* 2136567
* SBIR Phase I: Research on an energy harvesting system for the development of a self-sustainable, blue-tooth, low energy tracking and monitoring sensor for aircraft
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Maria-esther Martinez-barreiro, AEROSENS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,743.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel, self-sustaining, real-
time asset tracking technology that addresses the aviation industryâ€™s need for
efficiency and safety. This technology will provide automated safety and
emergency equipment compliance and security seal checks, significantly reducing
the time required for audits, while increasing their accuracy and avoiding
potential liability claims from undetected failure or tampering with safety
equipment. Based on in-flight compliant Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
communication, equipment can be monitored continuously, during flight and on the
ground, using a compact communication hub or mobile devices. Self-sustainability
is achieved by harvesting energy from mechanical vibrations present in-flight
and during taxiing, without requiring time-consuming battery change cycles and
avoiding regulatory challenges for hazardous battery chemistries such as
lithium-ion. The proposed research will also enable in-flight monitoring
applications and automate new tasks such as ensuring compliance with in-flight
seatbelt regulations. The proposed system will help passenger airlines stay
profitable in a highly competitive market, realizing significant cost-savings
through efficient operations, reduced turnaround times, and lower maintenance
overheads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to evaluate a mechanical energy harvesting design regarding
its technical feasibility and effectiveness as a power source for asset tracking
devices onboard an aircraft. To this end, new technologies for mechanical energy
harvesting will be tested: (1) a novel stacked piezoelectric device with tunable
resonance frequencies and output enhanced by superposition among different
piezo-elements vibrating in phase and (2) a mechanical vibration amplifier which
extracts large-amplitude linear motions from vibrations to enhance the amplitude
of mechanical movements. The two new technologies may enable the first
mechanical vibration harvester which is compact enough to permit effective use
in asset tracking in the aviation industry, resulting in an energy harvesting
module miniaturized to comply with aviation applications and to efficiently
harvest the extremely low frequencies (&lt;10 Hz) dominating cabin vibrations.
The energy harvesting circuit prototype will be evaluated under realistic
deployment conditions within the scope of this project and integrated in BLE-
sensor prototypes to further evaluate its performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.