* 2136938
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Generation of High Resolution Surface Melting Maps over Antarctica using Regional Climate Models, Remote Sensing and Machine Learning
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Marco Tedesco, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 12/31/2023
* USD 144,459.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is promoting
increased melting in Greenland and Antarctica, contributing to the global sea
level rise. Understanding what drives the increase and the amount of meltwater
from the ice sheets is paramount to improve our skills to project future sea
level rise and associated consequences. Melting in Antarctica mostly occurs
along ice shelves (tongues of ice floating in the water). They do not contribute
directly to sea level when they melt but their disappearance allows the glaciers
at the top to flow faster towards the ocean, increasing the contribution of
Antarctica to sea level rise. Satellite data can only offer a partial view of
what is happening, either because of limited coverage or because of the presence
of clouds, which often obstruct the view in this part of the world. Models, on
the other hand, can provide estimates but the spatial detail they can provide is
still limited by many factors. This project will use artificial intelligence to
overcome these problems and to merge satellite data and model outputs to
generate daily maps of surface melting with unprecedented detail. These
techniques are similar to those used in cell phones to sharpen images or to
create landscapes that look “real” but are only existing in the “computer
world,” but they have never been applied to melting in Antarctica for improving
estimates of sea level rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meltwater in Antarctica has
been shown to impact ice shelf stability through the fracturing and flexural
processes. Image scarcity has often forced the community to use general climate
and regional climate models to explore hydrological features. Notwithstanding
models having been considerably refined over the past years, they still require
improvements in capturing the processes driving the energy balance and, most
importantly, the feedback among the drivers and the energy balance terms that
drive the hydrological processes. Moreover, spatial resolution is still too
coarse to properly capture hydrological processes, especially over ice shelves.
Machine learning (ML) tools can help in this regard, especially when it is
computationally infeasible to run physics-based models at desired resolutions in
space and time, like in the case of ice shelf surface hydrology. This project
will train Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) with the outputs of a regional
climate model and remote sensing data to generate unprecedented, high-resolution
(100 m) maps of surface melting. Beside improving the spatial resolution, and
hence providing a long-needed and crucial dataset to the polar community, the
tool here proposed will be able to provide satellite-like maps on a daily basis,
hence addressing also those issues related to the lack of spatial
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.