* 2136242
* Workshop on Emerging Opportunities at the Intersection of Quantum and Thermal Sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 29,999.00

This award is to support the Workshop on Emerging Opportunities at the
Intersection of Quantum and Thermal Sciences to be held virtually on June 28-30,
2021. Advances in quantum science over the past century have laid the foundation
for both modern information technologies and solid-state energy-conversion
devices that have emerged and altered the course of human history. As these
classical devices and technologies approach their theoretical limits, progress
is now being made to store information in quantum systems to enable secured
quantum communication, quantum sensing, and quantum computation of complex
problems that cannot be handled by current classical computers. Among the
various grand challenges that need to be overcome for the establishment and
deployment of quantum information technologies, innovative thermal science and
engineering solutions are required for cooling the quantum hardware to an
extremely low temperature. Meanwhile, thermal measurements can provide unique
probes of exotic quantum materials and may provide unanticipated new directions
in quantum hardware designs. In response to these challenges and opportunities,
nineteen leading researchers in relevant fields have been invited to present
forward-looking perspectives and participate in panel discussions in the three-
day virtual workshop. The workshop is open to the broad research community,
including both students and established researchers from different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this three-day virtual workshop is to
identify emerging research opportunities at the intersection of quantum and
thermal sciences, especially on thermal challenges and opportunities in quantum
computation and hardware, thermal science and engineering of quantum sensors and
materials, and coherent phonons and magnons for quantum information
technologies. This goal will be pursued via invited talks from leading experts
in quantum and thermal science communities in US, Europe, and Israel, as well as
panel discussions that will stimulate scientific exchanges and initiate
interdisciplinary collaborations between the different communities in quantum
theories, thermal science, material science, and advanced manufacturing. These
cross-disciplinary interactions will help identify research needs in thermal
science and engineering for advancing quantum information science and
technologies. The workshop is also expected to promote the applications of
quantum sensing and computation for measurements and computation of thermal
problems. These reciprocal interactions between quantum and thermal sciences
will stimulate future research opportunities in materials science and advanced
manufacturing for realizing thermal devices and components in quantum systems
and quantum hardware for thermal applications. Besides identifying collaboration
opportunities for the research communities, the workshop will contribute to the
education of students from diverse backgrounds for the future workforce of the
quantum information technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.