* 2136146
* Discovery of naturally produced bioemulsifiers to remediate the next oil spill
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julia Kubanek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 419,896.00

Crude oil accidents, either on land or in the ocean, have devastating
environmental consequences, especially in pollution-sensitive habitats. Large
amounts of oil from the Exxon-Valdez accident in 1989 in Alaska and the
Deepwater Horizon accident in 2010 in the Gulf of Mexico washed up and were
buried in shoreline sediments where they have persisted for decades.
Microorganisms are the first to respond to environmental contamination and
process most of the oil that enters the environment. However, oil biodegradation
may be extremely slow and, as a result, oil ends up sinking and then is buried
in sediments. Buried and harmful polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons associated
with oils can then be released to the surface during storm events causing
further environmental damage. The common emergency response strategy to oil
spills is to apply chemical dispersants to facilitate oil dispersion and
dissolution. However, such chemicals can have high toxicity to microbes that
degrade oil in the environment. Thus, new products are needed. The overarching
objective of this project is to develop new, environmentally friendly
dispersants, surfactants, and emulsifiers to remediate future oil spills. To
achieve this objective, the research team will study the natural emulsifiers
produced by coastal bacteria that were discovered in the aftermath of the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill and then test effective crude-oil degraders. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
identification of environmentally friendly and effective emulsifiers for crude-
oil degradation. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of two graduate students at
Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oil spills require millions of liters of
chemical dispersants to help remediate damage. Environmentally benign and
effective emulsifiers and surfactants are needed to address oil spills where the
use of previous chemical dispersants have been banned. The research team has
recently reported the metagenome-guided isolation of a novel bacterium,
provisionally named Candidatus Macondimonas diazotrophica, that represents a
phylogenetically narrow group of previously uncharacterized, crude-oil
degraders. These microorganisms are highly abundant in oiled sediments of
coastal marine ecosystems across the world, often comprising up to ~30% of the
total microbial community, while being low abundance in adjacent, non-
contaminated samples. This high abundance in a natural ecosystem suggests
unusual physiological capabilities in these microorganisms that confer advantage
over other microbes when exposed to oil contamination. The bioinformatic
annotation of the Ca. M. diazotrophica genome has revealed several novel
biosynthetic clusters that are predicted to produce lipid-based bioemulsifiers
and surfactants. The overall goal of this project is to identify and
characterize these new bioemulsifiers and test their ability to speed up crude
oil biodegradation. The emerging bioremediation technologies will fill a gap in
remediation techniques for oil spill-related disasters. These bioemulsifiers are
also likely to find applications in enhanced oil recovery from natural habitats
as well as in the detergent industry as a replacement for chlorinated solvents.
Hence, the broader impacts of the resulting bioemulsifiers and technologies will
affect multiple science and engineering disciplines and find several practical
biotechnological applications. Students will be trained at the interface of
cutting-edge metagenomics and bioinformatics with bioprospecting, chemistry, and
engineering. The experience gained from the educational activities will be
shared in a workshop with faculty from undergraduate and community colleges
during the major undergraduate education conference of the American Society for
Microbiology and at the Gulf of Mexico Research Institute annual
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.