* 2136304
* SBIR Phase II:  High Energy-Density Hydrogen-Halogen Flow Batteries for Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Brennan Gantner, SKIP TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 978,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is directly related to the utilization of renewable
energy sources in the electrical grid. Due to the variability of supply,
renewable energy generators (e.g. solar and wind) cannot supply the entire
electrical demand as these often under-produce during times of high demand and
over-produce during times of low demand. To alleviate this problem, large-scale
energy storage solutions are necessary to balance generation and demand. This
project aims to create the necessary technological breakthrough of a chemical
battery to address this need. The company has developed an enabling technology
that unlocks a chemistry which was first proposed over forty years ago. However,
it has always failed before due to a flaw at its core. The proposed work
addresses this flaw. The proposed storage technology will enter the large-scale
energy storage market that is poorly served by existing solutions and is
expected to exceed hundreds of billions of dollars worldwide annually within the
decade as the world transitions to greater renewable energy generation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to bring a novel
membrane technology for flow batteries to a commercial ready status. In previous
iterations, flow batteries of this type have been limited in success due to
issues of thin-film membranes which are at the heart of such batteries. A novel
solution to this problem has been identified and a proof-of-concept has been
successfully demonstrated. This project aims to transition that device from a
laboratory setting of a single operational cell to a commercial product linking
many such cells in a manifold. This work will involve a combination of
laboratory experiments, manufacturing design, as well as theory and simulation
work. At the end of this project, numerous cells in a physical stack will be
built that will facilitate manufacturing and quality assurance. These advances
will enable a direct transition to full-sized commercial-ready flow batteries.
Initial investigations have demonstrated that the novel technology and approach
to solving flow battery membrane problems may be extended to other similar
fields with similar advantages, e.g. fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.