* 2136377
* Collaborative Research: Illuminating Cave Benthos in Subterranean Estuaries- Biodiversity, Ecology, and Role in Coastal Ecosystem Functioning
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Joan Bernhard, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2025
* USD 620,321.00

Karst subterranean estuaries (KSEs) occur worldwide where fresh and marine-
derived waters mix within coastal aquifers, creating a chemical reaction zone
that alters the composition of materials transported to the sea and sustains
characteristic aquatic communities. Approximately one quarter of Earth’s
population depends on karst (eroded limestone) water supplies that – within
coastal regions – are directly threatened by rising sea level, uncontrolled
groundwater extraction, and rapid coastal development. Yet, the role of these
ecosystems in coastal biogeochemical cycling and groundwater health remains
unknown. While pelagic constituents of flooded caves in KSEs have been studied
for decades, the living benthic (cave floor / seafloor-hosted) fauna of these
caves and caverns remains understudied. The overarching goal of this project is
to better understand how benthic biodiversity affects ecosystem functioning
across subsurface environmental gradients between freshwater aquifers and the
marine environment. Flooded coastal caves allow the team to access the KSEs and
make direct observations. Results of this work benefit marine benthic ecology
and biology, biogeochemistry, paleoecology and biodiversity assessments. This
interdisciplinary project establishes a multinational, multi-institutional
collaboration, enhance research and scholarship opportunities at a predominantly
undergraduate Hispanic-serving institution in Texas and support young
investigators from under-represented groups in the sciences. For outreach, the
project-associated PhD student, who is an African American female, is co-
authoring a semi-autobiographical children’s book about cave diving and the
wonders of cave-associated organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KSEs influence
coastal carbon and nitrogen cycling because they buffer terrestrial material
inputs with groundwater discharge into the oceans. While pelagic communities of
flooded cave environments in KSEs have been studied for decades due to their
adaptations, biogeography, and evolutionary origin, the living benthic fauna and
their role in KSE elemental cycling remains understudied. The overall aim of
this project is to establish the diversity and ecology of benthic eukaryotes
across environmental gradients in extensive coastal caves flooded by the KSE in
the Yucatan Peninsula and Cozumel Island (Mexico) and determine how they
interact with benthic elemental cycles. This study provides a holistic
characterization of KSE benthos using interdisciplinary field- and lab-based
approaches including barcoding/meta-barcoding, meta-transcriptomics,
ultrastructural analysis, and lab culturing that are being integrated with
biogeochemical and hydrological measurements. Specifically, the investigators
are characterizing (1) the drivers of spatial biodiversity patterns in coastal
cave eukaryotic benthic communities across salinity/oxygen gradients, relative
to organic inputs; (2) the role of benthic meiofauna (to nanobiota) communities,
with emphasis on foraminifera, in ecosystem function relative to dominant
biogeochemical processes that mediate organic matter transformations and
nitrogen cycling; and (3) the temporal constraints of benthic meiofauna (to
nanobiota) biodiversity and ecosystem resilience in response to seasonal
hydrological variation associated with meteorological
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.