* 2136297
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a nasal compression device with medicated intranasal sponges for the treatment of nosebleeds in any setting
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Elizabeth Clayborne, EMERGENCY MEDICAL INNOVATION, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help treat
the common nosebleed. Nosebleeds are a common problem that 60% of people
experience. The proposed project develops an effective and low-cost innovative
technology to address this by combining external pressure with intranasal
medication when placed in a nominal manner by any user. The solution would
provide a simple method that reduces the need for patients to visit health care
services, and reduces the burden of health care providers for treating
nosebleeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design and
develop an effective nosebleed treatment device for children and adults that
combines external pressure using a prototype nasal clip with intranasal
medication sponges. The objectives of this project include completing systematic
studies towards (1) design and development of a nasal clip with pre-medicated
intranasal sponges capable of consistently applying the proper amount of
pressure and eluting the proper amount of medication when placed in a nominal
manner, (2) testing of the device using a nosebleed model, (3) identifying
manufacturing processes to commercialize and scale the device in a cost
effective manner. The outcome will be a functional and lab tested nosebleed
treatment clip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.