* 2136838
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Power Chip Component Development
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Ekhi Muniategui, DIRECT KINETIC SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,139.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is aiming to put a minute power plant in the motherboard
of electronic devices. Every device with a battery in it has the potential to be
enhanced with the proposed approach. This will take care of the idle and standby
functions, preventing unnecessary battery drain. The benefits this provides are
enormous, as an example, a potential customer was able to monitor a grain silo
for a year transmitting once a day with its current setup, by adding one of the
proposed power sources, they could monitor for five years while transmitting
once an hour. The markets where such devices are expected to shine are IoT,
especially for companies offering sensing as a service, particularly in remote,
austere, and hostile environments where maintaining sensors is too costly, and
in Space. In Space, we offer a third power alternative to the small satellite
and below spacecraft. The proposed power sources can be used to continuously
generate power for the entire system, or be used as a redundant power source to
ensure critical systems are always alive. The company expects to commercialize
the finished product by the end of 2023. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to enhance the radioisotopic compound used in the power sources
under development. The product is composed of three major components, the
semiconductor (chip), the compound (the fuel and target for this engagement),
and the encapsulation (putting them both together and ensuring they are
producing power). The compound improvement is expected to enhance the power
generation of our devices. From previous experiments, it was discovered that the
area coverage of the previous version of the compound could be greatly improved.
As coverage improves, the power output is expected to improve accordingly, the
hypothesis is that it will be possible to at least double the previous power
output results. Following such an anticipated significant improvement in the
compound performance, the company will experiment with different chip
combinations, this will allow for the creation of alternatives for potential
customers, depending on their power and budget needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.