* 2136169
* EAGER: Developing a Highly Selective, Orthogonal, Enzymatic RNA Labeling Technology via Directed Evolution of an RNA Transglycosylase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Neal Devaraj, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Tools that facilitate the study of individual RNAs are critical for
understanding their mechanisms of action and biological significance. RNAs are
difficult to study as they vary in size, function, location, abundance, and
lifetime. This project intends to engineer new enzymes that insert novel, small
molecule reporters into an RNA in a manner that is appropriate for studying any
RNA of interest. These enzymes will insert reporters that are small enough to
not interfere with RNA function and do so in a manner that is specific to that
individual RNA. These never-before-seen enzymes and small molecules will be
programmed to work alongside their native counterparts without unwanted
crosstalk, allowing researchers to efficiently investigate how location and
abundance of RNAs influences their role in genetic mechanisms. The project will
have broad impacts including improving societal literacy surrounding genetic
mechanisms through presentation in accessible media platforms and increasing
STEM exposure of underrepresented groups through local high school outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project intends to use directed evolution to
discover new RNA modifying enzymes capable of exchanging a nucleobase in an RNA
for a functional small molecule reporter. The directed evolution workflow will
involve iterative rounds of site saturation mutagenesis and a unique high
throughput screen to probe mutant transglycosylases for their ability to accept
novel substrates. This technology avoids the limitations of state-of-the-art
technologies, including bulky reporters, transient association, and off target
installation. The enzyme will be evolved to act orthogonally to endogenous RNA
modification enzymes and their substrates, facilitating high fidelity tagging
and low background. The versatility of this RNA modification strategy will
provide investigators with an unprecedented tool to study their transcript of
choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.