* 2136383
* STTR Phase I:  Neuromodulation by Electromagnetic (EM) Energy-Induced Hypersound
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Bruce Towe, HYPERSOUND MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project proposes to develop a new way to block pain in the human body. This new
technology offers the potential for a novel, less invasive, lower cost, non-
addicting solution to pain relief. The project develops a device to be applied
near or on the skin, significantly penetrating the tissue to inhibit pain. The
primary market is to provide relief from back pain, which affects more than 100
M Americans. Other potential markets include pain suppression from peripheral
wounds, neuralgias, migraine, cancer, diabetes-related neuropathies, and
degenerative diseases, such as the rheumatoid group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Project proposes a new approach to
noninvasively modulate selected neural tissues to block pain by known principles
of neurological competitive inhibition. The technology employs electromagnetic
energy in a novel electrostrictive mode of action within the dielectric nature
of cellular media to remotely evoke ultrasound as well as higher frequency
hypersound forces in-situ. These induced forces are hypothesized to result in
biological effects through the well-known action of cellular stretch activation.
This project will further develop instrumentation to produce unique microwave
device designs and determine the effects of microwave variables on
neuromodulation. The research institution will apply the developed
instrumentation on rat and neuronal cell models to define the important
operating parameters for ensuring therapeutic safety and
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.