* 2136004
* Collaborative Research: Interactions between Photoreactive 2D Nanomaterials and Biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Yun Shen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 10/31/2023
* USD 125,904.00

A collaborative team consisting of researchers from The George Washington
University and the University of Notre Dame is exploring the interplay between
emerging photoreactive 2D nanomaterials, i.e., graphitic carbon nitride and
black phosphorus nanosheets, and biofilms in natural environment through a
highly integrated and sophisticated approach. Photoreactive 2D nanomaterials
have emerged as promising materials in recent years for their broad engineering
applications, however, incidental release and disposal of these nanomaterials
could pose adverse impacts on the environment. Potential impacts of these
photoreactive 2D nanomaterials is currently unknown. The investigators will
explore the effects of photoreactive 2D nanomaterials on biofilms that play a
critical role in the natural environment and ecological systems. The
photoreactive 2D nanomaterials can harvest and utilize visible to mid-infrared
light to produce oxidative species or localized heat; therefore, these
photoreactive 2D nanomaterials could interfere with biological systems by
inducing stresses upon light exposure. This research project will provide
fundamental understanding of reactive materials and biological systems, which
will be far reaching due to the ubiquitous presence of such systems, both man-
made and naturally occurring. This research project has the potential to be
transformative for material development through the improvement of multiscale,
rational, functional design, and it will contribute significantly to
nanotechnology, biological engineering, materials science and engineering, and
environmental engineering. The project will provide training to students in
science and engineering areas and offer them hands-on research experience, and
introduce students from diverse backgrounds and educational levels, particularly
those from underrepresented groups, to cutting-edge research in science and
engineering. In addition, the project will disseminate the acquired knowledge
through education modules, scientific journals and conferences, and science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims to understand the interplay
between emerging photoreactive 2D nanomaterials (i.e., graphitic carbon nitride
and black phosphorus nanosheets) and biofilms in natural environment through
nanomaterial, biomaterial, and computational characterizations. The proposed
research will employ a multi-faceted approach that combines (i) synthesis and
characterization of photoreactive 2D nanomaterials, (ii) chemical and biological
characterizations of biofilms in response to photoreactive 2D nanomaterials, and
(iii) ageing of photoreactive 2D nanomaterials and the resultant impacts on
biofilms. The research will generate correlations between nanomaterial
properties, biofilm chemical compositions and biological gene regulations, and
biofilm development and elimination upon exposure to photoreactive 2D
nanomaterials under light exposure. The research project will also develop a
mechanistic understanding of the photoreactive 2D nanomaterials with biofilms
and will determine whether chemical reactions or biological regulations controls
biofilm behaviors. In addition, this research will also provide insights into
the complex natural aquatic environment and the attendant transformation of
photoreactive nanomaterials and subsequent impacts on biological systems. The
project will provide training to students in science and engineering areas, and
offer them hands-on research experience in nanotechnology, biological
engineering, environmental engineering, and microbiology. The project will also
introduce students from underrepresented groups and students from diverse
backgrounds and educational levels to cutting-edge science and engineering
research. Moreover, the project will disseminate the acquired knowledge to help
increase the scientific literacy of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.