* 2136161
* Hybrid Ensemble Variational Analysis of Polarimetric Radar Data to Improve Microphysical Parameterization and Short-term Weather Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Jidong Gao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 655,096.00

This project seeks to study the best possible ways to utilize polarimetric radar
data (PRD) to improve understanding and prediction of severe weather. The United
Statesâ€™ national weather radar network was recently upgraded to dual-
polarization capability, which provides detailed, 4D, real-time data about the
observed precipitation particles, such as their shape, phase, and amount. This
information is often poorly represented in numerical weather prediction (NWP)
models, which can negatively impact their forecasts. However, the expected
benefits of incorporating this observed polarimetric radar information into NWP
models to improve their forecasts have not yet been realized. This project seeks
to advance our understanding of, and improve the prediction of, severe weather
and microphysical characterization in NWP models by exploring the application of
advanced storm-scale data assimilation techniques to PRD. Such improvements will
help realize the benefits of the existing upgrade to the radar network and
provide more timely severe weather information to the public as storm-scale NWP
models are increasingly incorporated into the warning decision
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly available PRD from the WSR-88D radar
network are arguably the best source of data for storm-scale weather
quantification and forecasts because PRD contain rich information about
hydrometeor microphysics, including the size, shape, phase, and composition of
precipitating particles, and can be used to characterize the microphysics and
radar signatures of severe weather event precursors. Hydrometeor classification
and the retrieval of hydrometeor particle size distributions from PRD are
performed to better diagnose microphysical states and their evolution. Further,
PRD can be directly assimilated into NWP models to improve model initialization
and to produce more realistic analyses and forecasts. Specific goals of this
work include: (1) development of accurate and efficient parameterized PRD
forward operators for hydrometeors; (2) quantification of observation errors
that include both measurement and forward operator errors; (3) observation-based
retrievals of hydrometeor particle size distributions; (4) simulation of severe
storms using convective-scale NWP models with advanced microphysics
parameterization schemes under different environmental conditions, and their
comparison with PRD for real cases; and (5) assimilation of PRD into NWP models
using a hybrid ensemble variational data assimilation routine for optimal model
initialization and better prediction of severe
weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.