* 2136202
* CIF: Small: Signal Processing and Learning for NOMA Millimeter-Wave Massive MIMO Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Yue Wang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 12/31/2024
* USD 328,000.00

With the proliferation of versatile devices and data-consuming services, the
quest for spectrum efficiency has led to the combination of three disruptive
technologies, namely millimeter-wave (mmWave) communications, massive multiple-
input multiple-output (maMIMO), and non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA). To
fully understand the niche role the combined NOMA-mmWave-maMIMO technology could
be playing in future wireless systems, this project develops sparse signal-
processing and advance machine-learning techniques for efficient sensing and
system optimization. The outcomes of this project are expected to make NOMA-
mmWave-maMIMO an attractive candidate to support low-power high-data-rate
applications in dense urban environments, including wireless broadband access,
machine-type communications and Internet of Things. This project provides ample
opportunities to students for research and workforce development, and further
broadens societal impacts via curriculum development, research dissemination and
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The spectrum sharing paradigm of NOMA
needs to be re-engineered to account for the unique angular selectivity of
mmWave and maMIMO channels. To this end, this project addresses research
challenges related to spectral efficiency, energy efficiency, and intelligence,
with focuses on (i) accurate and efficient channel sensing under hardware
constraints and in practical settings, and on (ii) the holistic integration of
signal processing and machine learning for system enhancement and real-time
design optimization in NOMA-mmWave-maMIMO systems. Proposed ideas and methods
combine multi-disciplinary research concepts and methodologies from wireless
communications, signal processing, optimization and machine learning. This
research effort is expected to advance the design of 5G wireless systems and
beyond, but also to have a beneficial impact on the development of future
intelligent wireless applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.