* 2136421
* EAGER:  Detection and Quantification of DNA and Brain-Specific Markers in Extracellar Vesicles for a Rapid Assessment of Neuroinjury in Liquid Biopsies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bartosz Szczesny, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

There is a critical need for the development of a simple, cost effective and
reliable sensing platform for diagnosis and monitoring of brain trauma. Current
developments in the fields of extracellular vesicles biology, molecular
targeting, proteomics, optical biosensing and liquid biopsy technology offer a
great opportunity for the development of novel optical based sensors that can
detect and quantify the degree of brain injury based on the detection of
biomarkers of brain injury present in biofluid samples that can be readily
collected for non-invasive on-demand detection. This approach has the potential
of impacting the standard of care for managing brain injury by enabling rapid
and inexpensive diagnosis of head trauma. In particular, the proposed optical
biosensors have the potential of becoming a game-changer in early diagnosis and
monitoring of brain trauma. The proposed sensors will yield quantitative results
within minutes using established optical-based detection technology. This
technology will be inexpensive and is therefore very suited to be used in field
and in resource challenged environments. The team of investigators will make an
effort to recruit women and minority students for this R&amp;D endeavor through
well-established training programs at the University of Texas Medical Branch,
thus facilitating the training of the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current diagnosis of traumatic brain injury
(TBI) patients includes a neurological exam and imaging tests; both are time
consuming and require dedicated resources that are not readily available,
particularly in resource-challenged environments such as emergency rooms, sports
arenas and battlefields. Thus, there is an urgent need for the development of
novel liquid biopsy technology for the early detection and quantitative
monitoring of TBI severity, which is the ultimate goal of this project. In this
project the team aims to define DNA and protein content of brain-derived
extracellular vesicles present in the circulation as a reliable biomarker for
the assessment and prediction of severity of neuroinjury at the early post
injury time point followed by monitoring long term TBI consequences as well as
assessing the response to the potential therapeutic interventions. The aim is to
develop a compact optical-based point-of-care device for detection and
quantification of key biomarkers of brain injury including fluorescence-based
sensing of circulating cell free (ccf)--DNA complemented with the detection of
brain-specific biomarkers in blood that would enable engineering of a novel
multi-sensing device that can be used for rapid, early and non-invasive
assessment of TBI severity. As part of the proposed development, the team will
identify the key biomarkers of brain injury and their temporal distribution in
the brain-derived extracellular vesicles collected from blood samples and then
assemble, test, and validate novel optical biosensors that can be used to target
these key markers for early and quantitative assessment of neuroinjury via
readily available liquid biopsy. A multidisciplinary team of researchers with
expertise in mitochondrial dysfunction, traumatic brain injury, biophotonics,
medical device development, microfluidic technology, and bioengineering will be
pursuing the stated goals of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.