* 2136118
* STTR Phase I:  Desalination Batteries for Energy-Efficient Desalination and Selective Chloride Removal
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Margaret Lumley, CHLOBIS WATER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is in comprehensively addressing issues related to water treatment,
environment protection, and resource recovery through the development of a new
desalination technology called a desalination battery. Steady growth in human
population and rapid industrial development have led to greater demands for
clean water production. At the same time, anthropogenic activities, agricultural
practices, and the disposal of wastewater have led to the salinization of
natural freshwater resources. The desalination battery combines the functions of
desalination and energy generation to reduce the energy and costs associated
with desalination, addressing challenges at the intersection of the water-energy
nexus. The goal of the proposed research is to accelerate the commercialization
of the desalination battery by evaluating the effects of various solution
components present in real feedwater types on performance. The project will also
establish mitigation plans for problematic solution components. Successful
development of the desalination battery will help to safeguard access to
freshwater resources and ensure an adequate water supply, which are essential to
advance the health and welfare of the American public. Commercialization of the
proposed technology will also create jobs for researchers and engineers making a
positive economic impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this STTR project is
to further develop a new desalination technology, a desalination battery, which
is based on the patented use of bismuth (Bi) as a chloride (Cl)-storage
electrode in combination with a sodium (Na)-storage electrode. The desalination
battery stores and releases energy during the charging and discharging
processes. These processes are coupled with the storage and release of Na+ and
Cl-. As the energy consumed during charging is recovered during discharging, the
net energy required for desalination is drastically reduced. Furthermore, since
Na+ and Cl- are removed via ion-specific electrode reactions, it enables
membrane-free desalination. While efficient removal of NaCl has been
demonstrated, the effects of various other solution components present in real
wastewater and seawater are still unknown. The goal of the proposed work is to
accurately evaluate the effects of different salinities, pH conditions, and
various inorganic and organic species present in real feedwater on the
performance of the desalination battery. The project will also develop
mitigation plans for any problematic solution components. Accurate
technoeconomic calculations will be used to prioritize the most promising
feedwater targets and to develop a tailored commercialization plan for specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.