* 2136006
* I-Corps: High-performance cementitious material
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Zachary Grasley, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves the
development of a novel concrete mixture containing recycled steel fiber (RSF) as
fiber reinforcement, and reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) as a virgin aggregate
replacement. Rebar reinforcement makes conventional reinforced concrete
structures less economical due to the material cost of the steel and the labor
cost to install the rebar. The presence of rebar also makes concrete placement
difficult and may lead to settlement cracking. Concrete blended with randomly-
oriented RSF provides a solution for more affordable and versatile concrete
structures by eliminating rebar reinforcement. Additionally, both RSF and RAP
are underutilized in concrete. The existing applications of these materials,
typically viewed as waste, have major limitations: RSF has been conventionally
sold as scrap steel to make new steel, which is less economical and has higher
environmental impact than direct reuse. RAP has been primarily used in new
asphalt pavement but that usage is often restricted due to pavement cracking
problems. By using RSF and RAP in concrete, significantly less energy and raw
materials are consumed compared to to conventional
concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a cost-effective, high-performance, sustainable concrete. Unlike conventional
concrete that is often brittle and rigid, this new concrete is semi-rigid. The
new system uses recycled steel fiber (RSF) as fiber reinforcement, which
markedly increases concrete toughness and ductility due to the fibers' ability
to bridge cracks. Reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) is added as intermediate-
sized coarse aggregate to achieve optimized aggregate gradation. Aggregate
gradation optimization reduces paste content in concrete and this, in turn,
results in better concrete performance and reduced shrinkage. Additionally,
replacing virgin aggregate with RAP also produces more ductile and crack
resistant concrete because of the viscoelastic nature of the asphalt in RAP that
leads to high stress relaxation. The asphalt coating on RAP acts as a lubricant
and increases the flowability and pumpability of the materials. Finally, the new
concrete has better damping properties, which may more effectively reduce noise
and vibration damage caused by wind and earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.