* 2136602
* SBIR Phase I: Adaptable Ad Hoc Network Architecture for Rapid Infrastructure Development in Disaster Zones
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Mateo Abascal, BEAMLINK, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2023
* USD 270,928.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is reducing the cost of getting people online
and connecting people in emergency situations such as natural disasters. Natural
disasters often destroy cellular networks, exactly when people need
communication the most. The influx of users on the limited remaining
infrastructure often overwhelms existing resources, making it impossible for
first responders to coordinate, for families to call their loved ones, and for
volunteers to help. In other potential markets, the technology seeks to provide
cellular phone access to parts of the world where it is now prohibitively
expensive. This project seeks to develop small, portable cellular base stations
that can provide access in both emergency and hard to reach and poorly resourced
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project researches and implements a small, portable cellular base
station. The technological focus for the base station utilizes Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM) / General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) (or 2G and
2.5G) radio for communicating with a high density of cell phones in a
computationally cheap manner while utilizing WiFi for local, high bandwidth
applications. The technology implements many “micro-cells” in lieu of the
current macro cell approach to cellular coverage, blanketing the area with a
high number of towers. This decentralized approach provides high reliability
even if one or several nodes fail. This project will develop the algorithms
necessary for interconnecting large numbers of base stations together and mesh
the networking capabilities that provide radio links between each base station.
Finally, this project will finalize the mechanical design and make the base
station manufacturable at large scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.