* 2136667
* SBIR Phase I:  Antibody Brush Polymer Conjugates with High Drug Antibody Ratios and Immunostimulatory Payloads for Treatment of Late-Stage Cancers
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Hung Nguyen, WINDOW THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make a new class of antibody-based
immunotherapies that can be generally applicable to oncology patients. For
select cancer patients, immunotherapies can serve as a cure by reactivating
their natural immune systems to fight against their cancers. Unfortunately,
cancers are often mutated to evade the small library of currently approved
immunotherapies. Many promising experimental small molecule immunotherapies
cannot be used because they cannot effectively accumulate in cancer sites at
high enough concentrations and often cause severe side effects through off-
target damage to healthy organs. Antibodies can be used to help shuttle drugs
directly to cancer sites but are currently limited. This project advances a
novel technology that increases antibody drug loading over an order of
magnitude, up to 100 drugs per antibody. These novel Antibody Brush polymer
Conjugates (ABCs) will enable immunotherapies to treat notoriously immunotherapy
resistant cancers, such as colorectal cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create the next-
generation of Antibody-Drug Conjugate (ADC) immunotherapies through the research
and development of Antibody-Brush polymer Conjugates (ABCs). Due to limited
chemical handles, ADCs have low drug loadings that force the use of cytotoxic
drug payloads like auristatins that cause severe adverse events in patients.
This project will develop conjugation techniques that will lead to ABCs with
drug-antibody ratios as high as 100. Brush polymers, through a combination of
PEG shielding and targeted drug release, enable this higher drug loading that
will lead to both greater efficacy against low expression antigen targets in
cancer and application of drugs with more diverse mechanisms of action.
Specifically, this project will create libraries of ABCs loaded with
immunostimulating molecules like TLR and STING agonists that, despite
significant preclinical promise, have stagnated in clinical development due to
narrow therapeutic windows and limited targetability. Optimized
immunostimulatory ABCs will be evaluated in vivo for tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, efficacy, and curative potential in
traditionally immunotherapy-resistant colorectal cancer animal models. This SBIR
Phase I research will enable further development of the novel immunotherapies
into clinical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.