* 2136782
* A macro- to nano-scale interrogation of 4 Gyr of tectonism, metamorphism and alteration in the Acasta Gneiss Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Tyler Blum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 347,049.00

The origin and growth of continental crust on Earth is an important and enduring
question in the Earth sciences. The configuration and interaction of tectonic
plates throughout Earth’s history is recognized to play a critical role in
Earth’s crustal evolution. The Acasta Gneiss Complex (AGC) of the Northwest
Territories, Canada, exposes the oldest known continental crustal rocks. This
project will characterize the detailed geochemistry of an important mineral,
zircon, in the AGC to evaluate the role of plate tectonic style (“stagnant-lid”
vs. “mobile-lid”) in continent formation. Ratios of trace elements and isotopes
in zircon will allow the PIs to track changes in AGC crustal compositions over
the course of approximately 1 billion years of Earth’s history, starting 4
billion years ago. Because of their extreme age, AGC zircon grains accumulate
damage to the crystal structure over geologic time. As a result, many (though
not all), zircon grains in Acasta have had their age and chemistry altered. This
work combines diverse methods of imaging, mass spectrometry and structural
characterization of zircon, allowing the PIs to identify unaltered zircon
chemistries and to evaluate the timing of alteration processes. Results of the
characterization of zircon will also provide information about changes in
continental crustal production and links between tectonic style and the
formation of the oldest continents on Earth. This research will also support
community outreach in collaboration with the University of Wisconsin Geology
Museum to improve scientific literacy and expand the public’s understanding of
geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4 to 3 Ga Acasta Gneiss Complex (AGC),
Canada, comprises over one billion years of magmatism, including the oldest
known exposures of felsic terrestrial crust, and thereby is a critical archive
of early terrestrial differentiation. The mineral zircon has been invaluable for
tracking the chronology and sources of magmatism in the AGC; however, pervasive
alteration of age, trace element, and isotope chemical information (often
related to radiation-damage-induced loss of crystallinity and recrystallization)
has impaired efforts to construct robust U-Pb geochronological, δ18O, and trace
element records spanning the duration of AGC magmatism. This work will apply a
novel and diverse set of characterization methods (plasma and secondary ion mass
spectrometry, Raman spectroscopy, and atom probe tomography) to: 1) expand the
primary U-Pb isotope, δ18O, and trace element record for AGC zircon grains in
tandem with the whole-rock geochemical record, including tectonic provenance
proxies Sc and Nb as well as alteration proxy OH in zircon; and 2) interrogate
the grain-scale to nanoscale manifestations of repeated thermal events and fluid
interactions within zircon grains by atom probe tomography. Ultimately, the work
will clarify primary versus secondary zircon chemistry, the length scales of
element mobility during a multistage thermal and metamorphic history, and the
primary 4-3 Ga magmatic and tectonic history of the AGC. This research will also
support community outreach in collaboration with the University of Wisconsin
Geology Museum to improve scientific literacy and expand the public’s
understanding of geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.