* 2136603
* STTR Phase I:  In situ, handheld, 3D bioprinting of hydrogel sealant for corneal tissue repair and regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Iman Noshadi, BICURE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the ability to develop a corneal sealant that will achieve
significant cost savings for the patient, hospital ecosystem, and taxpayer by
circumnavigating the limitations associated with corneal repair using the
sutures or cyanoacrylate glue. Nearly 7 million corneal/scleral tears and
perforations occur in the US and require surgical intervention. Around one third
of these injuries cause blindness and 80% lead to infections and other
complications. The high sensitivity of the corneal surface results in extreme
discomfort and trauma with even slight abrasions and scratches. A significant
portion of patients using current standards of care, i.e. sutures and
cyanoacrylate glue, suffer from postoperative complications like eye fluid
leakage, infection, and astigmatism requiring extensive care or corrective
surgery. The sealant developed here may reduce these issues, resulting in cost
savings for patients and insurance companies while improving the patient
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to optimize and
fine-tune the sealant formulation as well as its application onto the corneal
surface using a handheld bioprinting pen for the repair of corneal injury as
well as the develop an appropriate models for its evaluation. The first
objective aims to standardize and optimize sealant extrusion and photocuring
onto the corneal surface while conforming to the depth and shape of the corneal
injury. The results may optimize parameters to form a sealant film with improved
biocompatible, mechanical, and adhesive properties. The second objective aims to
establish sealant efficacy in corneal repair via long-term integration with the
corneal tissue, using a corneal injury model. The expected results will
establish the integrative capacity of the adhesive for filling corneal
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.