* 2136800
* STTR Phase I:  PIC: Electro-luminescence and doping of black phosphorus for printed lasers on silicon photonic chips
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Chad Husko, IRIS LIGHT TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to demonstrate the viability of a new
manufacturing process for on-chip lasers for silicon photonics using printed
nanomaterial inks. The difficulty of a scalable method for fabricating on-chip,
multi-color lasers is a major challenge for the silicon photonics market.
Specifically, today's standard manufacturing of photonic chips does not include
on-chip lasers. Without integration of laser engines to drive the circuits, the
market potential of light chips is constrained by design and price. The
technology developed here can allow foundries to mass produce chips with lasers
and open multiple new markets for silicon photonics including wearable photonic
sensors, optical data transfer, autonomous vehicle light detection and ranging,
quantum information, fiber-optic gyroscopes, and healthcare applications such as
immunoassay tests and medical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer Phase I project develops on-chip embedded lasers to enable
fully functional silicon photonic chip manufacturing. Currently, the laser
solutions being employed in silicon photonics include bonded lasers and
heterogeneous integration. The system integrators that assemble silicon
photonics modules rely on often cumbersome methods of gluing individual lasers
to silicon chips, keeping costs high and throughput well below desired levels.
The photonic inks developed here will overcome this challenge by enabling an in-
foundry laser solution via wafer-scale additive manufacturing. The photonic ink
emits broad-spectrum light covering the visible to the near-infrared range and
can be tailored to emit at specific wavelength bands relevant to different
markets by altering the number of atomic layers. The goals of this Phase I
project are to demonstrate electroluminescence from a p-n junction made from
doped, few-layer nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.