* 2136026
* I-Corps: Assessment of metabolic health using a nuclear magnetic resonance relaxometry device
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Naima Moustaid-Moussa, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
non-invasive technique using a nuclear magnetic resonance relaxometry device to
provide medical, health, and fitness professionals with instant feedback on the
metabolic health of their clients. This feedback enables regular assessment of
the effectiveness of recommended nutrition and/or exercise regimens. By
obtaining and using the NMR relaxometry data, individuals may have a way to
visualize and understand if and how their new regimens result in changes to
their metabolism. Using this feedback, individuals can positively impact their
overall well-being and have options to make informed decisions about their
lifestyle habits. The technology provides end-users with a method that measures
metabolic health quickly and painlessly, without a blood
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a non-invasive,
compact nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) time domain technology to measure the
fluidity of fatty acids in adipose tissue in a person's finger. The device uses
low-field permanent magnets in a table-top device and measures parameters using
NMR relaxometry to predominately measure the triglyceride-rich intracellular oil
droplets. The fluidity of lipids and lipoproteins in tissues is an important
parameter in understanding physical properties and biological functions. This
technology quantifies adipose tissue parameters that reflect the ratio of cis-
unsaturated to saturated and trans-fats in the tissue. Population studies
indicate higher intake of cis-unsaturated fatty acids is associated with better
health outcomes and decreased risk for coronary heart
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.