* 2136470
* SBIR Phase II:  Single wearable patch for cost-effective, reliable, and accurate home sleep apnea testing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Brennan Torstrick, HUXLEY MEDICAL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,495,932.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to help patients with cardiorespiratory
conditions, including sleep apnea and cardiac arrhythmia. The project will
develop a wearable sensor platform to simultaneously diagnose and monitor
conditions. Multiple physiological measurements are collected by a comfortable,
wireless sensor patch, resulting in a convenient remote monitoring clinical
framework. Interfacing sensor data with an efficient cloud-based provider portal
and automated algorithms will enable rapid screening of the 24 million
undiagnosed sleep apnea patients in the United States. The proposed innovation
will also provide insight into the practical clinical benefits and efficiencies
to be gained by bundling multiple comorbid or otherwise related diagnostic
pathways into a single workflow, such as reducing time to treatment for comorbid
atrial fibrillation. This remote monitoring bundle concept represents the only
all-in-one device capable of servicing multiple highly pervasive health
challenges in a method unobtrusive and user-friendly for both the patient and
the provider - particularly for telemedicine applications made more urgent by
the global pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop a simple, accurate, cloud-
connected wearable patch and collect clinical comparison data to develop
automated, low-power algorithms to simultaneously detect sleep-disordered
breathing, sleep stages, and cardiac arrhythmias. The project integrates
materials science, mechanical engineering, and signal processing approaches to
detect critical physiological signals from the torso, including oxygen
saturation and several hemodynamic metrics. The project will also conduct
studies that offer early insights into the clinical benefits of bundled
workflows across cardiac and sleep medicine
specialties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.