* 2136572
* SBIR Phase I:  Identifying Interictal Features of Epilepsy With Oculometric Data from a Naturalistic Setting
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Rachel Kuperman, EYSZ, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve the treatment and cognitive
function of epilepsy patients by using eye-tracking measurements to detect
seizures, neurocognitive symptoms associated with epilepsy, and side effects of
anti-epilepsy drugs. Epilepsy results in an estimated $28 B in direct costs
annually in the U.S. and affects the quality of life of patients and their
caregivers. The proposed eye tracking technology paired with seizure detection
and cognition monitoring modules will have a positive economic and societal
impact. For example, some patients with epilepsy may be able to return to work
sooner, and the burden on caregivers to monitor seizures and side effects may be
reduced. Earlier identification of co-morbidities can enable simple
interventions, such as additional support in classrooms, to improve long-term
outcomes. In addition, the technology will help clinicians diagnose and refer
drug-resistant patients to specialized epilepsy centers, much sooner than the
current average time of 18 years. Finally, the solution will improve side effect
monitoring in clinical trials for new antiepileptic drugs and help optimize dose
recommendations. These advances in turn will accelerate the development of new
anti-epileptic therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to improve the lives of epilepsy patients
by using passive observation of eye movements in a naturalistic setting to
objectively and reliably identify seizures and monitor neurocognitive symptoms
and drug side effects. The proposed solution will use a wearable device to
collect eye movement data over time, and this data will be analyzed to quantify
changes associated with impairments in cognitive functions like attention and
reading speed. This data then will be used to develop a personalized therapy
response profile to assist clinicians in managing epilepsy. The goal of this NSF
Phase I project is to determine whether non-seizure, spontaneous eye movement
data can provide insight into clinical features, including the improvement or
worsening of seizures and possible antiepileptic drug side effects. This project
will advance a comparison of passive eye tracking data to gold standard
neuropsychiatric assessments over time and as medication adjustments are
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.