* 2136950
* International Scientific Community Workshop Series on the Access and Benefit Sharing of Digital Sequence Information
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Rachel Meyer, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 49,932.00

Sequences of biological macromolecules, such as DNA, RNA, and proteins
(collectively “digital sequence information” or DSI) have become increasingly
important to advancing scientific research and discovery worldwide. Information
of this kind helps scientists understand how genes affect organisms’ shape,
physiology, behavior, and function. In turn, this knowledge provides the raw
material for innovations that will advance human health, food security, and the
preservation of biodiversity as the climate changes rapidly. The free and
unfettered exchange of non-commercial DSI enables the global community of
researchers, educators, biodiversity collections managers, students, and
innovators, including those in the United States, to work fluidly with each
other to enable scientific progress. Such free flow of information is not
guaranteed. Discussions have been taking place under the auspices of the United
Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and other multilateral bodies
to apply a principle known as access and benefit sharing (ABS), which was
initially developed for physical biological specimens, such as a plant or an
insect, to DSI as well. For the most part, the scientists whose research
projects depend on openly sharing DSI do not have a seat at the table at which
decisions about DSI are being made. This could result in limiting access to
information that is currently freely available; indeed, many scientists are
unaware that the conversations are even taking place. It is important, then, to
ensure that scientists and scientific societies in the United States and
elsewhere become more fully engaged in these deliberations, in part by
highlighting the importance of transnational collaborations that depend on the
exchange of DSI, and making recommendations for how related benefits can be
shared.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will engage scientific societies,
most of which have international memberships, to co-host a workshop series that
will educate the community on the issues, perspectives, and requirements that
are associated with discussions about DSI/ABS in the context of the CBD. The
workshops are slated to begin in late summer or early fall of 2021, before the
major CBD biodiversity negotiations to be held in Kunming, China (tentatively in
October 2021), and will extend into 2022. Activities will include talks from
high profile US and international scientists and facilitated discussions
tailored to the scientific societies’ concerns, which will help to build
capacity within societies to accelerate compliant and outstanding biodiversity
science across geopolitical borders and to develop recommendations that may be
helpful to parties to the CBD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.