* 2136584
* SBIR Phase I:  R&amp;D for Water Efficiency, Management and Markets Utilizing Distributed Ledger Technology
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Tyler Dow, WETX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project
will provide a significant improvement in economic incentives for water rights
holders to conserve and efficiently deploy their water. One of the greatest
struggles facing the Western States is the disincentive for water rights holders
to efficiently manage their water. If holders don’t use the entirety of their
water each year, they risk losing the unused portion back to the State.
Commercially, despite a billion-dollar demand for seasonal leasing of
water—which would satisfy annual use requirements—water holders have no place
and little ability to market and lease their unused water. This approach using
the proposed distributed ledger technology (DLT), allows holders to track and
log their water rights information on its platform. In turn, water users will
finally have access to information that traditionally informs other property
transactions—title history, water usage, comparable transactions, and localized
pricing. With that information, our customers populate a marketplace where
short-term and long-term transactions can be quickly and easily transacted. In
sum, by creating the tools and interfaces to digitize water rights and enable
simple-to-execute water transactions, DLT will power water markets and drive
efficient water use throughout the West.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to research and develop a unique combination of distributed
ledger (DL) tokenization and a decentralized distributed file system (DDFS) to
produce a robust digital twin of both physical water rights and usage, as well
as the associated legal materials and data. DL tokens represent the legal
quantity of water that has been granted to the user by the government. DDFS
allows the storage of key information pertaining to the water rights—including
title and use history—in a public, immutable manner, anchored in the DL
transactions. This approach provides a level of trust, transparency and
provenance for water that is currently absent in the United States. The current
state of the market—makes it impossible for the average water owner and manager
to have any insight into the value of their water assets. Water-specific
marketplaces backed by DL and DDFS allow both buyers and sellers the ability to
view, vet, and transact water assets efficiently and with minimal cost. This
first phase of research and development will establish the requisite
infrastructure to populate those marketplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.