* 2136973
* I-Corps:  Steerable 3D shape memory alloy activated core biopsy needle
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Bardia Konh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make a
practice-changing impact in tissue biopsy procedures by moving from manual
straight (rigid) needle insertions to robotic and steerable needle insertions.
With this technology, physicians can take biopsy samples from hard-to-reach or
impossible-to-reach lesions using an active steerable core biopsy needle. For
many types of cancer, biopsy is the definitive test for diagnosis. The long-term
beneficial consequences of the project will include: (i) increased accuracy of
biopsy extraction, (ii) reduced damage to surrounding tissue and sensitive
organ(s), (iii) reduced risk of bleeding and infection, and (iv) reduced
necessity and frequency of repeat biopsies. The active steering of the needle
proposed in this work is applicable to a number of cancer interventions
including both diagnosis and therapy, such as in-vivo analysis using Raman
spectroscopy as well as brachytherapy, photodynamic therapy, radio frequency-
based thermal ablation, and viral/gene therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project develops tissue biopsy procedures by offering a new steerable
core biopsy needle that can actively bend inside tissue using smart shape memory
alloy actuators. The movement of the steerable core biopsy needle is controlled
inside the body by a novel control algorithm that relies on the shape-sensing
capabilities of the smart actuators to provide needle tip position as a
feedback. The technical hurdles include complexity in shape memory alloy
hysteresis actuation and shape sensing control inside tissue. The control system
receives commands from the operator and provides appropriate signals to the
actuators to realize desired bending on the biopsy needle. The biocompatibility
and stiffness of the active needle results in robotic manipulation, online shape
sensing, and enhanced control inside the tissue to reach the target areas with
more precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.