* 2136215
* I-Corps:  Model-driven precision oncology for cancer therapy design
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Aniruddha Datta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the creation
of clinical decision support software that will enable oncologists to apply
precision medicine to improve cancer survivor rates while minimizing the risk of
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral
neuropathy is a common cancer treatment side effect that causes persistent
sensory impairments accompanied by pain that often results in dose limitation or
even treatment discontinuation. As cancer survivor rates improve, the prevalence
and economic impact of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy is expected to
increase. There is a critical need for effective preventative strategies to be
developed. Using the clinical decision support software developed with this
I-Corps project, oncologists may increase cancer survival rates at the 5-year
mark by avoiding neuropathy-related detrimental dose reduction or treatment
discontinuation. Oncologists may also improve their patient's quality of life
(e.g., decrease pain and disability while increasing activity level) by reducing
the risk of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. By alleviating
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy, medical costs are expected to be
reduced as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project may improve clinical
decision making by applying model-based precision oncology. Cancer is an
umbrella term for diseases that are associated with the loss of cell-cycle
control, the mechanism that tightly regulates cell numbers by maintaining the
right balance between cell proliferation and cell death. This loss of cell-cycle
control usually manifests itself as a malfunction in the cellular signaling
networks. For the vast majority of cancers, there is a critical need for the
precise identification of the failure points in the various signaling networks,
with the goal of targeting therapy with a better likelihood of success. This
I-Corps project utilizes gene regulatory network models to identify key drug
targets to kill cancer cells in several aggressive cancer lines (e.g.,
pancreatic, breast, lung, osteosarcoma and metastatic melanoma). New network
models will be created that incorporate both cancer signaling networks as well
as networks for the development of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.
Designing treatment plans to address both cancer and neuropathy benefits from
the model-based precision oncology approach developed in this I-Corps
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.