* 2136392
* STTR Phase I:  Membrane Biofilm Reactor for Recovery of Valuable Metals
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Calvin Ray, PRECIENT TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to use a biotechnology based Membrane Biofilm
Reactor (MBfR) to recover valuable materials, including platinum group metals
(PGM), Rare Earth Elements (REE), and other critical minerals and materials
(CMM) using the natural metabolic processes of bacteria. These materials are
used in battery and energy storage, semiconductor manufacturing and other
industries. The demand for some of these valuable materials is likely to
increase by as much as 4000% by 2040 and the USA is dependent on other countries
for some of these products. Limited supply of PGM and REE is exacerbated by
processing and recycling facilities losing â‰¥10% of the total market value of
these materials in their wastewaters. The MBfR directly addresses this loss by
recovering up to 99% of the lost PGM and REE as solid nanoparticles. Based on
the concentration of valuable metals and co-contaminants in water samples
provided by valuable-metals recyclers, a conservative 90% recovery of precious
metals using the MBfR may generate more than six times the return on investment
(ROI) for the customer in the first year. This project may help mitigate risks
associated with materials shortages and moderate costs as demand continues to
increase. The recovery of these materials from wastewaters may also avoid
serious hazards to human and ecosystem health associated with their discharge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project is organized into five
objectives through which the company seeks to quantify the reduction and
precipitation kinetics in relation to their hydrogen-delivery capacity. The
company will also characterize the metal and mineral nanoparticles according to
their chemical composition, purity, and size, as this affects how they can be
used in industry. The objectives of the project include: continuous recovery of
PGM and REE using the MBfRs, solid-state characterization of recovered PGM and
REE in the MBfRs; characterization of PGM/REE-recovering biofilms in the MBfRs,
and the development of a techno-economic analysis and technology-to-market
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.