* 2136915
* EAGER: Biometric Authentication using Noncontact Cardiovascular Signals
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Amos Abbott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2023
* USD 187,723.00

In our increasingly interconnected society, user authentication - procedures for
verifying that individuals are who they claim to be - is important for improving
the security of digital systems. Authentication protocols commonly involve
combinations of something the user knows (such as a password) or has (such as a
card or fob), and biometrics (such as the recognition of a fingerprint). This
project develops novel biometric approaches based on the activity of the heart.
Because shape and physiology of the cardiovascular system differ from person to
person, it is possible to detect significant differences related to blood flow
for different individuals. The project introduces methods for detecting
information related to the cardiovascular system using a video camera, at the
level of detail needed to perform user authentication. The project's broader
significance is the potential use of these new techniques, as well as a dataset
of measurements collected from several individuals for cybersecurity and health
care research and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying phenomenon
in this project is photoplethysmography, which is the use of illumination-based
sensors to record local volumetric changes in peripheral blood circulation. The
investigators use video cameras to obtain measurements of cardiovascular
activity, with the motivation that noncontact measurements are more convenient
and unobtrusive than using devices that touch the skin. An emphasis of the
project is the use of machine-learning techniques to analyze signals from videos
of the human face, to extract features that can distinguish individuals based
solely on cardiovascular activity. The research includes characterization of
camera parameters and illumination conditions. The primary goal is to
demonstrate that the resulting system can be used for user authentication.
Potential contributions of this project include improved security of digital
systems, along with better understanding of the cardiovascular
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.