* 2136168
* Non-Hermitian and Topological Plasmonic Devices for Light Manipulation at the Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Yongmin Liu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Title: Non-Hermitian and Topological Plasmonic Devices for Light Manipulation at
the Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optics and photonics play a vital role in
both fundamental science and cutting-edge technologies. Examples include solar
energy harvesting and conversion, fiber optic communications, and optical data
storage, to name a few. New strategies are urgently needed to further advance
the design and implementation of nanoscale photonic devices, in which the loss
and defect impose significant limitations on the performance of the devices. The
goal of this project is to investigate the novel phenomena and functions, such
as unidirectional transport of light waves, defect-immune photonic states, and
nanoscale lasers with low input power, by engineering the spatial distribution
of material properties as well as the structural topology. The success of the
project will lead to a crucial step towards the development of integrated
photonic devices with low energy consumption, small footprint, and robust
performance to benefit optical information processing, secure communications,
enhanced sensing, and quantum technology for a wide range of applications. In
addition, the project provides an interdisciplinary platform to engage students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, and foster them to become next-
generation scientists and engineers in the fields of photonics, materials
science, nanotechnology and applied physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research lies at the interface of nano plasmonics, non-Hermitian photonics, and
topological optics. The interplays among the three rapidly growing fields have
profound implications. On one hand, plasmonics has shown remarkable abilities to
beat the diffraction limit, generate local hotspots with electric fields
amplified by orders of magnitude, and significantly enhance light-matter
interactions. However, it is known that the loss and imperfection in geometries
strongly influence the optical responses of plasmonic nanostructures and the
performance of plasmonic devices. The notion of non-Hermitian and topological
physics can potentially address these challenges. On the other hand, up to date,
non-Hermitian optics and topological photonics have been mostly realized in
systems with the feature size at the micrometer scale. It is of great interest
to investigate if and how the two concepts could enable novel properties and
applications at the nanoscale. Plasmonics provides an excellent testbed in this
regard, thanks to the large flexibility in engineering the geometry, resonance,
coupling, dispersion, and complex dielectric constants of subwavelength
plasmonic elements. The proposed project consists of three research thrusts,
including (1) demonstration of unidirectional excitation and reflection of
surface plasmon polaritons in non-Hermitian plasmonic devices by modulating the
permittivity in the complex plane; (2) investigation of topological states in
one-dimensional and two-dimensional non-Hermitian plasmonic structures, which
are immune to defects, imperfections, and disorder; and (3) numerical and
experimental study of low-threshold and topologically protected plasmonic
nanolasers. The research findings of the project will open up a new route to
efficiently generate, harness and transport light and energy in an unprecedented
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.