* 2136045
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon dioxide (CO2) fixation into cellulosic textile products through heteropolymer stabilization of enzymes in cell-free synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Neeka Mashouf, RUBI LABORATORIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,944.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
proposal is in the development of a new carbon utilization technology with the
ability to make high-value, essential products from carbon dioxide (CO2) like
cellulosic textiles, food, and building materials. Enzymatic carbon utilization
is of high interest due to its ability to make high-value natural products from
carbon dioxide. The impediment to enzymatic carbon utilization technology has
been the short longevity of both enzymes and input molecules under cell-free
industrial conditions. This project will yield a novel enzyme stabilization
approach for carbon fixation and synthesis enzymes. The resulting system may
unlock CO2 as a new, natural resource for essential product supply chains that
are carbon-negative and water- and land-neutral, unlocking a $10 trillion global
market. This scalable technology could create a new carbon industry and advance
manufacturing jobs in the United States. This technology could enable
sustainable and domestic production of America’s most essential materials from
waste carbon dioxide emissions at a cheaper cost than today’s
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a production method that
applies a bio-inspired, non-covalent enzyme stabilization strategy that employs
cell-free conversion of carbon emissions into cellulosic fibers for textiles in
a CO2-to-textile process over industrially relevant time periods. The proposed
stabilization method preserves enzyme conformation without harming baseline
activity to allow for enzymatic activity in non-natural environments. The
heteropolymers are synthesized using a standard reversible addition-
fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization approach to produce
disordered polymeric chains with diverse monomers of varying charges and
hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity characteristics to complement and stabilize
enzymes surfaces. The disordered nature of the polymers enables local surface
binding to stabilize the enzyme, maintaining its conformation and protecting
against denaturing or degradation. The project scope covers key technical
hurdles: (1) the development of a enzyme stabilization technique for carbon
fixation and synthesis enzymes, (2) the development of a carbon conversion
system and process in a non-natural, industrial environment, and (3)
confirmation of a full proof-of-concept solution that can be scalable from mL to
50L scale. If successful, the result is an effective enzyme stabilization method
that can fix carbon emissions under cell-free conditions for use in industrial
supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.