* 2136325
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Breast Cancer Detection Algorithm Using Infrared Images
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Isaac Perez-Raya, BIRED IMAGING INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve monitoring and prevention of
breast cancer with mammograms. Over 48 million screenings are performed each
year in the US, and up to 10% women are recalled for further evaluation. Dense
tissue found in 40% of women masks tumors in mammograms. Ultrasound is used as a
complementary technique but it detects both malignant and non-malignant tumors
and an additional biopsy is needed to detect cancer. Over 90% of the recalled
women do not have cancer, resulting in added cost and unnecessary anxiety among
healthy women. On the other hand, limiting the recalls to under 10% causes some
cancers to be missed. This project advances a new infrared imaging (IR)
technology unaffected by breast density. It is sensitive to only cancerous
tumors because it uses their higher metabolic signature, and it can provide
accurate estimates of the tumor size and location within the breast. The
proposed IR imaging technology will reduce the overall healthcare cost and
improve clinical outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed IR technology will
provide an effective adjunct to mammography and it will identify cancerous
tumors in dense breast tissue as well. It uses contactless IR imaging and the
spatial and thermal data obtained from multi-view IR images of individual
breasts. The IR images are obtained in prone position to avoid gravitational
distortions and provide clear optical access over the entire breast, including
the region of inframammary folds. The heat transfer from the tumor to the
breastâ€™s surface is analyzed and modeled as a straightforward physical system.
The temperature profile on the breast surface is iteratively compared with the
IR images until a match is obtained indicating whether a cancerous tumor is
present. The analysis predicts the malignant tumor size and its location is
clearly displayed to a radiologist. The approach is patient-specific. The
overall breast cancer detection rate is expected to improve, while reducing the
recall rates and unneeded biopsies in healthy women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.