* 2136460
* STTR Phase I: A pediatric care platform to enable personalized and coordinated developmental and behavioral care for children
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Brandon Aylward, BLOOMALO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project targets the critical need and gap in
developmental and behavioral care for children and families. Up to 1 in 5
children have some type of behavioral and/or developmental problem that requires
diagnosis. Of these, 80% are likely to have insufficient behavioral or
developmental care. There continues to be an overall shortage of qualified
developmental and behavioral health clinicians, and specialists struggle to meet
the current service demands which have increased dramatically during the current
COVID-19 pandemic. The American Academy of Pediatrics recently declared a state
of emergency in child and adolescent mental health. The proposed platform seeks
to enable increased access to effective behavioral care and to allow families to
get personalized information and support to address concerns in a timely
fashion. The data-driven intelligence may allow for an approach that is scalable
and that will serve as a gateway for comprehensive developmental and behavioral
health care for children and families.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project applies research in machine
intelligence to the personalized developmental and behavioral care support for
children and families and helps to address the critical need and current gaps in
children’s behavioral health. The proposed research and development bring
together a suite of capabilities to allow children and caregivers to get the
support and access to care that they need in a timely fashion. The data
collected will enable the expansion of the artificial intelligence-driven
support. At its foundation, the platform seeks to provide evidence-based
content, personalized data-driven behavioral assessments, and facilitated care
navigation for families. The platform can use technology to increase the
dissemination of behavioral health care information, to provide increased access
and real-time support that is tailored to the families’ needs, and to establish
a personal and long-lasting relationship with families as their children age and
progress through various developmental stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.