* 2136038
* Theoretical Prediction of Hydrogen Rich High-Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eva Zurek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 395,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education aimed to advance computational design of superconductors.
Superconducting materials are technologically important because electrical
current can flow through them without energy loss, and because their interiors
expel magnetic fields. These properties enable superconductors to be employed as
cables in SmartGrid projects, in levitating trains, and as electromagnets used
in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machines and wind-turbines. Unfortunately,
all the superconductors that are technologically useful must be cooled to very
low temperatures, below the frigid temperature where liquid nitrogen boils.
Finding materials that behave as superconductors at room temperature would
revolutionize electrical infrastructure, health care, and impact our lives in
unimaginable ways. Hydrogen-rich solids are the focus of this project because
research suggests that they could behave as superconductors at high
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as diamonds can be synthesized at high
pressures deep within the Earth, researchers can vary pressure to create new
materials with unusual properties. Several superconductors have recently been
synthesized in this way, exhibiting superconductivity onset approaching room
temperature. Many of these have been computationally predicted and could be
materials by design success stories. The PI will carry out quantum mechanical
calculations to predict promising new superconducting targets for synthesis and
will collaborate with leading experimental groups in high-pressure research that
will attempt to create these materials. A focus of the work is finding materials
that are superconductors at temperatures as high as room temperature at lower
pressures than current highest temperature superconducting materials. To advance
this goal the PI will further develop software that can predict the structure of
a solid without any experimental information. Machine learning methods will be
interfaced with the crystal structure prediction software to accelerate the
calculations. The resulting programs will be made freely available to the
materials science, physics, and chemistry communities, facilitating the advance
of rational materials design as well as current and future discoveries in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in computational materials discovery as part of this
project. Aiming to broaden their participation, undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be trained in computational modelling and materials
prediction via personnel exchange, paving the way for future career
opportunities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education that will lead towards the rational design of novel
hydrogen-rich superconductors. The PI will computationally predict the crystal
structures of hydrides with unique stoichiometries and structures that can be
synthesized under pressure and study their electronic structure and properties
via first-principles calculations. The focus will be on computationally mapping
out the phase diagrams of ternary hydrides as a function of pressure. These
systems are currently under intense investigation, since research suggests they
may behave as superconductors at higher temperatures or lower pressures than the
binary hydrides that have been recently studied intensively. The computational
predictions will be confirmed by leading experimental groups in high-pressure
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XtalOpt evolutionary algorithm that can be
used to predict the structure of an extended system given only its
stoichiometry, will be further developed. Machine learning methods that will
accelerate the progress of the crystal structure searches and focus them on
materials that are likely to have the highest superconducting critical
temperatures, will be interfaced with XtalOpt. The crystallography suite within
the highly popular chemical builder, editor, and visualizer Avogadro, will be
further advanced. XtalOpt and Avogadro are open-source software, and their
development contributes to the creation of cyberinfrastructure, facilitating
current and future discoveries in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in rational computational materials design and programming, thereby
preparing them for future careers where synergy between theory, computation, and
experiment leads to innovation. Collaboration with primarily undergraduate,
minority-serving institutions that involves student and faculty exchange will
expose students from underrepresented groups to research and future career
opportunities in STEM fields and train them in first-principles modelling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.