* 2136256
* EAGER: Elevating and empowering Hispanic/Latinx voices through video: Reducing barriers in academia and building an ecosystem for success in the Earth system sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Daniel Zietlow, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 266,162.00

This NSF GOLD-EN EAGER project aims to create a culture of belonging, equity,
access, diversity and inclusion in the Earth system sciences by building a
network of support for minoritized groups that spans from their families to the
university community to professional societies. As our society is tasked to work
on increasingly complex and urgent Earth system challenges, geoscience and
related fields are as important as ever. Yet, the geosciences are one of the
least diverse STEM fields and there has been little improvement over the last 40
years. Furthermore, the geoscience careers are less visible in some communities
compared to other STEM professions, resulting in careers in the geosciences
being not well known or not perceived as viable careers. To solve current socio-
environmental issues, marginalized voices must be brought in and elevated in
equitable and culturally appropriate ways. This is particularly true for the
Hispanic/Latinx community, the fastest growing minoritized group in the United
States. This project will work with Hispanic/Latinx students and scientists in
the Earth system sciences to develop a foundation for engaging their families,
strengthen a network for Hispanic/Latinx students and scientists in Earth system
sciences, and build a sustainable network of academic institution leaders to co-
create an inclusive environment for Hispanic/Latinx students, scientists, and
families. This project will foster a framework that will be expanded in the
future for culturally appropriate engagement of other underrepresented
communities and their families in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
techniques will be employed to elevate the voices of Hispanic/Latinx
communities, to increase the knowledge of careers in the geosciences, and to
empower conversations between the Latinx/Hispanic community and the university
system: 1) storytelling through film to strengthen and build upon existing
culturally relevant science communication and storytelling skills of
Hispanic/Latinx participants; 2) highlighting the experiences of Hispanic/Latinx
students, scientists, and their respective families to increase knowledge of
geoscience career opportunities; and 3) conversations between Hispanic/Latinx
participants with university community leaders to elevate the understanding of
challenges faced by Hispanic/Latinx students and scientists as they pursue
geoscience careers. Through the use of narrative storytelling and listening
sessions, the project goals are: 1) to build an ecosystem for Hispanic/Latinx
students to pursue geoscience careers with the support of their families, 2) to
feel a sense of inclusion of Hispanic/Latinx people in academia in their pursuit
of geoscience education and careers, 3) and increase retention through a sense
of belonging in these fields with the support of the university community
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.