* 2136427
* SBIR Phase I: Scalable Mesh Routing to Augment Low-Power Wide Area Internet of Things (IoT) Networks
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Ram Ramanathan, GOTENNA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 11/30/2022
* USD 229,723.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to enhance the understanding of wireless
mesh networks and deep reinforcement learning algorithms in order to
significantly expand the coverage and robustness, accelerating Internet of
Things (IoT) adoption across the globe. These improvements to sensor systems
seek to benefit a range of applications including public safety, smart
agriculture, supply chain logistics, smart cities, wildlife monitoring,
healthcare and other markets. The coverage and cost benefits are especially
impactful for the U.S population in rural or economically-disadvantaged areas
that lack cost effective connectivity and are unable to take advantage of the
IoT benefits. Further, the project will enhance industry-academia partnership,
enable the technology transition of innovations, and expand the participation of
women in science, technology, enducation and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to enable scalable, longer-lasting, and higher-
throughput Low Power Wide Area (LPWA) Internet of Things (IoT) networks by using
LPWA IoT Mesh Augmentation (LIMA) devices to augment the connectivity between
end-nodes and gateways in a cost-effective and easy-to-deploy manner. The mesh
network of LIMA devices will adaptively multi-hop relay messages to maximize
effective capacity and range. The teams seeks to augment the connectivity of
LoRaWAN (a standard for Long Range Wide Area Networks) with a goal of increasing
coverage range several-fold, reducing the battery drain of end-nodes, and
enabling higher uplink bitrates. The core challenge for such LIMA is the
development of a scalable multi-hop mesh routing protocol that, unlike existing
protocols, accommodates the ultra-low bit rates that characterize LPWANs, and is
generalizable across the diverse applications of LPWAN technology. The LIMA
solution builds upon two synergistic innovations: (a) embedded-control routing,
that uses a very small amount of bits in the data packet header in lieu of
control packets, and thereby achieves scalability and energy-efficiency in
ultra-low-capacity, energy-constrained networks and (b) relational deep
reinforcement learning based routing that combines Reinforcement Learning and
Deep Neural Networks (DeepRL) with the use of relational features to learn
routing policies that adapt to a variety of link dynamics and traffic
conditions. The LIMA solution does not require changes to end-nodes. The
anticipated technical deliverables include mesh networking software, a
simulation model, a 4-node prototype using a LoRa integrated circuit, and
experimental analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.