* 2136198
* RTG: Optimization and Inversion for the 21st Century Workforce
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 06/30/2027
* USD 911,075.00

This research training group (RTG) aims to develop a new generation of applied
mathematicians who are experts in the areas of mathematical optimization,
inversion, and data science. Trainees will gain cutting-edge knowledge and
experience in visualizing, analyzing, and learning from real-world data. The RTG
will strengthen the graduate and postdoctoral programs to attract top students
in the nation and place them in top jobs. The investigators will diversify the
recruitment with efforts at the high school and early undergraduate levels,
geared towards underrepresented groups to broaden participation in mathematics.
The RTG will introduce novel transformative experiences for students and
emphasize on critical career transition points to attract and retain students
into math-related careers. The RTG project will encourage interaction,
collaboration, and mentorship between participants at different stages of their
academic careers. Core examples include working with junior high and high school
teachers to make math more accessible and exciting to students, vertically
integrated Focused Reading/Research Groups, a Science Research Initiative to
significantly increase the number of first-year undergraduates involved in
research, and Polar Research Experiences on Arctic Sea ice that provide a unique
hands-on opportunity for students to gather, analyze, and model their own data,
closing the loop between theory and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical
optimization, inversion, and data science play a crucial role in applications
across the sciences, engineering, and medicine. This RTG leverages the expertise
of mathematics faculty in these and related areas to train and mentor students
across levels ranging from high school to doctoral and postdoctoral scholars.
Some of the core projects will include optimal design of metamaterials, porous
media, photonics, climate modeling, machine learning, remote sensing, polar
ecology, medical imaging, geophysical exploration, drug delivery and discovery,
and uncertainty quantification. The RTG will introduce a new optimization-
centered graduate curriculum, offer trainees at all levels significant
experience working on important interdisciplinary problems in vertically
integrated settings, and, mimicking successful engineering classes, a
mathematical design competition to motivate students, and a thematic RTG
conference to provide collaborative mechanisms between RTG participants and
internationally renowned researchers. This RTG project will benefit the broader
math community and beyond as the involved students and postdocs assume leading
roles as researchers and educators in the 21st-century
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.