* 2136301
* EAGER: Prototyping three-dimensional printing of sand columns for granular physics experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Vanshan Wright, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,958.00

This project aims to three-dimensional print sand grains and columns that
replicate the mineral moduli, elastic moduli, and microstructures of naturally-
deposited sands. The investigator will collect undisturbed naturally-deposited
sands, fabricate thermoplastic, glass, and powder sintered grains, fabricate
sand columns composed of thermoplastic and sintered grains, and compare the
material properties of fabricated and naturally-deposited sand grains and
columns. This project is exploratory and will require multiple parameter testing
and/or trials and errors to refine the processes. The most high-risk high-payoff
product will be printing sintered grains while preserving their microstructures.
The successful development of these techniques will open several new research
avenues in the micromechanics of sands, landscape evolution, and geohazard
predictions. This work also broadens the participation of three early-career
black men in Geoscience. The project will create a transition to Ph.D. program
that will include participating in the University of California San Diego’s
Competitive Edge, which is a six-week-long program that aims to give minoritized
graduate students an opportunity to begin research before the start of their
graduate program and to acclimate to the campus
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess whether a combination
of sediment collection, image processing, three-dimensional printing, and post-
print techniques can produce sand grains and columns that adequately replicate
the behaviors of natural sands. If successful, three dimensional printing of
sand grains and columns will open new avenues of research for rock physicists,
geophysicists, sedimentologists, geomorphologists, engineers, and granular
physicists. As a rock physicist and a geophysicist, some questions that 3-D
printing will allow the investigator to interrogate in new ways include: (1)
what is the influence of grain texture on buckling of grains, which tend to
trigger landslides, liquefaction, and earthquakes? (2) what is the fundamental
theory governing granular flow, which occurs during compaction, fault zone
shearing, soil and hillslope creep, and contact creep aging? (3) how do grain
properties control force chain distributions, which strongly influence the
resistance of sands to deformation? These questions relate to several unanswered
geohazard processes that we cannot predict well partly because sands’ physical
properties can combine to create a vast range of mechanical behaviors. The
proposed work will inspire new research in the scientific community and bring us
closer to understanding the fundamental physics that controls sands’ mechanical
behaviors while helping to save or improve lives via better hazard forecasts and
natural resource identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.