* 2136744
* EAGER: Scalable, Content-Based, Domain-Agnostic Search of Scientific Data through Concise Topological Representations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Brian Summa, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Cutting-edge science relies on scientists’ ability to sift through and access
the massive amounts of data that are being produced by the latest research. Much
of that data is stored in online databases and is searchable only by using
specific, scientific terms, like keywords, tags, or descriptions. If someone
doesn’t know exactly the right terms to use, they often can’t access all the
data that might be useful for their research. By using mathematical approaches
for information retrieval in a new way, this project will study whether a
powerful search tool, called content-based search, can be modified for
scientific data. If successful, this project will free data users from needing
to know exactly which keywords to use, transforming how scientists are able to
access and share data and creating new opportunities for scientists with vastly
different expertise to work together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One particularly
promising way to describe the content of scientific data is through a dataset’s
topology. Therefore, this project will develop approaches to compute topological
similarity that are smaller, faster, and more scalable than previously thought
possible, with the goal of creating a method for cross-cutting, content-based
search of scientific data. Specifically, the investigators will develop a
learned-hash function to convert a dataset’s persistence diagram - the common
encoding of its topology - to a simple binary code. This hash will be trained
such that the bitwise distance between codes will maintain a measure of
topological similarity between datasets. This will convert topological
comparisons from the current state of an expensive bottleneck to one with
nominal processing costs that can scale to large database queries. Initially,
this project will focus on binary codes that maintain clusters and
neighborhoods, ultimately developing codes that are rank or semi-metric
preserving. The investigators will also explore strategies for training a
learned-hash function on synthetic data, with the goal of developing a fully
domain-oblivious approach to content-based search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.