* 2136163
* SBIR Phase I:  Genomics and AI-based biological effect benchmark development for functional ingredients
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Leena Pradhan-Nabzdyk, CANOMIKS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve the consistency of functional food and beverage and
dietary supplements (FFBDS). Functional ingredients are ingredients that have
benefits beyond normal nutrition, such as curcumin (turmeric), green tea, and
cranberry extract. Currently FFBDS companies face challenges in sourcing
functional ingredients that are consistent in their quality from batch-to-batch.
The testing methods measure only the ingredient quantity and not quality. This
project advances a technology to measure the effectiveness of these functional
ingredients. This information enables FFBDS manufacturers to provide clarity,
trust, and ease to the process of purchasing functional products. Furthermore,
this can also be used to identify the specific health benefits and develop
personalized nutrition products. In addition, the data can provide traceability
and information for sustainable farming, harvesting, extracting, and
manufacturing practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
biological effect benchmarks for the pure form of functional ingredients,
starting with turmeric, using commercially available human cells, genomics, and
artificial intelligence technologies. The project will develop a test to
measures a compound's biological effectiveness compared to that of the
benchmark. The system will generate a biological effect score of the ingredient,
a list of key genes affected, and a description of the relevance of these genes
on human health. The system will be developed for high-throughput, cost-
effective operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.