* 2136794
* SBIR Phase II:  Open Hardware and Software Platform to Enable Control of IoT Devices for People with Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* John Banks, Bansen Labs LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project improves assistive
devices for people with disabilities (PwD). The assistive technology industry is
projected to reach $2.4 billion in 2022, and the home rehabilitation market is
expected to exceed $225 billion globally by 2027. This project advances a novel
hardware and software platform to give PwD full control of consumer products,
including game consoles, smart home devices, drones, and business and design
software. The system builds on a novel end-user development (EUD) architecture
which supports applications in accessibility, IoT, gaming, physical therapy,
industrial automation, and other domains involving user-controlled electronic
systems. The initial application will be for children with cerebral palsy (CP)
ages 5-18, but later applications include adults with physical disabilities, and
the aging population. This will reduce time and resources needed for PwD to
overcome access barriers, thus creating new opportunities for socialization,
education, entertainment, employment, and independence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to advance a
system to support plug-and-play device compatibility, with developer feedback
indicating over an order of magnitude improvement on the state-of-the-art (45
times faster) for implementing accessibility use cases. This project will
support the research and design of a visual user interface for non-technical
users to enable them to easily configure their devices for everyday
applications, as well as a visual editor to allow hobbyists and engineers to
implement more demanding accessibility use cases, under guidance from user
feedback at a school for children with CP in collaboration with clinical and
user experience (UX) researchers. The system is anticipated to achieve over two
orders of magnitude improvement in development time (up to 250 times faster) for
accessibility use cases compared to existing
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.