* 2136139
* EAGER: Geoheritage and Two-Eyed Seeing - Advances in Interdisciplinary Earth Science Research, Learning, and Inclusion through Shared Ways of Knowing
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Valoree Gagnon, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 10/31/2023
* USD 296,686.00

Geoheritage and Two-Eyed Seeing (GTS) is an exploratory place-based project that
combines Indigenous knowledge with geoscience education and research. A project
team that crosses disciplines, generations and cultures will study dynamic and
interconnected geologic and human stories about the landscape’s past, present,
and future. The project will employ equitable knowledge exchange and other ways
of knowing to understand the foundations of Earth processes. GTS aligns with the
pressing societal need to expand and support diversity in the geoscience
community. The project engages innovative interdisciplinary perspectives and new
expertise, which challenges conventional ways of thinking about the Earth. The
project aims to broaden considerations of the relationships between people,
landscapes, and Earth systems processes. The work is expected to contribute to
the evolving field of geoheritage in the United States. Results will demonstrate
how braided knowledge system approaches nurture and complement deeper
understanding of diverse perspectives and increase awareness of Indigenous
histories, language, and knowledge of geologic landscapes among the broader
public. The diverse team will also cultivate social consciousness through shared
dialogue on critical issues related to belonging, access, justice, equity,
diversity, and inclusion (BAJEDI) through amplifying currently underrepresented
knowledge sets in the geoscience community. The project will result in the
creation of a geoatlas that includes geologic, geographic and cultural data,
which will be available to a range of stakeholders in the Great Lakes Region.
The project also engages tribal and non-tribal youth in digital storytelling and
geoheritage research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project setting, the
Keweenaw region of Michigan’s Upper Peninsula on Lake Superior, GTS explores
relationships with the Earth through the lens of both Anishinaabe-gikendaasowin
(Anishinaabe knowledge) and Western science with two objectives: 1) the creation
of a geoatlas – a publicly accessible, exploratory geoheritage database that
combines physical, cultural, and geographic datasets that will serve the
scientific community, educators, local tourist entities, land use planners, and
the broader public; and 2) cultivate youth leaders by fostering cultural
competency in tandem with other essential skills for career paths in the
geosciences. To achieve these goals an interdisciplinary team of Great Lakes
Indigenous knowledge holders, geoscience/geospatial researchers, and two cohorts
of tribal and non-tribal youth will braid knowledge sets documenting the way
that Nibi (water), Mishomis Grandfathers (rocks), Miskwaabik (copper), and
geologic processes have guided and continue to mold culture and life. These
qualitative data will be integrated as innovative geoheritage data layers in the
geoatlas expressing these relationships in a holistic way offering potentially
transformative impacts for the development of digital storytelling and long-term
geoheritage research and increased cultural competency among the broader public.
Further contributions of this work include: a) cultivating a diverse geoscience
community by introducing youth to geoscience career pathways through multi-
disciplinary, -cultural, and –directional learning about Earth systems
processes; b) creating foundations for transformative place-based, inclusive,
and culturally-appropriate K-12 Earth science and higher education geoheritage
curriculum, both informed by GTS project deliverables; and c) fostering a more
diverse and equitable geoscience community through elevating currently
underrepresented Indigenous knowledge sets in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.