* 2136635
* SBIR Phase I: A CPR-integrated airway and ventilator system that eliminates human operator variability
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Clay Nolan, COLABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is enabling automated cardiac resuscitation in
emergency situations. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) is a manual process
dependent on responder skills. Ventilation, the proper delivery of air into the
patient’s airways, is the process during CPR that requires the most skill and,
because it is manually accomplished, is the most variable - especially in high
stress environments. The proposed automated system offers a convenient, reliable
way of accessing the airway which automatically synchronizes ventilation with
chest compressions to improve blood circulation during CPR. The system also
introduces a defibrillation electrode in the airway tube to enable cardiac
defibrillation at lower, safer voltages. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project develops a novel, automated system to provide convenient, reliable
patient ventilation and synchronization of compressions. The project’s technical
milestones are to demonstrate: (A) reduced operator variability during airway
placement and improved oxygen supply in swine models compared to current
solutions, (B) reliable detection of cardiac contractions from pressure changes
measured in the airway, and (C) feasibility of electric defibrillation with
lower energy in cadaver models. The technical challenges are to: account for
variations in human anatomy and detect errors with insertion into the airway,
account for chest compressions not detected by the system, and ensure electrical
contact between the defibrillation electrode and the esophagus during cardiac
defibrillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.