* 2136447
* SBIR Phase I:  Massively scalable storage of nucleic acids using barcoded polymer packets
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,04/30/2023
* James Banal, CACHE DNA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,819.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a technology platform for storing biological
materials that will improve public health outcomes and enable the storage of the
ever-expanding digital data universe. Nucleic acids are the new bits of the 21st
century; they encode our health and can be repurposed as alternative storage
media for digital data. Harnessing the information encoded in these biological
materials requires a scalable way to store and access nucleic acids. For
decades, we have relied on energy-intensive low-temperature storage and
expensive robotics to maintain the integrity of nucleic acids, which are not
scalable. The successful outcome of this proposal is an alternative solution to
store massive amounts of nucleic acids, obviating the need for freezers and
enabling new products that leverage nucleic acid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will lay the foundation for
developing a low-cost scalable solution for nucleic acid materials. Current
approaches are limited by the requirement of low temperature to circumvent the
degradation of nucleic acids, requiring a constant supply of electricity and
expensive robotics. Instead, the proposed project focuses on maintaining the
integrity of nucleic acids for decades at room temperature and simultaneously
enabling search and retrieval functions akin to a computer or internet search
engine by leveraging the rapid diffusion of molecules in solution. This
ambitious goal will be achieved by using novel synthetic polymers that are made
compatible with biological materials to enable rapid encapsulation of nucleic
acids while providing long-term protection without the need for low temperature.
The resulting synthetic polymers discovered through the project will be tested
using purified nucleic acids, including animal, bacterial, or viral genomes, to
demonstrate the capabilities and breadth of materials that can be used for the
proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.