* 2136796
* SBIR Phase II:  Material Adjusted Signature Tags for Cradle-to-Grave Inventory Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Brandon Young, PASCAL TAGS INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,016,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project improves inventory
management. An estimated $818 billion is lost annually due to incomplete
knowledge of a company’s inventory. The problem occurs because of the absence of
a label at manufacturing that survives through the supply chain (retail,
logistics, and end user). Currently, traditional supply chain management forces
a company to add at least one new tag at each step. This project will reduce the
number of tags per product, exponentially decrease waste, increase supply chain
efficiency, and prevent knockoffs or counterfeits from being added to the supply
chain. All of this will help businesses run more effectively, better serve
customers, and enable consumers to gain detailed knowledge of their
purchases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
development of the first commercially viable, cradle-to-grave inventory tag
through optimization and scalability tasks. The innovation is a chipless
inventory tag with a unique serial number for every product to provide the
cradle-to-grave functionality. The underlying Material Adjusted Signature Tag
(MAST) technology uses printable materials to create a unique radio frequency
(RF) signal. The MAST tags will enable direct printing or application of a tag
onto a product, allowing an efficient way to reliably identify, track, and
attribute data to a product throughout its life. This project will improve the
tag’s data potential, optimize manufacturability, and achieve greater
readability. Beyond optimization and scalability milestones, this project will
test the tags, readers, and manufacturing equipment in relevant
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.