* 2136836
* SBIR Phase II:  Space-Based Atmospheric and Integrity Monitoring for Mission-Critical Position, Navigation, and Timing (PNT)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Bryan Chan, XONA SPACE SYSTEMS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable much-needed improvements to global
position, navigation, and timing (PNT) services that are used by billions of
people every day. The Earth’s atmosphere distorts PNT signals transmitted by
satellites (i.e. global positioning systems, GPS), which lead to end user errors
in position and time accuracy that are not easily removed. The goals of this
project are to remove these atmospheric-derived errors in real-time at a system
level. The effort will support novel global PNT services that will bring more
precise global positioning and timing accuracy (less than 10 cm, less than 1
nanosecond) to end users in many downstream applications. Global precision
timing from such a service will support the scaling up of intelligent
transportation systems, making autonomous vehicles safer while driving down
equipment costs. These autonomous vehicles include the projected millions of
drones and automobiles that will be manufactured over the next several years. In
addition, a global precision timing service, when available indoors, will reduce
the deployment cost of millions of critical infrastructure devices in power,
telecommunications, and financial sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to accurately map the
Earth’s troposphere and ionosphere and demonstrate autonomous satellite
integrity monitoring using a constellation of small satellites. Proper mapping
of the atmosphere may remove atmosphere-derived errors in space-based PNT
systems. The first research objective is to expand the algorithmic and data
processing framework for PNT satellites, called the Atmospheric Mapping and
Satellite Integrity Monitoring System (AMSIM). The research will be adapted to
real constraints of the system including spectrum and orbital configurations.
The second research objective is to demonstrate the major elements of AMSIM on
orbit, which will be accomplished with two demonstration satellites in Low Earth
Orbit. The third research objective is to combine these factors to inform the
true PNT performance of the production system so that it can be clearly conveyed
to target end users. The anticipated technical results will be a commercially-
viable and technically-feasible space system architecture enabling a precision
global PNT system that can offer 10 cm and 1 &lt;br/&gt;nanosecond accuracies to
end users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.