* 2136040
* EAGER: An ultradian cycle that mediates metabolic homeostasis under extreme conditions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* John Albeck, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) provides the majority of free energy for most
eukaryotic cells. Remarkably, inhibition of OXPHOS for extended periods of time
is well tolerated by cells, through compensation by glycolysis. The systems-
level properties that enable such metabolic adaptation are yet to be understood.
The PI previously observed a cycling of metabolism on inhibition of OXPHOS. This
project investigates how cells manage their energy budget dynamically to
withstand OXPHOS inhibition. By identifying these mechanisms, the project
enables a range of future investigations that will establish the function and
significance of metabolic cycling within physiological circumstances. This
project is developing an extracurricular program for undergraduates and high
school students that introduces them to current research concepts in metabolic
biochemistry, cell fate regulation, and dynamical systems modeling. Activities
include reading and presentation of primary literature, construction of pathway
maps using CellDesigner software, and contribution to the writing of reviews
that will be submitted for publication or posted to public websites. Students
learn about the process of conducting research, and the applications of research
findings to human or veterinary medicine and metabolic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) provides
the majority of free energy for most eukaryotic cells. Remarkably, inhibition of
OXPHOS for extended periods of time is well tolerated by cells when sufficient
glucose and other nutrients are available. Mammalian cells can survive full
OXPHOS inhibition and continue to proliferate, even though ATP generation per
glucose molecule is reduced from approximately 36 to only 2. Their survival is
enabled by a seemingly seamless switch to glycolysis, which has largely been
assumed to occur uniformly in time within all cells of a population. However,
recent work from the PI’s lab has revealed, using live-cell biosensors, that
OXPHOS inhibition induces large oscillations in the activity of AMPK, a key
regulator of metabolic status. Similar oscillations in AMPK activity occur in
multiple cell types and have a characteristic period of about 3 hours,
regardless of which mitochondrial complex is inhibited. This stereotypical
pattern suggests the existence of a common temporal program, which has been
termed the OXPHOS Inhibition-induced Cycle (OPIC). Furthermore, additional data
show that the activity of AMPK, which stimulates catabolism, alternates with the
activity of ERK and mTORC1, which are key pro-anabolic signaling pathways. These
data imply that metabolic homeostasis is temporally organized into phases
dedicated to distinct metabolic processes. This project is undertaken to
identify the network underlying cell cycle-independent, hours-scale periodicity
in mammalian cellular metabolism. The mechanisms driving OPIC are examined by
(1) disabling the cycle to determine its importance, (2) determining the
functional role of the cycle in metabolism and (3) to identify the regulators
and readouts of the cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.