* 2136458
* SBIR Phase I:  Study for a new design of child resistance packaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Cory Wilson, DATASHAPES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel medication safety cap
capable of simultaneous child-resistance and adult-accessibility to reduce the
morbidity and mortality associated with unintentional medication overdoses by
young children. Every hour a young child under the age of 6 is hospitalized, and
every 12 days a child dies in the United States due to unintentional medication
ingestion. Studies have shown that improper use of safety caps by adults (only
partially securing the cap or leaving it off entirely) contributes to
unsupervised medication ingestions by young children. The proposed safety cap
would prevent access by young children while also being easy to understand and
operate by older senior adults, integrate with current high- speed manufacturing
and distribution systems, and be cost-competitive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project leverages the
ergonomic differences between child and adult hand sizes, with differences in
human-product interaction behavior, to develop more effective child-resistant
packaging for medications. Current state-of-the-art safety caps rely on strength
and dexterity-based mechanisms to restrict access for young children, but these
methods are also often difficult for adults to use properly. This project seeks
to leverage the behavioral and mechanical product interaction differences into a
safety cap and provide quantitative evidence of both senior adult accessibility
and child- resistance. The expected outcomes of this Phase I project is a design
that is (1) validated to function within the thresholds of child-resistance and
senior adult accessibility, and (2) pass safety and regulatory
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.