* 2136750
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing benthic mysid ecology and animal-fluid interactions in response to background flow, food, and light conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Houshuo Jiang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,599.00

Mysid shrimp are a group of zooplankton that are distributed in diverse aquatic
environments – freshwater, marine and estuarine – in both shallow and deep
waters throughout the world. Due to their ubiquitous presence, mysids form a
critical link in marine food webs, yet little is known about their ecology and
interactions with their local surroundings. An interdisciplinary team of
investigators will develop and deploy a novel in situ imaging system in coastal
Maine over the span of two summers, conducting a comprehensive investigation of
mysid behavior in their natural environment, including their interactions and
distribution under varying local flow, food, and light conditions. The
investigators will train two graduate students at the interface of fluid
mechanics, instrumentation, and ecology. In addition, ten students from Florida
Atlantic University and the University of Southern Maine will be invited to
participate in annual workshops on ecological fluid mechanics, with first-
generation college students or those from other underrepresented communities
encouraged to apply. The cutting-edge instrumentation suite, including the
imaging system being developed as part of this project, can be used to address
different questions associated with spatial patterns and zooplankton or fish
behavior in the future. Image datasets will be openly accessible to the
scientific community and the public. Project results will be disseminated
through public outreach lectures at the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute,
Darling Marine Center, and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mysids have been historically understudied
compared to other zooplankton groups (e.g., copepods, krill), despite their
ubiquitous presence and importance to marine food webs. This project will
investigate mysid behavior, feeding ecology, and swarm distributions in relation
to prey availability, light levels, and background flow conditions, focusing on
a single mysid species – Neomysis americana. The investigators will use a state-
of-the-art suite of instruments in the field, including two separate imaging
systems and a high resolution Acoustic Doppler Profiler, to conduct field
experiments at the Damariscotta River Estuary. This instrumentation suite will
collect data to analyze mysid distributions and animal-fluid interactions in
their natural environment, as well as ancillary data on benthic
particle/plankton community composition and physical parameters (including
currents, waves, temperature and depth). Multi-spectral analysis will find
correlation patterns with water turbidity, flow conditions, bottom topography,
mysid abundance, and food source concentrations. Mysid samples will be collected
several times a week throughout the summer months to monitor changes in the
mysid population abundance, sex ratio, and stage structure. The investigators
will determine how seasonal changes in environmental variables and Neomysis
population structure affect distribution within the estuary, as well as small-
scale swimming and aggregation behavior. They will answer questions related to
how swarm organization, aggregation, and swimming behavior differ under
conditions of varying zooplankton abundance and swarm composition. Results will
ultimately improve our understanding of marine ecosystem
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biological
Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.