* 2136177
* 14th International Conference on Fundamentals of Adsorption, FOA14
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Gennady Gor, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide partial travel support for junior U.S. participants to
attend the 14th International Conference on the Fundamentals of Adsorption
(FOA14) which will take place on May 22-27, 2022 in Broomfield, Colorado. The
FOA series of conferences is the premier international conference in the field
of adsorption, organized by the International Adsorption Society. A hallmark of
the conference is its comprehensive coverage of the spectrum of fundamental
research and applications of adsorption, ranging from molecular modeling and
simulation of fluids adsorbed in porous materials to the design of pressure
swing adsorption systems for industrial gas separation processes. Research in
these topical areas has far-reaching societal implications, including mitigating
greenhouse gas emissions and reducing industrial energy consumption. The FOA
meeting is held triennially and is attended by researchers from all over the
world. The attendees represent a wide range of academic disciplines, including
chemical engineering, chemistry, physics, and materials science and engineering,
among others, and the level of industrial participation is high. The meeting
format includes a series of keynote, plenary, and invited talks, technical
presentations, and poster sessions. Thus, the conference provides an excellent
forum for the exchange of ideas and information between scientists and engineers
in academia and industrial practitioners in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
14th International Conference on the Fundamentals of Adsorption meeting will
feature technical sessions, daily poster sessions, and networking functions to
encourage the cross-pollination of ideas and to establish new collaborations.
The key themes of the meeting include fundamentals of adsorption,
thermodynamics, and kinetics; molecular simulation of adsorption phenomena;
adsorbent materials including zeolites, carbons, silicas, and metal-organic
frameworks; characterization of adsorbent materials; liquid-phase and gas-phase
adsorption processes; pressure swing adsorption and simulated moving bed
processes; biotechnology applications of adsorption; energy applications of
adsorption; and environmental applications of adsorption. The FOA14 organizing
committee is a diverse group of researchers from academia, industry, and U.S.
national laboratories whose expertise spans the array of technical topics. The
meeting is unique in its focus on fundamental adsorption science. The award will
support the participation of graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and
junior tenure-track faculty members from U.S. educational institutions and not-
for-profit research institutions. A primary objective of these travel subsidies
is to encourage participation among members of the research community who might
otherwise be unable to participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.