* 2136875
* SBIR Phase I:  High Power Microwave Robot for Industrial Extra-Terrestrial Resource Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Mohsen Yazdani, OFF-WORLD, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 252,433.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to create a viable microwave device for
material processing on the Moon and other planetary bodies. The innovation may
reduce the effort required to extract ice volatiles from inside solid materials
by 2-3 times compared to current lunar excavation methods and could be used
without preconditioning. Lunar extraction may reduce the cost of obtaining
essential materials on the surface of the Moon by an order of magnitude,
compared to supply from the Earth. Such a technology will have two key societal
impacts. First, as human populations continue to expand, critical resources on
Earth are becoming increasingly scarce and having another extra-terrestrial
source may provide the resources needed on Earth. Second, the development of a
space resource-use ecosystem may catalyze technical education, interest, and
economic development in addition to fueling continued Gross National Product
(GDP) growth. Accessing water cheaply in the lunar and near-Earth environment to
produce mission-critical water, hydrogen, and oxygen, is essential for this
outcome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to design a high-power Bessel beam microwave projector for
installation onto an autonomous robot, for the preconditioning or softening of
materials by supplying impulses of energy at high rates. The innovation
distinguishes itself due to the ability to focus high density energy from a
stand-off distance. The research involves the investigation of the subcomponents
of the system to address expected capabilities which include: the ability to
project a “pencil beam” from a stand-off distance using a multi-reflector
assembly, tolerance of the surface properties of the materials being treated,
and electronic steering of the projected beam using phase shifting to improve
focus. The research will start with simulations to lay the foundations for an
autonomous and mobile microwave system with the listed capabilities. The project
will develop, using simulation, the Bessel beam platform, perform the initial
robotic designs, and source system integrators for the microwave and robotic
components needed for subsequent development phases. Specifically, this system
would be used in space mining applications towards the retrieval of ice
volatiles such as water, methane, carbon monoxide and dioxide, and ammonia, that
are found in cold shadowed craters at the lunar poles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.