* 2136298
* STTR Phase I:  Smart Semiautonomous Fluid Drainage System for Surgical Procedures
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Simon, JUGGERNAUT LIFE SCIENCES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
novel automated manner to drain abnormal accumulations of fluid in the abdominal
body cavity. The proposed system seeks to progress visualization, sensor and
algorithm technologies to semi-automate drainage procedures, standardizing
delivery of care and reducing the required clinical resources (personnel and
required hospital equipment). Healthcare costs continue to increase in the
United States (US). This trend, coupled with current and projected manpower
shortages in the healthcare sector, is driving the relevant stakeholders to
consider innovative solutions to appropriately manage healthcare costs while
still providing high-quality healthcare to patients. While other sectors of the
economy have greatly benefited from increased use of automation to improve
efficiency and cost containment, for a variety of reasons, the healthcare sector
is lagging in implementing these innovations in a systemic way. With this
opportunity in mind, this Phase I STTR project aims to prove the feasibility of
developing a unique, semi-autonomous robotic platform that will be adaptable to
many medical procedures. As envisioned, the technology may lead to key advances,
including improved patient outcomes and levels of care while increasing
procedure/staff efficiencies, and reducing medical costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase I effort is to demonstrate a
proof of concept for an integrated procedural unit for semi-autonomously
performing paracenteses. The prototype system to be completed during this stage
is comprised of an ultrasound probe, motorized anesthetic syringe, scalpel, and
aspiration needle, and can be integrated into standard, commercially available
robotic units. The algorithm will be developed using Bayesian indexing based on
ultrasound images to execute ascites fluid removal in both virtual and
mechanical simulations. Based on the preliminary work done by the
multidisciplinary team of medical, robotic, and artificial intelligence (AI))
experts, the company plans to create and test a compact robotic device with the
required sensory and driving components. This robotic device will have multiple
subunits arranged in a compact and innovative way, capable of accurately imaging
and controlling various instruments essential for anesthetizing and then driving
the necessary cannulas for fluid aspiration. The project objectives include: (i)
design and manufacture of the robotic system, (ii) development of AI-driven
segmentation of ultrasound images and optimization of needle placement, and
(iii) design and implementation of control algorithms for safe and robust
operation of the surgical robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.