* 2136474
* SBIR Phase I:  EEG-guided intelligent transcranial photobiomodulation to reduce symptoms of autism
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Eugenia Steingold, JELIKALITE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 01/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate proof of concept for a wearable device for delivering personalized
therapy to mitigate autism in children. One out of 44 children in America is
diagnosed with autism. Behavioral therapies with no pharmacological or device
treatments show mixed effects. This project advances an effective personalized
treatment to augment or replace the state of practice. The device will be used
in the privacy of each child’s home without the need for a specialist. The
benefit of the proposed system is approximately 33% improvement in autism
symptoms, resulting in over $1 million in lifetime savings for each child.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of a non invasive wearable medical device that stimulates brain
tissue using near infrared radiation in Transcranial Photobiomodulation (tPBM),
with integrated EEG feedback on Delta brain waves indicative of therapeutic
effect. This project will complete prototyping of a system suitable for use,
collect pre-clinical data in children, develop a signal analysis database, and
develop algorithms based on the patient’s baseline factors for the desired
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.