* 2136218
* Shock-Tube Studies of High-Temperature Flames Applicable to Next-Generation Energy Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Ronald Hanson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/28/2025
* USD 449,595.00

Meeting society’s growing energy demands while simultaneously ensuring reliable
and equitable energy access and mitigating the role of energy production on
exacerbating climate change requires a holistic research and technology-
development strategy. The combustion of chemical fuels remains the primary
energy conversion technology used in the power generation and transportation
sectors and is projected to persist for decades to come, particularly in “hard
to electrify” sectors such as commercial aviation and shipping. Next-generation
combustion-based energy systems using sustainable, net-zero-carbon fuels
together with advanced thermodynamic cycles to maximize energy conversion
efficiency provide a pathway for the continued use of combustion systems while
mitigating the adverse effects with which they have historically been
associated. This project provides support to the development of next-generation
energy systems through fundamental studies of flame behavior at high-temperature
conditions relevant to practical combustion applications. Advanced experimental
techniques and high-speed imaging and laser-based diagnostics will provide
detailed measurements of flame speeds and structure at the highest temperature
conditions ever studied in a controlled laboratory environment. The availability
of such measurements will inform the accurate modeling and simulation of
combustion processes and shorten the development time required for the
deployment of next-generation energy systems with reduced carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premixed, laminar flame speed represents a
fundamental property of a fuel-oxidizer system. Jointly governed by thermal,
transport, and chemical-kinetic properties, the laminar flame speed contains
information on multiple components of the detailed models commonly compiled to
describe combustion events. Experimentally measured flame speeds are widely
utilized as performance metrics in all stages of kinetic mechanism development,
including tuning the parameters, validating the global performance, and
maintaining accuracy as mechanisms are reduced in size for use in detailed
simulation of practical combustion systems. The shock-tube flame speed method
has been developed and refined to enable the study of laminar flames at high-
temperature, reactive conditions relevant to next-generation energy systems but
beyond the capability of experimental study using previous measurement
techniques. Activity 1 of this project is to apply the shock-tube flame speed
method to perform a survey of laminar flame speed measurements at high
temperatures for fuels relevant to current and future energy systems. These
measurements will be collated into a new measurement database to ensure simple
and open access of the resulting data. Activity 2 of this project will include
the exploratory application of advanced diagnostics to determine the presence of
and study novel flame structures and phenomena existing at high temperatures,
such as cool, double, and overdriven flames. Data resulting from this project
will serve as the first fundamental experimental measurements of high-
temperature flame behavior and are thus expected to significantly advance the
understanding of combustion phenomena at conditions relevant to practical
energy-conversion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.