* 2136844
* SBIR Phase II:  A study of the electromechanical failure modes in hydraulically amplified aelf-healing electrostatic (HASEL) actuators
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Timothy Morrissey, ARTIMUS ROBOTICS INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 955,030.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the novel scientific knowledge gained by
understanding the effects of high electrostatic fields on composite dielectrics,
the translation of experimental materials to robust and high performance HASEL
(Hydraulically Amplified Self-healing ELectrostatic) actuators, and, more
generally, the impact of HASEL actuation technology within real-world
applications. This knowledge contributes to many highly interdisciplinary fields
of science, ranging from electrostatics, materials science, mechanical
engineering, computer science, and electrical engineering. The advancements of
HASEL actuators achieved during this project may have broad impacts on
commercial, research, education, and defense sectors. These actuators may be an
enabling component for a variety of industries including automation, automotive,
medical devices, robotics, and defense applications. Key features of HASEL
actuators include: analog motion, mechanical compliance, high speed, high
strain, silent operation, customization, and self-sensing. By bringing forward
actuator technologies, industries may adopt robotic technologies, strengthening
the economic competitive advantage of these industries. The team will continue
to leverage academic partnerships to contribute to and train a highly capable
technical workforce of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to advance the performance
of HASEL (Hydraulically Amplified Self-healing ELectrostatic) actuators. HASEL
actuators harness electrostatic forces to drive shape-change in a soft hydraulic
structure, providing a variety of muscle-like actuation modes and the ability to
self-sense their deformation state. HASEL actuators address critical problems in
existing soft actuator technologies. For example, soft pneumatic actuators must
be tethered to a system of valves and pumps for high performance actuation,
whereas HASEL actuators are electrically controlled and can be operated with
battery-powered portable power supplies. The team will develop and validate
approaches to advance the performance and ease of use of HASEL actuators. These
advances of the technology will be realized through material optimization,
fabrication improvements, and a more fundamental understanding of solid-liquid
composite dielectric structures under high electrostatic fields. Performance
improvements will be applied to actuators well-suited for industrial, consumer,
defense, and experimental applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.