* 2136807
* I-Corps:  Highly secure anticounterfeiting tags with deep learning software for reliable product authentication
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Po-Yen Chen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts and commercial potential of this I-Corps project enable a
new platform for anticounterfeiting and authentication of physical goods. This
project uses physically unclonable devices such as small anticounterfeiting tags
that are essentially impossible to replicate. Because these tags are not readily
copied by current manufacturing processes, they ensure uniqueness and security
with distinct advantages over other chaosmetric approaches. Current
anticounterfeiting technologies often face challenges with low pattern
complexity that allows the security tag to be copied, lack of facile
authentication tools for high-complexity tags, and physical instabilities that
can limit applications. This technology platform addresses these challenges as
it offers potential commercial applications in markets with high safety
standards, such as pharmaceuticals and automobile parts, or in high-value
sectors where authentication can often be destructive or
difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops two dimensional
(2D) nanomaterials and their microstructures for use in anticounterfeiting
applications. By physically deforming the 2D nanomaterial thin films randomly,
the resulting microstructure shows chaosmetric properties and high structural
stability which can be utilized as a new type of anticounterfeiting tag. The 2D
nanomaterial tags may be irreplaceable and can be utilized in a variety of
extreme environments such as at very high or very low temperatures, in strong
acidic or basic solutions, and after physical washing. These physical
environments are areas where conventional anti-counterfeiting tags often
fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.