* 2136792
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimized Extraction and Projection Optics for Ion Point Sources
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Thomas Kelly, STEAM INSTRUMENTS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2023
* USD 255,261.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to demonstrate a
technology advance in the field of imaging mass spectrometry. A successful
project will enable: (1) markedly improved mass resolving power sufficient to
separate key mass interferences that limit the technique, and (2) introduction
of a new generation of position-sensitive ion detectors to dramatically improve
data acquisition rates by 100 times and detection efficiency to 100%. These
developments will create an opportunity to rethink the underlying architecture
of commercial stigmatic-imaging time-of-flight mass spectrometry microscopes.
With this technology, a new generation of instruments will be realized. The
addressable market opportunity for these instruments is currently about $50
million per annum and is expected to grow with the new superior performance and
with increasing need which grows more acute with time. Such improved instruments
can beneficially impact major industries such as semiconductors ($450 billlon
per year) and metals ($12 trillion per year). Improvements in the quality,
quantity, and availability of atomic-scale information from imaging mass
spectrometry instruments thus can have a large impact on technological progress.
The advances sought in this project are the first steps toward new tools that
will meet the demands of scientists and engineers for decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is embodied in an
experimental test of a new optical approach to control beam divergence from
point sources of charged particles. By controlling beam divergence, ion imaging
detectors can be optimally adapted to record images with superior properties.
This will significantly advance fields of stigmatic-imaging mass spectrometry
and ion-beam projection instrumentation. Extensive computer simulations have
been conducted and used to aid design of prototype ion optics. The ability of
these optics to control the ion beam divergence while projecting stigmatic ion
images must be confirmed. Such ion images will be recorded over a wide range of
operating conditions of the ion source and optics. A proof-of-concept experiment
is proposed here to validate predictions of modeling. The quality of the
projection will be assessed and compared with the simulations for validation of
the models and further optimization aiming at development of a product
prototype. This work will enable 1) long-sought-after imaging time-of-flight
mass spectrometry measurements with large field of view and high mass resolving
power for precise ion identification, and 2) implementation of a new generation
of ion detectors that offer 100% detection efficiency and a hundred-fold
increase in data acquisition rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.