* 2136228
* RTG: Program in Computation- and Data-Enabled Science
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Jeffrey Ovall, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2027
* USD 900,000.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) in Computation- and Data-Enabled Science
(CADES) at Portland State University is designed to train students and postdocs
in computational mathematics and statistics, as well as enable them to develop a
broad understanding of current issues in data-driven science. Targeted research
directions of societal impact include simulation of optical fibers that drive
today's internet, forecasting of weather, air quality, and drought,
understanding progression of diseases such as cancer and dementia, and
optimizing warehouse locations and wireless services. The research, at the
intersection of mathematics, statistics, and computing, is characterized by
intellectual diversity of techniques. Integration across these disciplines is
expected to result in enhanced research productivity and uniquely qualified
trainees. For this RTG, eight faculty experts integrate research and training
with service for the city and the local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research group effort integrates numerical techniques for partial differential
operators, data-intensive statistical learning, and optimization methods for
data science. Specific projects include simulation of light propagation in
microstructured optical devices using advanced eigensolvers, improvements to
time-evolving simulations by spacetime approaches with and without causality,
learning dynamical systems from noisy data, kernel methods for randomized
control trials, advanced data assimilation for prediction of complex systems,
and optimization methods for multifacility location and machine learning.
Mechanisms to accelerate the entry of trainees into these research topics are
integrated into the program. The project will establish a Consulting Lab for
client-based research and training experiences using real-world data, a
byproduct of which is the creation of new consulting services for regional
clients. Training innovations include a new seminar favoring dialogue over
monologue, buy-in from leaders in the field as external examiners, summer boot
camps to overcome anticipated lack of trainee prerequisites for
transdisciplinary crossovers, identification of selected external partnering
institutions for topical internships, and city-based and community-serving
research experiences for undergraduates. All projects require high performance
computing and open-source scientific software products. Training in these topics
are valued byproducts. The RTG recruitment activities are targeted to increase
participation of underrepresented groups. Engagement from external partners in
need of US citizen employees augments job prospects for the trainees and helps
address shortages in the technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.