* 2136531
* SBIR Phase I:  Skin-Voltage Biometric Sensing Using Highly Conductive Fabric Electrodes on Wearable Garments
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,08/31/2022
* George Sun, NEXTILES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,753.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to broaden access to healthcare data. Users
of the system developed in this project can take biometric measurements such as
heart rate, muscle-activity, and body mass calculations in real-time, with data
collected through sensors embedded into clothing. The innovation enables vital
measurements to be taken, both inside and outside of clinical environments,
while reducing instrumentation weight and cost requirements. This fabric-based
technology can potentially serve users ranging from medical professionals to
everyday consumers who will more easily adopt wearable soft-material products in
lieu of traditional hardware devices. Specialized sectors such as physical
therapy, pre-surgical studies, sports labs, and out-patient care have the
highest growth opportunity for new technology adoption. Complementing the rapid
growth of telehealth, bio-sensing capabilities for real-time and remote tracking
will improve patient compliance and aid health care workers by providing better
access to comprehensive vital measurement data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves material science
research in conductive threads and fabrics. These soft goods can bend, stretch,
and compress along the body where they are worn. In addition, their
electromechanical characteristics allow them to pick up small voltage and
current signals that are naturally generated from the body, specifically from
the heart, muscles, and the brain. By strategically weaving these materials
within a shirt, small voltages for EKG (heart), EMG (muscle), EEG (brain), and
BIA (water and body mass content) can be simultaneously captured and measured
for heart rate, muscle activity, brain activity, and water and fat content
measurements. The technical research will involve innovation in fabric-materials
optimized for small signal and low noise pickup and design of a comfortable
garment incorporating multiple fabric-based electrodes for simultaneous pickup
of EKG/EMG/BIA signals. The project will also develop new signal processing
algorithms to transform raw voltages to real-time signals transmitted
wirelessly. The desired technical result is a functional and wearable prototype
with end-to-end communication from the fabric through the garment to a receiving
mobile or desktop app visualizing the processed data for heart rate, muscle
activity, and body mass analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.