* 2136783
* SBIR Phase I:  Dense, Socially-Compliant, Autonomous Delivery Robot
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Utsav Patel, INCEPTION ROBOTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,428.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to enable autonomous mobile robots (AMRs) to operate
in densely crowded spaces in a safe and socially compliant/acceptable manner. A
key potential outcome is the development of a collision avoidance method based
on Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). This method would be capable of handling
dense crowds and optimized to run on compact and power-efficient embedded
processors. Such abilities would increase the commercial potential and adoption
of learning-based navigation methods that have demonstrated excellent collision
avoidance and noise handling capabilities. The technology may unlock commercial
opportunities by deploying AMRs in the airport, retail, healthcare, and
hospitality industries, where the environments are highly dense and dynamic. The
airport industry may derive postive impacts from AMRs that can navigate in
complex, indoor environments where global positioning systems (GPS) are not
allowed by providing contactless deliveries of food, beverages, and other retail
products to travelers at the gate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates a hybrid collision
avoidance approach enabling autonomous mobile robots (AMRs) to operate safely in
dense crowds, while being socially-compliant in sparse scenarios. Preliminary
research has shown that Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)-based approaches can
compute collision-free robot velocities with inaccurate, uncertain perception
data. The proposed DRL-based model will be implemented as an optimized neural
network that works on power and cost-efficient embedded processors. The key
technical hurdles in this technology are: the DRL model trained in simulation
may not perform well in real-world environments (known as sim-to-real gap), the
fully-trained DRL model may have some performance degradation compared to the
company’s current DRL models due to the lower number of parameters used to run
on embedded processors, and the localization modules could compute erroneous
locations when the AMR is navigating through a dense crowd due to occlusions.
The key objectives of Phase I are to address these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.