* 2136816
* NSF-BSF: Synergistic Multiscale Modeling and Single-Molecule Fluorescence Studies of the Dynamics and Function of AAA+ Protein Disaggregation Machines
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* George Stan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2025
* USD 851,499.00

Disassembly of toxic protein aggregates is an essential quality control
mechanism that ensures cell viability under stress conditions. This action is
performed by ring-shaped AAA+ (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular
Activities) biological nanomachines, such as Clp/Hsp100 (ClpB in bacteria or
Hsp104 in yeast), which apply mechanical forces to extract protein molecules
from aggregates and translocate them through narrow pores to assist their
renaturation process. Understanding, at the microscopic level, the coupling
between the conformational dynamics of the nanomachine and the mechanisms of
substrate protein (SP) threading and disassembly will enable the elucidation of
fundamental aspects of critical cellular processes. This project will
synergistically combine hybrid multiscale computer simulations, performed in the
lab of Prof. Stan at the University of Cincinnati, US, and single-molecule
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (smFRET) experiments, performed in the
lab of Prof. Haran at the Weizmann Institute, Israel. Increasing the
participation of underrepresented minorities in computational sciences is at the
center of educational and mentoring activities integrated with the biophysical
research in this project. These activities will include outreach at Central
State University (CSU), a Historically Black College and University, and
research experience opportunities for underrepresented minorities at the
University of Cincinnati. Further, science training programs will be offered for
summer camp students at the Cincinnati Museum Center. The US-Israel exchange
program included in this project will provide interdisciplinary experience and
international perspective for students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address two key aspects in the mechanism of protein machines,
namely the propagation of conformational transitions between subunits and the
way substrates are being manipulated. A combination of unique single-molecule
experiments and innovative simulations will be performed on ClpB and will reveal
the real-time propagation of function-related conformational changes between the
subunits of ClpB. Functional states and domain motions during the allosteric
cycle of the machine will be measured using smFRET methodology over a broad
range of timescales, from microseconds to seconds. Computer simulations, using
smFRET-derived distances, will determine ClpB conformations associated with
functional states and characterize motions between them. Coarse-grained
simulations and analysis based on machine learning will be employed to this end.
This project will also reveal how SPs are translocated through the ClpB lumen.
SPs will be traced in real time on the single-molecule level as they interact
with ClpB molecules. Novel hybrid multiscale computational models will
complement the experiments and provide atomistic-level information on the
mechanism of extraction of SPs from amorphous aggregates and their threading
process. These studies will provide a new framework for the synergistic
application of experiments and computations to nanomachines, with implications
to multiple future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli
Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.