* 2136005
* Creating a Path to STEM Careers in Psychology for Under-Represented Minorities
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Monica Foust, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 11/30/2024
* USD 605,761.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
increasing the participation of Under-Represented Minority (URM) students in
STEM based neuroscience psychology programs and careers. The project will
develop a STEM minor curriculum in psychology informed by instructional pedagogy
that promotes science-based education within the context of academic
supplemental instruction, cohort models, and student support. The project will
investigate how the inclusion of a STEM minor in a Psychology degree program can
increase retention, persistence to graduation, and successful transfer of URM
students to 4-year college neuroscience degree programs and careers. Further,
the project will assess and evaluate how a seamless articulation between CUNY
Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) and City College of New York
(CCNY) can cultivate psychology students that i) are well prepared for STEM
based classes, ii) have the confidence to persist in a 4-year neuroscience
focused degree, and iii) have a positive outlook for neuroscience-focused
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BMCC STEM minor in psychology will require
students to fulfill the general education science and math requirements with
revised courses in neurobiology and mathematics foundations essential for the
career fields of neuroscience, data science, and digital/AI. The minor will
include upper-level courses in Behavioral Statistics, Cognitive Psychology, and
Research in Psychology. These courses will align with senior college transfer
requirements. Additional credits will be included in the minor as upper-level
science courses to build a stronger biological and mathematical foundation for
students entering senior college neuroscience programs. The STEM minor will
require that students participate in the psychology laboratories where they will
learn about neuroscience assessment as well as have opportunities to participate
with faculty in research projects. In addition to these academic revisions, the
project plans to develop the following interventions: i) Cognitive: Cohort
building in conjunction with supplemental instruction, contextualized tutoring,
and research collaborations with faculty; ii) Non-Cognitive: Academic mindset,
perseverance, learning strategies, social skills, and academic behaviors that
affect success in STEM courses. The findings can be modeled by other community
colleges in the STEM education community and have the potential to have a
positive impact on the well-being of diverse student populations. The NSF
program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that
advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description
promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education
at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.