* 2136642
* SBIR Phase I: Drone-Delivered AEDs for Treatment of Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Sean Flynn, QUANTWORKS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,719.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reduce emergency medical services (EMS) response times and improve
patient outcomes for out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCA) through the creation
of a 911-integrated drone service. Sudden cardiac arrest is responsible for more
than 450,000 deaths annually and is the third leading cause of death in the
United States. Of these deaths, ~350,000 occur outside of the hospital. Survival
for OHCA in the U.S. is around 8%-10%, and despite considerable effort this
statistic has changed little over the past three decades. The solution to
improving OHCA outcomes is early and effective bystander cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (e.g., chest compressions) and prompt defibrillation using an
automated external defibrillator (AED). In locations with publicly-available
AEDs, survival has increased 40%-70%. However, ~70% of OHCAs events occur in
private residence, and public-access AEDs are not available for these patients.
Drones can deliver AEDs to the scene of a cardiac arrest more quickly than a
ground ambulance team, enabling early defibrillation by bystanders with the
potential for substantive improvements in survival rates. The impact on EMS
response times will likely be greatest for patients currently not well served by
EMS systems such as individuals living in poor and minority neighborhoods. EMS
drones can also address other health problems such as delivering naloxone for
opioid overdoses and blood products for the pre-clinical treatment of
hemorrhagic shock. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project addresses
critical barriers to creating a 911-integrated drone service. First, it develops
algorithms to optimize the spatial distribution of drones given performance
parameters. Second, it integrates the emergency care drone response directly
into the 911 dispatch process. The system uses state-of-the-art prediction and
data integration solutions to provide real-time launch decision support and
asset tracking capabilities to the 911 dispatcher. The result is a drone
response system that is accurate, fast, and scalable. The project focuses on
delivering automated external defibrillators to victims of out-of-hospital
cardiac arrests. The decision support system and underlying algorithms developed
in this work can be applied to other use cases integrating drone services into
the 911 response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.