* 2136551
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Unique Flavor Peptide Ingredients to Create Authentic, Sustainable, and Cost-effective Plant-based Food Products
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,10/31/2022
* Christopher Guske, BOTANY AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will create new meat alternatives. This project advances a process to
create animal-free products with the same authentic taste and textures as real
meat. The project will develop four different chemicals for producing various
meat flavor profiles, and especially in fat systems, and a novel advanced method
for the first true authentic beef flavor profile for plant-based food
applications. This will lower the risk and industry costs for new and diverse
alternative meatless food products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
offers a new strategy to address the limitations of existing flavor profiles
currently lacking in the plant-based food market by unlocking the power of
precision fermentation and peptide encapsulation. Technical challenges include
characterizing the unknown “meaty” kokumi peptides properties and identifying
the encapsulation parameters necessary for stable capture of both encapsulated
umami (BMP) and kokumi peptides. The proposed R&amp;D will (1) generate an
advanced encapsulation protocol to capture peptides to produce unique flavor
profiles not found in plant-based foods, (2) define the physical and chemical
properties of the encapsulated peptides to determine their validity and
stability in various food media, and (3) develop first true authentic beef
flavor profile for plant-based foods. Research objectives include: (1) formulate
and characterize the BMP and kokumi peptides, (2) measure the chemical stability
of the encapsulated BMP and four kokumi peptides, (3) measure the encapsulated
BMP and kokumi authentic meaty flavor profile in broth and French fry model
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.