* 2136649
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational platform to infer putative causative pathways of pathology using spatial omics data
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Shoba Sharma, SYGNAMAP, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,994.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to improve clinical outcomes and quality of life for kidney
disease. This technology will help identify biomarkers and enable new
personalized treatments to improve efficacy and reduce harmful side effects. The
innovation will leverage new enhancements in visualizing molecules in biological
samples and will improve scientific understanding of complex diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will leverage the power of the
emerging field of spatial omics to build a novel computational platform. Multi-
omics technology at a spatial level is changing our understanding of complex
conditions, such as cancer and metabolic diseases. These technologies are
important to better understand heterogeneity of normal organ structure and
changes during the development of complex chronic metabolic diseases and
cancers. Mass spectrometry-based platforms have led multi-omic spatial
applications, but quantifying the output of mass spectrometry imaging remains a
challenge. The research objectives are to correlate and optimize localization of
molecules with pathologic features and identify key biochemical pathways that
drive disease development. The methods will include computational pathology,
mass spectrometry imaging, and artificial intelligence/ machine learning
approaches. The anticipated technical results will be development of
technologies that convert semi-quantitative output to rigorous, quantitative
results for identification of pathways driving disease
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.