* 2136259
* SBIR Phase I:  Localized and Sustained Antibiotic Delivery For Treatment of Periprosthetic Joint Infection (PJI) in Arthroplasty Patients
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Cambre Kelly, RESELUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 275,247.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is develop an innovative medical technology for localized and sustained
antibiotic treatment in the case of periprosthetic joint infection (PJI). The
proposed activities may result in commercialization of an implant with novel
reservoir technology to be placed at the infected site, and which will locally
deliver antibiotics to eradicate the infection. This solution may improve
patient care as well as reduce costs associated with treatment of infection. The
development of an implantable, antibiotic-eluting orthopedic spacer which
enables patients to return to ambulatory conditions while providing sustained,
appropriate, anti-infection resistance for a sustained duration could benefit
patients and reduce medical costs. The proposed product seeks to reduce
infections and reduce the need for surgical revision and significant antibiotic
treatments. If successful, this technology will reduce the burden associated
with unresolved infections and avoid amputations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team
will design, develop, and validate the proof of concept for an orthopedic
spacer. The system will be 3-D printed using a novel porous medium capable of
controlled antibiotic elution. The product will be tested using benchtop
mechanical testing and in vitro studies of implanted system viability and
controlled elution. The objectives include a study of the prototype's ability to
meet design criteria for mechanical performance, as well as a demonstration of a
superior antibiotic elution profile over an extended-release period. The
mechanical testing to be performed include load, stress, and cycle testing
within current standards, in conjunction with in vitro laboratory elution
testing of the specified antibiotic substance over a sustained duration of time
(up to &gt;180 days).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.