* 2136382
* Discovery Workshop on Enhancing Data Science Education by Leveraging Data Sets from the African Diaspora
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Moses Garuba, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,962.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
is committed to enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education and
research at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to broaden
participation in the nation's STEM workforce. HBCU-UP seeks to work towards this
goal by providing awards to develop, implement, and study innovative approaches
for making dramatic improvements in the preparation and success of HBCU
undergraduate students so that they may participate successfully in graduate
programs and/or careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. This award to Clark Atlanta University has the potential to
inform the HBCU Community about creating a framework for a data science
curriculum. The proposed exploratory discovery workshop by the Clark Atlanta
University Data Science Initiative "Enhancing Data Science Education by
Leveraging Data Sets from the African Diaspora" aims to advance new knowledge
and practice around culturally reflective data science and data science
education. It is expected that outputs of the workshop have the potential to
impact data science education at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will convene an interdisciplinary community of experts at the
intersection of data science, social equity, and undergraduate STEM education to
achieve the project goals. At the three-day workshop, about 60 expert
participants will actively collaborate to develop, test, and refine innovative
undergraduate data science modules that incorporate social and racial justice.
The participants will contribute to the knowledge sharing by describing
promising practices for developing course modules that focus on the African
diaspora, identifying data sets appropriate for modules, providing
recommendations on how to handle sensitive racial topics in the data science
classroom, and determining tools and strategies for teaching culturally relevant
data science. A project evaluation will include both formative and summative
components that will provide feedback on the workshop activities as well as
generate insights from the participants on how to enhance data science education
through data sets on the African diaspora. Following the workshop, findings and
recommendations will be shared with the wider community through an open seminar,
a conference report, a 2-page summary, a case studies publication, and
conference presentations. This project has the potential to inform future
research and collaboration around how to practice undergraduate data science
education that explores topics of the African diaspora with the aim of improving
data science education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.