* 2136302
* SBIR Phase I:  Sodium-Based All-Solid-State Batteries for Stationary Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Erik Wu, UNIGRID LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,700.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will involve lowering the barrier to adoption of renewable energy
generation and energy storage. The project seeks to take advantage the sheer
abundance and low costs of sodium materials compared to state-of-the-art lithium
materials. This will reduce upfront energy storage cost and in turn the payback
time and costs of electricity for end users can be significantly reduced. The
United States has 23 billion tons of domestic sodium reserves, which makes up
88% of the global supply of sodium. Successful utilization of the vast U.S.
sodium reserves in new battery technologies will significantly reduce import
reliance of critical materials and alleviate supply chain limitations on
lithium-based materials. This project will accelerate the adoption of solar and
renewable energy generation, making the grid cleaner, more sustainable, and more
resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project advances new batteries
enabled by a novel halide-based sodium solid state electrolyte. The technology
offers several beneficial properties compared with conventional lithium-ion
batteries: enhanced safety due to the use of completely nonflammable materials,
higher volumetric energy density by using a dense alloy-based anode, lowered
costs due to the abundance of sodium-based raw materials, and improved longevity
from the use of superior halide-based solid-state electrolytes. Unlike the
commonly used sulfide-based or oxide-based solid electrolyte materials, the
halide-based innovation provides enhanced electrochemical and chemical stability
while eliminating the need for high temperature sintering during fabrication.
This project develops the halide solid electrolyte material, improving its
baseline material ionic conductivity by 1-2 orders of magnitude, as well as
exploring scalable synthesis routes using single-step fabrication at room
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.