* 2136210
* SBIR Phase I: Harmony Virtual Reality (VR) Implicit Bias Training Product
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ellie Giles, VIRTUAL APPRENTICE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

The Broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop and pilot a training tool
prototype to promote diversity in the workplace. This implicit bias training
tool allows the user to walk in the shoes of another – be it their coworkers
and/or clients - by creating an immersive presence in a virtual workplace
environment. Through the immersive experiences of workplace encounters, the
users’ understanding of his/her bias is heightened, stimulating intuitive and
efficacious learning. The ability to understand the vantage point of others
advances a collective lens of leadership, productivity, and creativity.
Promoting inclusive behaviors and cultures in the workplace may result in higher
productivity and economic competitiveness, advance the health and welfare of
society, and provide expanded participation of underrepresented groups across
industries including science, technology, enginieering and mathematics (STEM)
industries. When employees perceive bias, they are more than three times as
likely to leave the organization within a year. This is especially true with
younger generations seeking to advance in an organizational hierarchy. This
project is a novel and engaging solution addressing workplace implicit bias that
offers broad humanitarian impacts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the following research
question: Will interactive and immersive bias training have an improved impact
on sustained, non-verbal behavior change in the workplace? This implicit bias
training tool will engage users in a fully immersive, active learning experience
to help them understand, at emotional and behavioral levels, how
microaggressions can impact work life. The product blends an immersive virtual
reality (VR) experience with data capture to inform users of their implicit
biases and corresponding microaggressions in action. Research will be grounded
in social-psychology theory addressing behavior change. The technical challenges
to be explored include establishing a user comfort level with VR, accurate data
collection and reporting logistics, and measuring the degree of impact on
workplace culture and policy. The pilot data analysis coupled with participant
interviews and subject matter expert guidance will inform product modification
to best address challenges and technical risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.