* 2136676
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient Superconducting Neuromorphic Computing Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Ryan Goul, ZENOLEAP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is potential commercial development of superconducting neuromorphic
computing (NC) circuits with the ability to enable true biological brain-
inspired deep neural network circuit algorithms and to improve efficiency,
speed, and scalability of NC by orders of magnitude. The knowledge and
approaches developed through this effort may help advance the foundational
development of next generation computing hardware, helping NC continue its
advance toward broad market adoption, and helping the US maintain its position
as a leader in processor development and production. Additionally, the
integrated synthesis-characterization-application approach can be extended to a
range of applications, including sensors, metamaterials, catalysis, and
renewables, which require atomic-scale control of materials and interfaces.
Finally, through a partnership with University of Kansas, the project will
facilitate university technology transfer and will serve to educate the next
generation of materials and advanced electronics scientists and engineers. The
atomic-to-nanoscale design, fabrication, characterization, and application
experience will not only assist in recruiting top-quality students and provide
them opportunities for entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop novel
superconducting neuromorphic computing (NC) circuits consisting of atomically
tunable memristors (synapses) with superconductor interconnects and
superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs, neurons). This
superconducting NC circuit aims to enable true biological brain-inspired deep
network circuit algorithms and to achieve currently unattainable levels of
energy efficiency, switching speed, and scalability in NC. The proposed research
will design, fabricate, and characterize superconducting memristor-SQUID NC
circuit hardware including development of the corresponding algorithms for
pattern recognition, with machine learning capabilities, using the Modified
National Institute of Standards and Technology database to prove viability. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research is illustrated in: (1) novel,
atomically-tunable memristors with 3-4 orders of magnitude dynamic range in the
on/off ratio and switching frequency that can enable spikes of different
amplitudes and frequencies as demanded for emerging deep circuits, (2) SQUID
neurons with very high sensitivity and low noise, and (3) neurons and
interconnects that can significantly reduce power consumption by eliminating the
parasitic wire resistance that, in current NC circuits, increases substantially
with circuit scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.