* 2136890
* LEAPS-MPS: Applications of Algebraic and Topological Methods in Graph Theory Throughout the Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Lindsey-Kay Lauderdale, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/28/2023
* USD 219,529.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Graphs are used to represent complex networks
throughout the sciences; for example, biology, chemistry, computer science, and
engineering all use graphical networks to model real-life phenomena. The use of
graphs allows for a concise way to model the relationships among a large number
of entities in a network, and these relationships can be understood through the
structural properties of graphs. Such structural properties of graphs are often
quantitative, and the research goal of this project is to study numerous
quantitative graph measures. The research results will be applied to complex
networks, which arise outside of the mathematical sciences, in order to improve
network models. The educational goal of this project is to increase the
persistence in the undergraduate mathematics major by creating opportunities
that increase both the academic integration and social integration of
mathematics majors. Mathematics majors from underrepresented groups will be
encouraged to participate with the goal of increasing the number of such
individuals who could serve as role models for the scientific workforce of the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this project is to study distance-
based graph invariants using various algebraic and topological methods in order
to improve models which the graph describes. Some current viewpoints do not
account for the symmetries of a graph, which are known to affect certain
applications; the first area of focus in this project is to further develop
graph invariants to account for such symmetries of graphs. The PI will create
generating functions that represent q-analogs of these invariants. The second
area of focus in this project is to use embedding techniques to obtain new
properties and bounds on graph invariants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.