* 2136972
* TEA Center: Kaksiza Caŋhdeṡka Center for Dakota Linguistics
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Alessandro Jaker, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 11/30/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instructional and research capacity. This project aligns directly with that goal
and will have a direct impact on communities in North Dakota, South Dakota,
Minnesota, Montana, and Nebraska. Sisseton Wahpeton College’s Kaksiza Caŋhdeṡka
Center for Dakota Linguistics aims to be a hub for promoting the documentation,
revitalization, and use of Dakota language and linguistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kaksiza Caŋhdeṡka Center for Dakota Linguistics
project builds directly on linguistics capacity built at the institution and
strengthens close partnerships with tribal community organizations and cultural
knowledge holders. The project aims to advance knowledge by using the Topic-
Based Curriculum Instruction (TBLI) model to develop instructional modules
steeped in Dakota epistemology and culture. A focus of the center is to address
gaps in existing documentary materials and document ongoing dialect development
within Dakota-speaking communities. The center plans to employ linguistic and
anthropological theory and methods to design and promote Dakota proficiency,
training community language experts and teachers to co-develop TBLI modules,
document emerging terminology, and promote a master-apprentice program. The
center seeks to adopt traditional approaches and serve a unifying purpose for
linguistical, anthropological, sociological, and other expertise to support
revitalization efforts for Dakota-speaking tribes facing dramatic losses of
fluent speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.