* 2136226
* SBIR Phase I: A Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) Compatible Single Photon Avalanche Diode
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Ingvar Aberg, IMPACT PHOTONICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make 3D cameras for long-range LiDAR
(Light Detection and Ranging) more affordable, widespread, and as reliable and
simple to use as cameras found in common mobile devices. 3D cameras (LiDAR) are
being used for precise positioning and velocity determination of objects in
augmented reality applications and are crucial for widespread adoption of
autonomous cars and trucks where the 200-300 meter range is required. Eye safety
concerns with low-cost silicon sensors force the long-range autonomous vehicle
customers to use one pixel at the time or limited field of view imaging using
high-cost and complex systems based on materials that require specialty
materials and manufacturing. This technology will enable the use of mainstream
materials and process technology for the long-range autonomous vehicle segment
without compromising eye safety. This capability will reduce cost, lower
complexity, and improve reliability of long-range 3D cameras and help propel the
autonomous vehicle industry into widespread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
fully complementary metal-oxide semiconductor compatible single photon avalanche
diode (SPADs) based on germanium that operates at eye safe wavelengths. Current
germanium-based avalanche photodiodes require cryogenic cooling due to excessive
dark noise from tunneling or dislocations. They suffer from poor absorption at
the eye safe wavelengths beyond 1450 nm. This project will implement a photon
trapping strained heterostructure device architecture which reduces dark counts
while enhancing absorption at the operating wavelength. The device structure
will be developed with particular emphasis on the semiconductor growth process.
The experimental results will be benchmarked to the dark count and absorption
requirements for the mass-market, long-range autonomous vehicle application. The
technology will offer a highly manufacturable, lower cost alternative to
compound semiconductor based SPADs that are often prohibitively expensive to
produce in large arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.