* 2136886
* SBIR Phase I:  A computer vision system for calorie tracking to encourage adherence to customized weight-loss regimens
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Kehlin Swain, Xplosion Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2022
* USD 272,370.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to help the 60% of the 21 million African American
women in the US who are overweight or obese, increasing their risk for diabetes
and cardiovascular disease in greater severity than the general population. This
project overcomes barriers to weight management in African American women
through its customized data library. The proposed automated food tracker is
combined with a social network function to incentivize new users to engage with
the application. These features provide a powerful tool for the user to achieve
a healthy body mass index and maintain health over a
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a mobile weight-loss
management application to help African American manage diet and track physical
activity. It helps women build their knowledge of proper nutrition and follow a
healthy lifestyle, thereby improving adherence rates for diet and exercise
regimens. The application's innovation is to automate the tracking of food
intake from the users with image recognition and machine learning algorithms.
This innovation creates a unique data set for foods common in the African
American community, labeling the carbohydrates, calories, proteins, fats, and
serving size. This automatic process provides a framework that eliminates the
barriers created by the manual calculations that current solutions require.
Furthermore, it will incorporate a game-like interface to increase engagement
for better long-term weight management outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.