* 2136391
* Constraining the relationship between orogenesis and seismogenesis along the southern Cascadia forearc
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Delph, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Curtis Williams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,681.00

Mountain building in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States of
America shows significant variation along its length (northern California to the
US-Canada border). In particular, the region between the coastline and the
active volcanic system has the highest elevations over the broadest region in
northernmost California (between 40 â€“ 42 degrees latitude) compared to the same
locations in Oregon and Washington State. This likely arises from the complex
interactions between the northern portion of the San Andreas Fault System that
can generate magnitude &gt; 7 earthquakes and the Cascadia Subduction Zone in
the Pacific Northwest, thought to be able to generate magnitude &gt; 9
earthquakes. In addition, relatively newly-discovered phenomena (episodic tremor
and slow slipping earthquakes) are prevalent in this portion of the margin, and
may contribute to mountain building, and therefore earthquake potential. The
purpose of this project is to better understand how deformation in this portion
of the Cascadia forearc relates to mountain building and earthquake style and
genesis by analyzing a recently acquired dataset created from subsurface images
of the upper 40 miles of Earth. Understanding the interrelationships between
these different geological characteristics in northern California and comparing
them to what is observed further to the north in Oregon and Washington State,
may also provide insights into the hazard and mountain building processes in
those regions. The team will also engage with the local community in northern
California to communicate the basic geologic and tectonic context of the region;
develop a Wikipedia page to make the experiment, project goals, and major
results accessible to the general public; and contribute to the training of
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural and
rheological properties of a subduction margin directly influence seismogenesis
and overriding plate deformation, but several aspects remain poorly understood.
The research team will investigate how the composition, structure, and seismic
character of the southern Cascadia margin (northern California) contributes to
broad uplift, topographic evolution, and high rates of episodic tremor-and-slip
by analyzing newly-collected data from 60 nodal seismic stations with pre-
existing and currently operating seismic stations. To constrain the
characteristics of the forearc, the team will apply both robust and novel
seismic methodologies, including: 1) teleseismic receiver function imaging, 2)
body and surface wave ambient noise interferometry, 3) a joint inversion of
receiver functions and surface wave dispersion measurements to obtain a new 3D
shear-wave velocity model of the region, and 4) focal mechanism analysis.
Insight into how these characteristics relate to the expression of subduction in
southern Cascadia will then be used to better understand what controls
variability in the manifestation of subduction elsewhere along the Cascadia
margin. In addition, these high-resolution images of forearc crustal structure
will allow for the better understanding of the possible physical, compositional,
and rheological controls on the processes of episodic tremor-and-
slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.