* 2136919
* I-Corps: Metal hydride technology to miniaturize and provide new cooling or heating  solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Leslie Mushongera, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the development of a
reusable metal hydride-based device for energy storage. The project will provide
a compact and inexpensive cooling device for a wide range of markets. Potential
applications of the metal hydride technology are in batteries, hydrogen storage
materials, and thermal energy storage to harness excess energy and provide on-
demand sustainable energy. Current metal hydride-based device storage devices
largely work only at temperature extremes, which limit their application in
conventional storage systems. Thus, strategies are needed to develop storage
devices for use at ambient conditions. The proposed technology may provide an
efficient method for energy storage that will be a key enabler for future clean
energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a
cooling device that is driven by solid-gas reactions between a pair of alloys
and hydrogen. Hydrogen storage by metal hydrides is accomplished by an
intermetallic alloy phase that has the ability to absorb and store atomic
hydrogen in interstitial sites of the metal lattice. Forcing the intermetallic
alloy phase to release the absorbed hydrogen leads to an endothermic reaction
which results in cooling. Various metal hydrides have been investigated to
determine the hydrogen absorption/desorption pathways and to identify the
thermodynamic requirements necessary for dehydrogenation reactions with an
equilibrium close to ambient conditions. Preliminary results have shown that at
ambient conditions the metal hydride can be recharged 10,000 times with only 10%
loss of capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.