* 2136977
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless-Wireline Convergence
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* akula reddy, PHYTUNES INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2023
* USD 250,104.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is to improve
connectivity for everyone by enabling widespread 5G cellular phone coverage at
significantly lower costs and substantial energy savings. The proposed
technology may result in accelerated 5G deployment and ubiquitous 5G
availability in both urban and rural areas. This coverage will have positive
impacts, bridging the digital divide across different geographical areas of the
US and across different socioeconomic groups, by bringing new opportunities for
telework, tele-education, telehealth, and telemedicine to traditionally un- and
under-served communities. The technological innovation of this project may allow
mid-band and high-band cellular signals to be carried over existing twisted-pair
copper wires, as well as coaxial cables, optical fibers, and Ethernet wires, to
enable the delivery of 5G-based services across barriers that signals delivered
over the air from a tower cannot penetrate. The technology developed in this
project will reuse the existing wireline infrastructure and reduce the need for
deployment of more cellular towers, providing a more environmentally-friendly
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project has the potential to provide a low-cost solution to the problem
of extending 5G cellular coverage to the interior of homes and buildings. The
proposed project seeks to address critical technical issues related to the
overall feasibility and performance potential of the cellular subscriber line
(CSL) technology, as well as the corresponding high-level deployment guidelines.
These issues will be resolved through the development of a detailed simulation
platform, the design and development of network-side and customer-side prototype
units using existing radio-frequency integrated circuits (RFIC) and field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) components, including the protocol for
communication between the two units, and the validation of the technology though
testing of the prototype units in the laboratory of a major wireless
carrier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.