* 2136159
* SBIR Phase I:  Magneto Hydro Dynamic (MHD) Generation for Spacecraft Power
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* William Torre, TORRE SPACE AND POWER SYSTEMS, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,896.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide electric power generation for
spacecraft that is environmentally clean, has much higher power generation
density per volume and weight than any existing alternative, has high
reliability and nearly no degradation over time. This power generation will
utilize a process called Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) - a process that uses
natural solar plasma produced by the Sun to provide electrical power. This
technology will benefit society by allowing spacecraft and satellites to
function more efficiently for longer periods of time. MHD generation also
provides environmental benefits since it utilizes no hazardous materials and
reduces the amount of fuel needed for launch, reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
This project will also introduce a new type of ion funnel that is highly
efficient and portable that can also be used in medical ion spectroscopy,
resulting in reduced costs for this equipment and improved portability. The
compact, high-density electromagnets developed can also be used to improve
efficiency and power capability in many industrial and power system
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project addresses the problem of providing electrical power
generation for spacecraft that can meet the demands for producing large amounts
of electrical power while reducing payload launch mass requirements. The
objectives of this research are to prove the feasibility of utilizing the solar
wind plasma in space as well as to determine the performance of
Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) generation to produce electricity. Modeling solar
wind plasma conditions based on data from various space probes indicates that
conditions of ion flux and plasma conductivity are conducive to support MHD
power generation. This research will answer the question of whether high-energy
solar wind plasma can be harvested by MHD generation and unlock energy that is
available. This research will involve design and development of a small MHD
generator and testing a prototype in a vacuum plasma chamber that simulates
solar wind plasma conditions. The experimental results will be modeled with
numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.