* 2136955
* Structural Control at Fluidic Interfaces with Nanoparticle Surfactant Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2025
* USD 471,407.00

This project will use synthesis, experiments, and numerical simulations to
examine the dynamics of immiscible liquid drops that are encased by
nanoparticles (NPs) at the interface between the drop and surrounding liquid.
Encasing the drop with NPs prevents the drops from coalescing with each other,
which makes this special kind of emulsion of great interest. A mixture of NPs
that preferentially interact with each other will be synthesized so that they
undergo a phase separation at the interface, producing drops that have patchy
areas of different NPs on their interfaces. Tailoring the structure of the
interface in this way will enable control over the spatial arrangement that a
large collection of drops assumes when they are forced to pack closely together.
This technique can be used to produce objects with distinct interconnection
points and channels between adjacent drops. Such constructs would provide access
to transduction pathways for the transport of charges, particulates, or
chemicals from one compartment to another and would form the basis for materials
with controlled optical, magnetic and transport properties. The research team
will develop outreach activities for junior high and high school students in
critically important areas of STEM training with hands-on participation in
laboratory research. This reinforcement of foundational principles in STEM at
early educational stages will help address opportunity inequities of students
from underrepresented groups and will contribute to an educational pipeline for
the benefit of all participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to design functionalized nanoparticles that phase separate on the interface
of liquid drops in ways that promote controlled 3D arrangements of drops and,
ultimately, the formation of macroscopic structures with unique properties. NPs
dispersed in one liquid that are coated with ligands dissolved in a second
immiscible liquid are nanoparticle surfactants with high binding energy to the
interface. The project will explore using heterogeneous interfacial assemblies
of functionalized NP mixtures that undergo 2D phase separation to form droplets
with interfaces having distinct NP domains from which hierarchical assemblies of
drops will be generated. Furthermore, NP reorganization at the liquid-liquid
interface can generate inter-droplet channels as an interconnected,
compartmentalized system having transduction pathways, dictated by the
interactions between the ligands and the 2D phase separated morphologies, for
transport, separations, and flow-through media. The project will focus on the
fundamental underpinnings of functionalized nanoparticle surfactant assemblies
(NSAs). Experiments will probe the synthesis of ligand-functionalized NPs for
generating NSAs and the in situ characterization of the structure and dynamics
of NSAs on liquid droplets. They will be accompanied by simulations that predict
the phase behavior of mixed NSAs and investigation of macroscopic 3D arrays of
mixed NSAs. Results from the project will open new opportunities in
technologically important areas, including additive manufacturing, while
providing opportunities for the professional development of researchers at the
intersection of nanoscale engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.