* 2136737
* SBIR Phase II:  Fast Panoramic Image Capture for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Andrew Kurtz, Circle Optics LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,499.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable wider adoption of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) across industries such as real estate, agriculture,
construction, energy, entertainment, oil &amp; gas, and journalism. The project
develops advanced UAV camera systems with seamless 360-degree imaging
capabilities to increase flight time and the imaging capability. End users
benefit from reduced labor demands and real-time high-fidelity images of remote
areas otherwise inaccessible. Industrial inspections, crop management, field
surveying, and site security are most often conducted by deploying humans into
the field - often creating labor bottlenecks and potentially dangerous
situations. Adoption of UAVs for these applications can be limited by image
processing that consumes too much power for UAV use, delayed image presentation
affecting navigation capabilities, or image artifacts that obscure the details
pertinent to market needs. These limitations can all be overcome with the camera
technologies developed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops a lightweight, parallax-free,
360-degree panoramic camera system with an innovative optical design based on a
polyhedron-shaped configuration of adjacent cameras. Each camera's field of view
closely abuts but does not overlap with the next, enabling seamless and
computationally simplistic capture of images from 360-degree views, while
limiting blind regions and lost content between cameras. This approach
eliminates the stitching errors and image distortion associated with wide angle
lenses and multi-camera systems, and reduces the computational demand for
360-degree image capture. As a result, low energy edge-computing presents images
in real time with minimal impact on flight time or energy use in unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV) applications. Furthermore, this project advances system designs
optimized for UAV weight and size, as well as improved concepts for kinematic
space frames, in which the cameras can be integrated to form robust multi-camera
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.