* 2136652
* SBIR Phase I: Feasibility investigation for a self-buoyant solar panel
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Christopher Barnes, TAKA SOLAR CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,779.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to bring to market a novel self-buoyant panel that
will enable floating photovoltaics (FPV) to play an important role in achieving
the Nation’s clean energy goals. The Federal Solar Futures Study describes a
goal to generate over 40% of the nation’s electricity using solar, which would
require a 10x increase. However, this would require 10 million acres by 2050 –
an area larger than New Jersey. FPV systems can directly mitigate land
displacement. According to NREL, the 24,419 US bodies of water have a technical
potential of over 300 GW. The barrier to scaling deployments is the cost premium
of the artificial island needed to support panels, which can increase system
costs by 30% compared to ground-mounted utility scale solar arrays. The proposed
solar panel design floats uses sealed photovoltaic (PV) glass tubes and no
mounting hardware to solve the cost premium. Further, the PV tubes track the sun
like 1-axis trackers, but with no moving parts, to increase energy yield by
10-20%. These systems could become the cheapest form of solar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to address the key
barriers to commercialization of the proposed FPV technology. Realizing the
market and impact potential of this solution requires retiring multiple risks
and achieving several milestones that are address in the proposed project. The
company will refine and test functional tubes that are hermetically sealed at
the ends to maintain floatation and protect the solar cells. The company will
team with one of the premier US marine renewable energy research institutions,
to study multiple aspects of the design. First, the project will focus on a
robust structural system that meets operating requirements. The project will
research using simulation tools the mooring system and panel configurations
needed for a range of wave and wind conditions. Additionally, a key element of a
self-buoyant approach requires knowledge of potential biological factors that
can impact solar production and panel performance. Accordingly, this
investigation will also study the potential effects of biofilms and other
environmental factors on PV tubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.