* 2136542
* STTR Phase I:  Improved drug delivery platforms for localized and sustained drug deposition for traumatic injuries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jelena Jeremic, NOSTOPHARMA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to reduce complications due to trauma.
Current traumatic injury treatments are systemic and untargeted with unwanted
side effects and low efficacy. The proposed project will develop a sustained-
release, biodegradable, nanoparticle drug delivery system for treatment of soft
tissue trauma complications. The successful commercialization of this technology
may advance the state of the art in sustained release technologies and
dramatically improve the standard of care for trauma patients by addressing
critical needs to enhance medication compliance, as well as the efficacy and
safety of medications prescribed following trauma surgery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will address the needs to improve traumatic injury treatments through
the development of a sustained-release, biodegradablem drug delivery platform
that delivers post traumatic medications within the injured tissue thereby
obviating the need for unnecessary systemic drug administration. Such a
technology has the potential to improve the clinical outcomes of surgical
procedures for patients with post traumatic injuries and reduce societal costs
associated with additional surgeries and rehabilitation among trauma surgery
patients. In addition, it is anticipated that this drug-device combination will
reduce surgery times, save money, and prevent complications among affected
patients. During Phase I, the team proposes to demonstrate in vitro and in vivo
feasibility towards altering the ectopic bone microenvironment with the aid of
nanotechnology that will prevent ectopic bone development and progression. The
technology uses immunomodulatory nanoparticles loaded with the Hedgehog pathway
inhibitor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.