* 2136777
* SBIR Phase I:  Investigate Process-Structure-Property Relationship of Nano-Layered Coatings of Binderless Electrodes by a Nozzle-less Spray Coating Technique
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* David Noye, NANORESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a manufacturing process innovation that overcomes
volume expansion problems of batteries made by conventional manufacturing
processes. These expansion problems limit the broad adoption of high
performance, safer, naturally abundant, environmentally friendly, and cheaper
raw materials for advanced batteries in applications such as modern electric
vehicles and powered aircraft. The proposed project develops a drop-in
technology for existing manufacturing infrastructure with the potential to
significantly reduce the environmental waste of conventional manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBIR Phase I project will investigate the
binderless electrode manufacturing using nano-layered coatings deposited using a
nozzle free spray coating technique. The technical challenges include
contaminated electrodes with filter residues; non-uniform electrode thickness,
density, and porosity; poor repeatability; and lengthy filter removal process,
inhibiting scale-up of the vacuum filtration method for making binderless
electrodes. This project will validate a new ultrasonic spray coating technique
for scaling the production of binderless electrodes. The scope of the research
includes: designing surfactant removal and homogeneous dispersion of
nanocomposite mixture solution subsystems, synthesizing binderless electrodes
with the innovation, and characterizing electrode prototypes. The project's
tasks (using an iron oxide anode for demonstration) include selecting precursor
materials with appropriate morphologies and sizes for effective bonding between
nanocomposites and adhesion on current collector; designing binderless electrode
structures; computer modeling and simulation to optimize parameters of
binderless electrode structure, electrode nanocomposite constituent morphologies
and sizes; advancing surfactant removal, homogeneous dispersion, and
thermal=pressure subsystems; developing ultrasonic nozzle-less spray coatings to
make prototype electrodes; and characterizing the mechanical and electrochemical
properties of the binderless electrode prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.