* 2136085
* Community Needs for Research Data Management in Aquatic Ecosystems
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* William MacMullen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 11/30/2023
* USD 40,154.00

This workshop will bring together multiple communities that cross disciplinary
boundaries and sectors to focus on shared Aquatic invasive species (AIS) data
challenges in the Upper Mississippi River Basin (UMRB). The Midwest Big Data Hub
(MBDH) team will work in partnership with a committee of AIS experts and with
national organizations including the other three NSF Big Data Innovation Hubs.
Intended workshop participants include researchers, outreach and education
specialists, and government agency staff. AIS are a growing threat to freshwater
resources, aquatic ecosystems, and wetland plant communities in the Midwest. In
the UMRB the potential for spread and impacts are especially high due to the
proximity to the Great Lakes, the interconnected stream network, and an
abundance of glacial lakes used for recreation. Much of the data needed to
address the questions around aquatic invasive species movement and impact are
currently being collected by various academic institutions, government agencies,
and other stakeholders. However, the UMRB Region currently lacks a comprehensive
inventory of the data available, information about accessibility, and data
format standards. Further, AIS management is a multifaceted issue requiring data
on numerous interconnected processes. Advances in technologies as well as data
management skills are needed to advance data interoperability and replicability
to address the challenge of AIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.