* 2137603
* Track 4:  Advanced CI Coordination Ecosystem: Monitoring and Measurement Services
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Abani Patra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 10/31/2027
* USD 10,077,074.00

The SUNY at Buffalo team provides monitoring and measurement services as part of
the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services &amp; Support
(ACCESS) program. Advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI), which includes high
performance computing (HPC), cloud computing and advanced networks, plays a
pivotal role in ensuring U.S. leadership in science and engineering and serves
as a powerful tool to help drive the U.S. economy. Indeed, CI performance is
essential in all technology fields from research and design to manufacturing.
Given the importance of CI, as well as its substantial cost, it is important
that all stakeholders, i.e., the public, end-users, system support personnel,
application developers and decision makers, have at their disposal tools to help
optimize and measure CI performance, as well as the applications that use
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University at Buffalo is developing CI measurement
and optimization tools, namely XDMoD (XD Metrics on Demand) and its open-source
counterpart, Open XDMoD, which are in use worldwide for advanced CI monitoring
and reporting in academia and industry. This project builds upon and expands
this foundation for measuring and monitoring services for the large NSF
investment in the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services
&amp; Support program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highlights of this project include:
(1) development of a flexible framework that allows stakeholders to use
analytical tools they desire on performance data from national and local CI
resources; (2) development of a comprehensive view of the CI ecosystem,
including network, data, and public clouds, to facilitate CI planning from the
local to the national level; (3) development of a CI simulator to predict the
response of the CI ecosystem to proposed new systems or changes in existing
systems enabling efficient deployment and use; and (4) development of automated
tools to monitor application performance metrics (including energy) on
established and novel CI architectures. The relationship between time-to-
solution versus energy consumed is important to determine the feasibility of
adopting novel CI architectures which promise lower energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open XDMoD has a broad impact through its use
by institutions worldwide to better manage their CI assets, including academic,
industrial, and governmental research centers. Development and deployment of the
tools include a range of activities to train the future CI workforce in an
inclusive manner promoting diversity and equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.