* 2137351
* Mesoscale to Microscale Coupling Using Continuous Eddy Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Stefan Heinz, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 324,827.00

Atmospheric numerical modeling simulations are based on techniques that are most
relevant to the scales that are being simulated. Models that are built to study
wind flow through urban buildings use a different methodology as ones that
simulate weather at continental scales. It has been a standing challenge in the
field on how to bridge these scales. This project takes research that has been
conducted in the engineering discipline and applies it to atmospheric modeling,
with a goal of better simulating the motions closest to the Earth’s surface. The
work has particular relevance to wind energy production, but also to weather
forecasting in general. A postdoctoral research scientist will play a large role
in the project, thereby providing training for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for the application of a newly-
developed mathematical method to the “Terra-Incognita” problem of coupling
mesoscale and microscale atmospheric models. The Continuous Eddy Simulation
(CES) method was developed for engineering problems that span the Reynolds-
averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) and Large Eddy Simulation (LES) modes. In
meteorology, this relates to the difficulty in running models on simulations at
intermediate grid spacing, where there are inconsistencies between equations and
the scaling of characteristic time and length scales. CES is able to stably
respond to changing conditions as implied by grid and Reynolds number
variations. The work plan is focused on two tasks with
subprojects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Implement CES as a microscale model in the
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model environment. The integration will
need to demonstrate the ability to correctly cover almost RANS and almost
resolving LES regimes, and consistently redistribute resolved and modeled modes
in response to grid variations. CES-WRF will be validated using an existing LES
simulation. CES-WRF will also be used to validate the Townsend Eddy Theory
(TET), which is a recently developed conceptual model for the structure of wall-
bounded turbulent flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Validate CES as mesoscale WRF.
CES-Microscale/Mesoscale (MIME) will be evaluated for a wide range of domain
sizes and coarse grids to verify the functioning of the CES mode redistribution
mechanism. A variety of coupling cases will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.