* 2137027
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Data-Driven Analysis, Modeling, and Design of Off-Grid Power Systems on Tribal Lands
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Henry Louie, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 267,621.00

Access to the power grid has remained out of reach for tens of thousands of
homes on Native American reservations. This form of energy poverty is associated
with a wide range of negative health, economic, and educational outcomes.
Recently, small-scale solar-powered off-grid electrical systems have been
installed in homes on reservations, providing modest but meaningful access to
electricity. However, crucial data is needed to understand how the systems
perform and how they can be optimized. This NSF project aims to assess how off-
grid systems on Native American reservations perform and to develop a novel
method to improve their design, resulting in lower costs and enhanced
performance. The project will bring transformative change to the practice of
off-grid electrification on tribal and non-tribal lands. This will be achieved
by creating a dataset of measurements taken from the off-grid systems,
rigorously analyzing the data, and developing a new data-driven design
methodology. The intellectual merits of the project include creating the largest
and most comprehensive dataset of electricity consumption and environmental
measurements from off-grid systems on Native American reservations and devising
a novel design methodology based contextual information and measured consumption
patterns. The broader impacts of the project include increasing electricity
access among underserved populations, supporting engineering education at two
predominately undergraduate institutions, and increasing participation of Native
American students in research. A robust dissemination plan includes trainings,
tutorials, and workshop materials targeting off-grid practitioners on Native
American reservations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deploy data
acquisition systems to collect data from approximately 200 residential off-grid
systems on Native American reservations over a yearlong period. The dataset will
include measurements of load, solar array power, battery bank voltage,
irradiance, and temperature. Contextual data will be collected through surveys.
The analyses include: statistically characterizing and modeling the electricity
consumption to create load profiles, assessing the systemsâ€™ technical
performance, computing reliability indices, and cataloging outage causes. The
project develops a novel data-driven design methodology based on regression
models of consumption, with contextual information collected from surveys as
explanatory variables. Laboratory measurements taken from hardware testbeds that
can emulate off-grid systems will be used to validate the
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.