* 2137645
* QuIC – TAQS: Interconnected superconducting and color center qubits in silicon devices
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Boubacar Kante, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,463,475.00

Quantum technologies, similar to their classical counterparts, will be built by
combining modules containing quantum processors, memory units, and optical links
for long-distance communication. When networked over long distances, these
modules will enable applications including long-distance secure communication,
distributed quantum computing, and secure access to cloud quantum computers in a
way that guarantees complete privacy to the user. A critical missing ingredient
for the realization of such a ‘quantum internet’ is units that can convert
quantum information between such modules. This project develops interconnects
between leading solid-state quantum computing and memory platforms based on
superconducting circuits and atom-like defects in solids. It advances
microfabricated electrical, acoustic, and optical devices to enable quantum
state conversion between superconducting quantum processors and single-atom
memories in silicon. By using microfabricated silicon devices, this approach
could lead to the adoption of advanced semiconductor manufacturing techniques in
quantum technologies and interconnects. In addition to the research, the PIs are
training students and increasing participation in the emerging field of quantum
engineering by developing new K-12 outreach modules on quantum networks,
supporting undergraduate research positions, and establishing new graduate
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops building blocks for a
quantum network architecture combining superconducting quantum processor end
nodes and color-center quantum repeater nodes operating at higher temperatures.
Superconducting circuits, while frontrunners as quantum processors, lack an
optical interface and have to operate at ultralow temperatures. This makes them
a scarce resource in a large-scale quantum network. This project develops
modular microwave-to-optical quantum transducers to interconnect superconducting
circuits with optical photons and color center qubits in silicon. It integrates
recently discovered color center qubits in silicon into silicon photonic devices
to develop practical repeater nodes that can operate at higher temperatures. The
microwave-to-optical quantum transducers and the quantum emitters are both
developed on an integrated electro-opto-mechanical device platform based on
silicon-on-insulator. The PIs are using this integrated device platform to
investigate on-chip and off-chip methods of entanglement generation between
superconducting qubits and color center qubits via indistinguishable photon
detection and coherent single phonon exchange, and optimizing protocols for such
a heterogeneous quantum network. This approach builds on silicon devices, the
ideal material platform for fabricating electronic and photonic devices at
scale, to interconnect leading solid-state qubit
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.