* 2137369
* Collaborative Research: BPC-AE: STARS: Catalyzing Action-Oriented Academic Communities for Broadening Participation in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Susan Fisk, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 388,484.00

It is critical to address the longstanding issue of underrepresentation of
women, Black, and Hispanic students in computing degree programs to provide an
equitable foundation for all to participate in our society and the global
economy as controllers and creators of technology, and to advance the
preparation of a diverse, innovative, and competitive tech workforce. Building
on the prior success of the STARS Computing Corps Alliance for Broadening
Participation in Computing, the goal of the STARS Catalyst project is to: 1)
increase the number of women, Black, and Hispanic students that persist in
computing degree programs, and 2) advance the careers of students and faculty
from groups that have been historically underrepresented in computing. Through
research and evaluation around STARS Catalyst activities, this project will
advance knowledge about practices designed to increase persistence and support
career advancement in computing for college computing students and faculty,
particularly for those from underrepresented and intersectional groups in
computing. The STARS Catalyst Alliance is a collaborative effort across Temple
University, North Carolina State, Kent State, Florida State University, Morgan
State, and University of North Carolina Charlotte. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STARS Computing Corps Alliance for Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC)
engages computing faculty and students at colleges, universities, and community
colleges in a community of practice with a shared commitment to take action to
advance diversity, equity, and inclusion in computing. STARS Computing Corps
conferences, communities, and networks create significant institutional and
human resources that can expand BPC research to a larger audience of
researchers, educators, administrators, CS departments, and K-20 students, and
can dramatically increase the number of people taking action in BPC efforts.
Prior results show that the STARS Computing Corps alliance increases intentions
to persist in computing among STARS students and faculty, with enhanced outcomes
for Black students and faculty. This project will significantly extend the STARS
alliance to expand upon those impacts, by 1) including new partners that expand
the reach of STARS and that emphasize participation of Black and Hispanic
students and faculty, particularly from emerging Hispanic Serving Institutions
and community colleges, 2) creating new program elements that test new and
propagate evidence-based BPC practices within computing departments, and 3)
leveraging partnerships to support identity-focused affinity groups, and 4)
developing STARS Alumni groups employed in industry positions to promote
transition to and retention within the tech workforce. Extensions to the STARS
Leadership Corps program, STARS Launch program, and the STARS Celebration
conference will serve to develop and propagate evidence-based approaches aimed
at improving the teaching and learning of computing for Black and Hispanic
students and build evidence of their effectiveness, and the RESPECT research
conference will continue to advance peer-reviewed BPC
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.