* 2137684
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Combining high-resolution climate simulations with ocean biogeochemistry, fisheries and decision-making models to improve sustainable fisheries
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Colleen Petrik, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,548.00

NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Combining high-resolution climate
simulations with ocean biogeochemistry, fisheries and decision-making models to
improve sustainable fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fish and shellfish
populations are a vital source of protein for many of the worldâ€™s people, and
several of the largest are found along the eastern boundaries of the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans, where cold, deep water moves towards the surface, bringing
nutrients that support both production by plants (phytoplankton) and the fish
populations that feed on them. To ensure sustainability, fish and shellfish
managers need information not only on the number of animals available at any
given time, but also on potential future numbers, so that they can plan for such
things as the number of fishing boats required or the size of seafood processing
plants. Forecasting what will occur in such eastern boundary areas is difficult,
however, because local winds rapidly change conditions. Adverse climate impacts,
such as rising ocean temperatures and increasing acidity, are already affecting
many coastal fishing-dependent communities, and such longer-term changes also
have to be considered. The project aims to develop a decision support system,
which uses the latest ocean models incorporating marine physics, chemistry and
biology, to assist fish and shellfish managers in making their decisions. This
is important as there are many stakeholders involved in harvesting fish and
shellfish, who may have potentially conflicting interests. To this end, the
research is aimed at integrating the outputs from the ocean models with a web-
based decision support system that will help fisheries managers and industry
make informed decisions to ensure that both the industry and its associated food
production are sustainable. The investigators will work directly with the
stakeholders to develop tools that are specifically able to meet their needs.
The initial focus of the work is the California Current system along the U.S.
west coast from California to Washington, which supports a local seafood
industry valued annually at about $12 billion, with additional billions from
catches landed by foreign boats in the U.S. If successful, the new tools should
be extendable to other similar regions of the global ocean, thus increasing the
value of the research. The project will provide training for students, including
those from under-represented groups, in the use of the latest ocean models, as
well as development opportunities for young faculty members at the participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change-driven adverse ocean impacts
are already affecting many rural, coastal, fishing-dependent communities, and
these adverse impacts will likely accelerate for the foreseeable future.
&lt;br/&gt;Forecasting potential changes in eastern boundary upwelling systems
has benefitted recently from improvements in the resolution of global Earth
system models, so that the latest eddy-resolving models at 10 km ocean
resolution have greatly reduced systematic errors relative to observations. This
project aims to use these advancements to improve forecasts of the fisheries
potential of the California Current Ecosystem and improve decision making by
managers and other stakeholders. The project will couple the output from such a
high-resolution model simulation with the Marine Biogeochemistry Library and
Fisheries Size and Functional Type models, thus incorporating physics, chemistry
and biology with climate variability. The results will be integrated with a
prototype, web-based decision support system, that uses mathematical decision
analysis capabilities, to assist fisheries managers to model the complex,
climate-related decision problems on which fisheries production depends. This is
vital to ensure that the region can continue to support a sustainable fishery in
the long term and the communities that depend on fishing for a living. In Phase
1, the project will develop a prototype of this linked decision system. The
project will also develop a well-networked multidisciplinary team of modelers,
social scientists, fisheries managers, economists, and industry and community
stakeholders to advance convergence science and develop avenues for more
sustainable fisheries under a changing climate. This team is essential for
developing tools that are directly applicable to the needs of fishery
stakeholders and will be fostered by meaningful communication between all groups
throughout the project period. If successful, the model suite and decision
support system should be extendable to other similar regions of the global
ocean. Students and post-doctoral researchers, the next generation of
scientists, will be trained in decision analysis and to use the most current
high-resolution models. Furthermore, the project will provide valuable
professional development opportunities for early career female Co-PIs involved
in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.