* 2137828
* QuIC-TAQS: Deterministically Placed Nuclear Spin Quantum Memories for Entanglement Distribution
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Joseph Lyding, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,873,272.00

Connecting nodes of a communication network with quantum states would
fundamentally change the way we communicate, process information, and sense the
world around us. Unfortunately, realizing such connections over long distances
has been hampered by the lack of quantum interconnects that can transfer, store,
and manipulate delicate quantum states. This project aims to demonstrate a
quantum repeater with precisely placed quantum memory to enable large-scale
quantum networks. The PIs will accomplish this using ultra-pure semiconductor
materials coupled with novel atomic-scale fabrication techniques capable of
creating quantum devices with atomic precision. The devices will be integrated
into photonic platforms and protocols for their use and system-level integration
will be developed. The regularity and quality of the qubits synthesized through
these techniques will enable large-scale quantum interconnects. The PIs will
also develop new multi-disciplinary undergraduate curricula to train students in
quantum information science and recruit students from underrepresented groups
into the program and research. Ensuring quantum concepts are introduced during
the first year of study coupled with hands-on undergraduate research will help
train the future workforce in quantum information sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to demonstrate a quantum repeater using
the silicon monovacancy at a hexagonal Si site (the V1 center) in isotopically
purified SiC. The goals of this research include: (1) create deterministically-
placed V1 centers in ultra-low defect, isotopically-pure 28Si12C grown
epitaxially; (2) create nearby deterministically-placed 29Si or 13C nuclear
isotopes as quantum memories using atomically precise fabrication techniques
using a scanning tunneling microscope; (3) exploit the precise placement of the
nuclear spin to enable superior quantum memories and control schemes for
transferring quantum information to and from the memory and distant nodes; (4)
integrate the optically-addressable defects and quantum memories into
nanophotonic structures, providing a nanophotonic interface and aiding
integration in scalable quantum networks; and (5) develop and implement
optimized routing, entanglement, and measurement protocols for the demonstrated
repeater in a quantum internet, incorporating realistic device performance such
as gate errors, channel loss, and memory lifetimes. The results of this project
will enable the fabrication of quantum repeaters on the timescale of days
compared to the year that current approaches require. Additionally, the utility
of this approach is not limited to developing quantum repeaters, and could
enable superior defect-based quantum processors, quantum sub-systems, and
quantum sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.