* 2137341
* ERI: Incipient contact dynamics of viscoelastic drops
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Min Pack, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before a droplet moving through a
gas can contact a solid surface, the gas between the droplet and surface must be
displaced. If the displacement is incomplete, some of the gas may be entrained
as small bubbles inside the drop. This process has been studied extensively for
common systems such as water droplets moving through air that impact various
kinds of solid surfaces. This ERI award focuses on how the contact dynamics
change when the liquid drop contains polymer additives. The impact of polymer-
laden drops on solid surfaces is relevant to many applications including
bioprinting, pesticide formulation, and the deposition of pathogen-laden
respiratory droplets on surfaces. The influence of polymer additives on air
displacement underneath droplets will be examined using a combination of
experiments and theory. A state-of-the-art rheometer and a high-speed optical
technique that can track the approach of droplets nanometers from contact will
be used to assess the air entrainment in droplets containing commercially-
relevant polymers such as polyethylene oxide. Results from the project will
provide useful information to engineering practioners who must control air
entrainment to ensure product quality in various applications. Graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in the research, and research results
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. The project will
partner with the Mayborn Musuem on the Baylor campus to enhance existing
outreach efforts aimed at communicating science to students of all ages and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Air entrainment is a common industrial
problem in inkjet printing and various coating processes. Although the
fundamental hydrodynamics underlying air entrainment has generated broad
interest, the problem remains challenging because it spans orders of magnitude
in spatiotemporal dynamics. Efforts to uncover the incipient contact of droplets
have focused mainly on droplets composed of Newtonian liquids even though
important applications involve polymeric drops. In order to fill this knowledge
gap, this ERI project will analyze nanometer- to millimeter-scale dynamics using
experiments and theory to uncover the contact routes for polymer-laden drops.
The research comprises three tasks: (1) investigate the influence of polymer
additives on air entrainment phenomena; (2) characterize the energy loss caused
by the entrained air film during droplet spreading; and (3) analyze strategies
to control the air entrainment mechanism. The influence of polymer concentration
on air entrainment and the roles of shear thinning and elasticity will be
investigated using a combination of high-speed total internal reflection
microscopy and rheometric measurements. The project will develop new
experimental tools for assessing the viscoelasticity of polymer-laden droplets,
which will benefit researchers studying interfacial phenomena and multiphase
fluid mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.