* 2137261
* IUCRC Phase III University of Akron: Center for Tire Research (CenTiRe)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ajay Mahajan, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 04/30/2027
* USD 49,999.00

This award is a Phase III renewal for an existing Industry University
Cooperative Research Center - The Center for Tire Research (CenTiRe). CenTiRe is
a collaboration between Virginia Tech and the University of Akron. With the
advancements made in vehicle as well as road design, the demand on tire
performance has increased tremendously. Therefore, the Centerâ€™s mission is to
push the boundaries of tire science and to better understand the complex
interactions between the tire, road surface and the vehicle, and apply this
knowledge to impact the competitiveness of the tire industry. To support this
mission, the Virginia Tech (VT) site will conduct and disseminate innovative
research and solutions in tire and vehicle modeling and simulation, tire-road
interaction characterization and modeling (force and moment, friction and wear,
noise, and vibration), related test equipment development, and intelligent tire
system and the University of Akron (UA) will provide innovative research in tire
materials, material models, simulation tools, test equipment, and manufacturing
methods. In addition to its research efforts, the Center actively promotes the
progress of science by directly supporting the education and training of a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CenTiRe disseminates innovations in tire science
and technology by finding solutions for new materials, models, simulation tools,
test equipment, and manufacturing methods. VT is globally known for tire and
vehicle engineering and Phase III efforts will focus on research to better
understand tire performance. This includes: tire and vehicle dynamic modeling;
tire-road interaction modeling for friction, wear and noise; road profiling and
friction estimation; and materials development for enhanced tire performance.
The research team at UA complements those at VT particularly in the materials
and sustainability thrust areas. UA teams make use of complex heterogenous
dynamics in understanding performance of silica filled rubbers in tire tread
compounds, recycling bottle grade plastics into technical grade fibers for tire
reinforcements, understanding degradation of road wear particles, developing
reliable aging model, and 3D printing process for manufacturing tire tread
sensors. These technologies address the roadmap required for unmet and
underserved industry needs including all-weather traction, durability, and
environmental impact. CenTiRe sites prioritize developing a well-trained
workforce by providing rigorous training for undergraduate and graduate
students, many who come from diverse and underrepresented groups including women
and minorities. Center societal impacts are equally emphasized through K-12
education, REU and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.