* 2137949
* LEAPS-MPS: Singularities, Rigidity, and Trace Modules
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Haydee Lindo, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,175.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The focus on this research is in commutative algebra
with motivating questions, and applications, from representation theory and
algebraic geometry. Commutative algebra concerns itself with the structure of
solutions to systems of polynomial equations and so is connected to fundamental
problems in the sciences and engineering. This project focuses on the study of
fundamental algebraic objects known as modules and ideals over commutative
rings. In particular, a trace module is the homomorphic image of one module in
another and is a generalization of the image of the familiar trace map on a
matrix. The trace module is an old construction enjoying renewed interest and
has applications in commutative algebra and related fields. This project
involves undergraduate students research with the aim of professional
development, preparation for STEM careers, and broadening participation within
the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
development of the modern theory of trace modules with applications to the
representation theory of rational singularities, the annihilation of cohomology,
and Ext-rigidity over commutative rings. In particular, this project is driven
by questions under three broad categories related by the theory of trace modules
over commutative rings. The first category explores the representation theory of
Arf rings and other singularities. This includes making precise the relationship
between the various notions of closure that coincide in the Arf setting with
applications to the representation theory of higher-dimensional rings. The
second goal is the development of the theory of trace modules over commutative
rings. Finally, the project will study the phenomenon of Ext-rigidity over
commutative rings and calculating the cohomology annihilator ideals when
cohomology does not vanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.