* 2137769
* RAPID: Critical Wildfire Monitoring Utilizing the National Ecological Observatory Network Mobile Deployment Platform with Edge-computing Cyberinfrastructure
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Eugene Kelly, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,924.00

Wildfire frequency and intensity are highly likely to increase in forests of the
U.S. Intermountain West, a region that is experiencing the worst drought in over
a century. This RAPID project will utilize the Mobile Deployment Platform (MDP)
of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) coupled with high-
performance computing resources to enable responsive and real-time, data-driven
soil sample collection during and immediately following wildfire activity. This
rapid response is vital to enable researchers to characterize changes in soil
microbial community structure and carbon metabolizing ability during and
following fire disturbance. The information obtained will be used for modelling
the impact of wildfire and climate change, and to help guide forest land
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will mount thermal imaging cameras
equipped with the edge-enabled, intelligent sensor network known as "SAGE" on
the NEON MDP along with in-situ edge computing resources to guide location of
manual observational sampling in and adjacent to fire-exposed forest. Soil
microbiota across a range of soil temperatures will be studied to examine their
heterogeneity guided by thermal sensing. Metagenomoic DNA sequence analysis will
be used to study soil microbiome functional traits in the immediate aftermath of
wildfire, and determine the impacts of shifts on carbon cycling and
sequestration. The results will test whether real time data acquisition can
effectively guide sensor placement and human observational sampling during and
immediately following disturbance and test the coupled ability of the NEON
platform and SAGE cyber-infrastructure to support real-time alerts when edge-
based and artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled algorithms detect anomalous
conditions (e.g. additional smoke plumes). This will be the first such use of
the NEON MDP with SAGE cyber tools, and represents an urgent advance to enable
scientists and managers to better understand the impacts of climate change,
drought and wildfire disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.