* 2137452
* LEAPS-MPS: Unraveling the Galaxy-Cosmic Web Connection using Monte Carlo Physarum Machine
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Burchett, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 239,445.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). All of the galaxies in the Universe are embedded in a
cosmic web of filaments of material. One of the open questions in galactic
astrophysics is how the structure and mass distribution of galaxies might depend
on the structure of the filaments in which they are embedded. This work will
explore how the cosmic web affects the structure and evolution of galaxies, and
in turn how galaxy evolution and the expelling of material might affect the
cosmic web. The program will be supported at a Hispanic Serving Institution, and
will draw undergraduate researchers from under-represented groups. The team will
also initiate and after-school outreach effort at a local high school where high
school students will have the opportunity to work on actual science data from
the project, and interface with project personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will deploy a simulation routine called the Monte Carlo Physarum Machine
(MCPM), which incorporates filamentary structures while providing environmental
density estimates even at the very low densities of the intergalactic medium.
The MCPM is a computational model designed to reconstruct physically plausible
density fields over sparse discrete data – in this case, these are primarily
observed galaxies (positions and masses), and alternatively simulated
baryonic/dark matter halos. This model is underlined by the optimal transport
theory, obtaining network-like structures that interconnect data according to
the principle of least action. Given that exact solutions to optimal transport
problems are typically NP-hard, MCPM relies on a biologically inspired solution:
emulating three-dimensional growth patterns of Physarum polycephalum ‘slime
mold’, which is known to provide good approximations to this class of problems.
From a computational perspective, MCPM is a stochastic model based on a
combination of a discrete and a continuous component. The discrete component is
an ensemble of particle-like agents that freely explore the simulation domain.
The continuous component is a pair of 3D scalar lattices: one that represents
the concentration of an environmental marker that guides the agents through the
input data, and one that accumulates the spatio-temporal density of the agents
and represents the actual solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.