* 2137663
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigating the role of carbohydrate-mineral interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Vivian Merk, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 244,109.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living organisms build skeletal elements that serve
a variety of functions, ranging from mechanical support to protective armor. An
intriguing phenomenon in biomineralization is the incorporation of organic
molecules into a growing crystal, which profoundly alters the mineral’s
macroscopic properties and function. Proteins are known to play a critical role
in controlling mineral formation, while the impact of sugars is yet poorly
understood. By using well-defined model systems, this research will advance our
fundamental understanding of polysaccharide-mineral interactions. Transferring
biological construction principles to industrial processes has the potential to
benefit practical applications, such as the environmentally friendly synthesis
of fracture-resistant ceramics that emulate mineralized structures in nature.
Progress in this area will benefit diverse disciplines, including but not
limited to materials science, polymer chemistry, nanotechnology, geosciences, or
biomedical engineering. Specific examples include the mineral-catalyzed sugar
synthesis on meteorites or pathological mineralization processes in the human
body. The principal investigator aims at broadening the participation of under-
represented minorities, women and K-12 students in STEM through educational
outreach activities. Early research engagement of students from minority-serving
institutions is intended to create a pipeline for STEM
talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An intriguing phenomenon in biogenic minerals is
the inclusion of organic matter into a growing crystal, which has important
implications for the material’s macroscopic properties. Prior investigations
have revealed that intracrystalline proteins play a critical role in controlling
mineral formation. However, the role of polysaccharides in regulating
biomineralization is not well established at present, although they occur
frequently in biologically produced crystals and often constitute a large
portion of the organic-mineral interphase. The main objective of the proposed
research is to address this knowledge gap by investigating the role that
carbohydrates play in mineralization. The proposed work will focus on in vitro
model systems based on naturally occurring minerals and polysaccharides, which
closely mimic fundamental interactions of the organic matrix in living
organisms, while eliminating the complexity and heterogeneity associated with
living systems. Single crystals with polysaccharide inclusions will be prepared
by a slow diffusion method and analyzed for their hierarchical structure and
chemical composition using a combination of electron microscopy, vibrational
spectroscopy, and X-ray scattering. The study will give insights into the
mechanism of polysaccharide incorporation into crystals, and the relationship
between chemical composition, structural organization, and crystallographic
orientation. This research further seeks to develop sustainable synthesis
protocols that emulate carbohydrate-mineralized structures in the biosphere.
This project intends to broaden the participation of underrepresented
minorities, women and K-12 students through outreach activities. Specifically,
the PI intends to develop a new course and online learning module on
Biomineralization for integrating STEM education and research. The PI is
planning to organize a crystal summer school for middle school students from
minority-serving institutions. High school and undergraduate students will be
offered learning opportunities through faculty-mentored academic and summer
research projects on bioinspired mineralization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.