* 2137159
* IUCRC Phase I Virginia Tech: Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Kevin Kochersberger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 223,346.00

The world’s aviation industry is moving towards autonomous air mobility and
sensing, where new developments in artificial intelligence, energy systems,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, advanced manufacturing, and
multidisciplinary design are enabling new air vehicle concepts and new ways of
using aviation in the daily transport of information, people, and cargo. The
Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS) will produce new
fundamental engineering knowledge, will develop new technologies, and will train
a new workforce needed by pooling the technical know-how of America’s leading
engineering research universities with innovative companies ranging from
startups to long-established leaders in the aerospace
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAAMS research focuses on improving air vehicle
performance, sustainability, safety systems, manufacturability, and reliability
by integrating research in traditional aerospace fields such as control,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, communication, and energy storage with
new disciplines including artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
robotics. Virginia Tech hosts one of six FAA-designated UAS test sites (the Mid-
Atlantic Aviation Partnership) that supports the safe development and approval
of air vehicle systems operating in the national airspace. An on-campus netted
facility and a 4-km2 off-campus test site (Kentland Farm) with runway gives
CAAMS researchers a test and evaluation capability critical to delivering
results from research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous air mobility and sensing
includes a broad range of vehicle concepts, integrated subsystems, supporting
infrastructure, traffic management tools, and applications that exploit
increasingly autonomous capabilities in aviation. These autonomous systems have
the potential to improve safety and reliability, reduce costs, and enable new
missions of national and global importance. The global market for autonomous
aircraft is expected to reach $1.5 trillion by 2040, and CAAMS will be a key
asset in enhancing US competitiveness. Center research will support dozens of
students every year, giving them hands-on experience with advanced autonomous
systems and direct understanding of industry perspectives and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center outcomes will be broadly disseminated through
archival publications, presentations at engineering and computer science
conferences, and technical interchanges with aviation industry members. A single
center-wide data repository will be established by the lead site with a
password-protected web portal that can be accessed by all center industry
members. Project data will be made available to center members annually and will
be made available upon request to the public two years after the center fiscal
year has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.