* 2137577
* LEAPS-MPS: Moduli of Stable Surfaces and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Julie Rana, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 192,905.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Algebraic geometry is rooted in the relationship
between polynomial equations and the geometric objects they define, such as
curves, surfaces, and threefolds. Within algebraic geometry, parameter spaces
known as moduli spaces form one of the most central objects of study;
understanding their structure can have extensive applications throughout
mathematics, physics, and statistics. This project explores fundamental
questions in algebraic geometry related to compactifications of moduli spaces of
surfaces and threefolds. The project has a significant educational and outreach
component: the PI will design and implement multiple activities, each of which
shares the objective of recruiting and retaining underrepresented students in
math, particularly students identifying as Black, African American, Latinx, and
Indigenous.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the moduli space of
surfaces of general type and its compactifications, as well as connections to
related moduli problems for threefolds. The methods follow the spirit of the
renowned Hassett-Keel program, the overarching goal of which is to completely
understand compactifications of the moduli spaces of algebraic curves. In the
case of surfaces, the jump in dimension adds an additional challenge to
understanding this moduli problem, and requires developing new techniques to
build and study singular objects. To this end, the PI will work on three
interrelated projects. The first is a study of T singularities, an important
type of singularity that frequently appears on stable surfaces. The second
focuses on the relationship between connected and irreducible components of the
moduli space of surfaces of general type and its compactification. The third
project branches out from the moduli of surfaces into Noether-Lefschetz problems
and moduli of threefold-surface pairs. In addition to dissemination of work
through talks and publications, the PI will conduct outreach activities in local
schools, develop an upper-level undergraduate course focusing on work of modern
BIPOC mathematicians, lead two undergraduate research projects, and organize
readings and discussions focused on retaining BIPOC students in
math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.