* 2137060
* CAREER:Combinatorial Intersection Theory on Moduli Spaces of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Emily Clader, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2027
* USD 179,249.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Curves are some of the most fundamental geometric
objects in mathematics; the simplest examples include such familiar shapes as
the parabola and the circle, but on a deeper level, these objects play a crucial
role in myriad fields of mathematics as well as the theoretical physics of
string theory. Although mathematicians have studied curves for centuries, a
breakthrough occurred in the late twentieth century with the advent of moduli
spaces. A moduli space, roughly speaking, is the collection of all curves of a
given type, and it was a groundbreaking realization that one can often more
effectively understand curves by considering them in such families rather than
studying them individually. In this project, the PI will undertake several sub-
projects that will advance understanding of the moduli space of curves from both
a theoretical and a computational standpoint, and she will initiate the study of
a new variant of the moduli space that illuminates a connection between the
geometry of curves, the combinatorics of polytopes, and the algebra of
permutations. Alongside their intellectual merit, these projects will provide
numerous avenues for student engagement: an undergraduate research program
through which the PI will recruit and mentor undergraduates at her home
institution of San Francisco State University (SFSU) to the Master’s level; the
authoring of an algebraic geometry textbook geared toward preparing less-
experienced Master’s students for research in the PI’s field; and research
projects as well as community-building via which the PI will mentor
Master’s-level researchers through the transition to a PhD. Because SFSU serves
a highly diverse undergraduate student body, these steps toward strengthening
the pipeline from Bachelor’s to PhD present a unique opportunity for broadening
participation and promoting inclusivity in the mathematics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically speaking, this project is
focused on two separate but interrelated lines of research. The first involves
studying the intersection theory of the Deligne-Mumford moduli space of curves.
Although the Chow ring of this moduli space is unwieldy in general, there is a
subring known as the tautological ring that carries much of the moduli space’s
geometric content while admitting an explicit set of additive generators.
Continuing a longstanding research program, the PI will investigate the
relations among these generators, with the long-term goal of using them to
determine a formula for the Chow class of the hyperelliptic locus. The second
line of research pursues a new family of moduli spaces constructed by the PI and
her collaborators, which parameterize genus-zero curves with cyclic action. The
motivation for these spaces arises from the fact that, in the genus-zero case,
the Chow ring of the moduli space of curves admits intriguing parallels to the
simpler setting of toric varieties and yet, from a birational geometry
perspective, it diverges from the toric case more than was originally expected.
Perhaps the most famous part of this story is Fulton’s F-conjecture, a statement
about the Mori cone of the moduli space that remains unsolved. The new moduli
spaces introduced by the PI and her collaborators are not toric, yet their
intersection theory generalizes that of toric varieties in that it is encoded by
a polytopal complex. Further investigation of these spaces will shed light on
the applicability of polyhedral combinatorial methods outside the domain of
toric varieties, and most ambitiously, may give a setting in which the analogue
of the F-conjecture can be proven.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.