* 2137871
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: A Disinformation Range to Improve User Awareness and Resilience to Online Disinformation
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rohini Srihari, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The unprecedented spread of disinformation, false information intentionally
created to manipulate public opinions, is the flip-side of the Internet’s
promise of universal access and information democratization. The presence of
false and/or misleading information in the media ecosystem erodes trust in
legitimate sources of information and poses a significant threat to society. We
posit that enhancing user awareness and building resilience are the keys to
combating disinformation, as ‘inoculated’ users can form the first line of
defense against the spread of corrupted and misleading information. The
overarching goal of our Disinformation Range (DRange) project is the development
of a research/educational platform with integrated digital tools, advanced
pedagogical techniques, and timely materials to increase disinformation
awareness and improve user resilience, so as to inoculate them against the
impact of harmful disinformation, and further prevent its spread.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DRange will facilitate the pursuit of high impact goals in
three overarching categories: 1) developing flexible technologies and culturally
responsive group learning activities to facilitate communal examination and
discussion of false and misleading information and inauthentic online behaviors
in safe and familiar settings; 2) conducting transdisciplinary research to
advance our understanding of the impact of dis/misinformation; and 3)
identifying and implementing preventive (‘immunization’) strategies and
mitigation practices. DRange is envisioned as a comprehensive learning process
that interweaves facilitated discussions, collaborative games, and group
activities, supported by a flexible and adaptable technical platform that uses
simulated (or de-toxed) disinformation to both encourage critical conversations
about online risks and vulnerabilities, and cultivate user resilience. DRange
will be designed, developed and structured in collaboration with community
partners to foster group interactions in diverse settings (e.g., classrooms,
after school activities, public libraries, summer camps, senior and community
centers, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.