* 2137320
* EAGER: Ultra Low Light Level Imaging for Ophthalmological Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Armand Tanguay,Jr., University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The current use of chemical mydriasis (chemical dilation of the pupil) in
eye/ophthalmological examinations requires significant time for both pupil
dilation and recovery following pupil dilation, often subjecting the patient's
eye to high levels of illumination during both the examination and recovery. The
time requirement alone limits the availability and frequency of full
ophthalmological examinations worldwide, particularly in regions without access
to ophthalmological clinics. The goal of this research program is to explore
whether it is possible to perform eye examinations under low enough light
conditions to allow for natural dilation of the pupil without the need for
chemical dilation. The research program will explore the development of ultra
low light level imaging systems that can provide high quality images of the
inner regions of the eye, including the retina, in a clinic with the lights
dimmed. Reducing the time required for each ophthalmological examination would
increase their availability and therefore enable both earlier diagnoses and
treatment of diseases worldwide. Other applications of the ultra low light level
imaging system developed could allow for eye surgeries to proceed with much
lower intensity illumination incident on the retina, thereby minimizing post-
surgical complications and enhancing chronic toleration, and be implemented in
other optical imaging applications, e.g., intracellular imaging, that produce
very low intensity scattering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
program is to investigate the possibility of performing ophthalmological
examinations under low light level conditions that would allow for natural pupil
dilation without the need for chemical mydriasis. To this end, the research
program will be focused on establishing the fundamental and technological
limitations that impact the development of ultra low light level imaging systems
for ophthalmological examinations and analyzing advanced techniques to
circumvent current technological limits. Ultra low light level imaging devices
implemented in the form of a direct ophthalmoscope, a wide field direct
ophthalmoscope, and a slit lamp would enable ophthalmological examinations to be
performed with only natural dilation of the pupil. This research program will
involve three key aspects: (1) establishment of the fundamental limitations that
affect ultra low light level ophthalmological examinations, starting at the
quantum level as it impacts the signal to noise ratio achievable at low photon
counts per pixel per frame, and including the wavelength dependence of the
reflectivity of both normal and abnormal regions of the anterior and posterior
segments, especially including the retina, (2) design and assessment of
technological implementations of ultra low light level imaging systems,
including both theoretical analysis and experimental prototypes, with the goal
of establishing current technological limitations that impact performance, and
(3) investigation of novel technical approaches that can advance the state of
the art of ultra low light level imaging systems toward the boundaries
established by fundamental limitations, thereby enabling the development of next
generation ophthalmological devices and procedures. Successful development of
ultra low light level imaging systems will in turn enable a significant increase
in the availability and frequency of full ophthalmological examinations under
field conditions, thereby providing earlier detection and treatment of adverse
eye conditions to a greatly expanded population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.