* 2137415
* Symposium Title: Phenological Plasticity: from Molecular Mechanisms to Ecological and Evolutionary Implications
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Lise Aubry, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 13,702.00

The timing of life history events (e.g. timing of migration, reproduction,
hibernation), collectively known as phenology, remains poorly understood in the
wild. Ecologists have been challenged in their ability to explain current
phenological patterns, as well as predict how such patterns may change as our
global climate continues to warm. Recent advances in molecular ecology,
physiology, and demography, coupled with the cumulation of long-term,
individual-based studies of animals in the wild, will considerably improve our
collective understanding of phenological shifts within the context of climate
change. By bringing together researchers focused on different hierarchical
levels of organization (from genes and molecules to organisms, populations and
communities) and different taxonomic groups, we hope to stimulate inter-
disciplinary discussion and collaboration within this emerging field. The
symposium provides opportunities for early career scientists such as
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, assistant professors,
and junior research scientists. Recognizing the importance of diverse
perspectives, our speaker line-up brings in balanced gender representation and
includes contributors from underrepresented groups. All speakers in the main
symposium will be contributing a manuscript for publication in a special issue
in the journal Integrative and Comparative Biology, the flagship journal of the
Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology. In addition to publication of
the results in ICB, we will broadly advertise and disseminate findings of the
symposium via social media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal variation in the
availability of essential resources is one of the most important drivers of
natural selection on the phasing and duration of annually recurring life-cycle
events. Shifts in seasonal timing are among the most commonly reported responses
to climate change and the capacity of organisms to adjust their seasonal timing,
either through phenotypic plasticity or microevolution, is a critical component
of resilience. Despite growing interest in documenting and forecasting the
impact of climate change on phenology, our ability to predict how individuals,
populations, and species might respond in their timing of reproduction to
changes in their environment is constrained by our limited knowledge regarding
1) the cues animals use to adjust timing, 2) the endogenous genetic and
molecular mechanisms that transduce cues into neural and endocrine signals, and
3) the inherent capacity of animals to alter their timing and phasing within
annual cycles. By bringing together researchers focused on different
hierarchical levels of organization (from genes to organisms, populations and
communities) and different taxonomic groups, we hope to stimulate inter-
disciplinary collaborations around these themes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.