* 2137154
* EAGER: Topographically Induced Lateral Organization in Biomimetic Lipid Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rana Ashkar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,204.00

Living cells constantly undergo shape changes to facilitate biological functions
that are essential to the cell survival. These shape changes are primarily
driven by an intracellular network of filaments and tubules, known as the
cytoskeleton. During cell reshaping, forces applied by the cytoskeleton cause
deformations in the cell membrane, a thin layer of lipids and proteins defining
the cell boundary. Importantly, such deformations have been linked to changes in
molecular arrangements, and emergent functions, within cell membranes. However,
it is unclear to what extent variations in membrane shapes can induce and
regulate molecular rearrangements, particularly clusters (or domains) of lipid
molecules implied in various cell functions. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project aims to explore this important phenomenon
through systematic experimental studies of membrane curvature and emergent lipid
domains. This will be accomplished through a novel design of nanofabricated
substrates, coated with a soft hydrogel film, that mimic the cell cytoskeleton.
Model lipid membranes, deposited on the fabricated substrates, will illustrate
how membrane curvature and cytoskeletal interactions influence the formation,
growth, and stability of lipid domains. The experiments will be synergistically
integrated with computer simulations to uncover the molecular mechanisms
underlying the observed lipid domain behavior. Throughout the course of the
project, the principal investigator will train graduate and undergraduate
students in experimental and computational methods which will prepare them for
careers in STEM. Findings from this project will be communicated to the
scientific community and the general public through conference presentations,
peer-reviewed publications, open-source data analysis software, and video-
recorded instructional tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes adopt
various shapes and curvatures, much of which are driven by dynamic cytoskeletal
deformations and are critical to the cell function. Cells are thought to use
membrane reshaping as a mechanism to translate mechanical signals into
compositional rearrangements and subsequent biochemical processes. Such
rearrangements include the formation and stabilization of functional lipid
domains that act as platforms for localizing signaling proteins and maintaining
the cell viability. However, a clear understanding of how membrane topography
drives the structuring and localization of lipid domains is still lacking. The
main goal of this project is to elucidate the key factors underlying curvature-
induced domain patterning in lipid membranes, including local curvature and
energetic penalties. This will be achieved using a suite of complementary
experimental, theoretical, and computational methods along with a novel design
of topographically structured hydrogel scaffolds as a proxy to the cell
cytoskeleton. A primary objective of the project is to optimize membrane
topography and membrane-scaffold interactions to allow systematic studies of
emergent lipid domains. The aim is to identify the role of topography and
interactions in controlling the size, localization, and diffusion of the lipid
domains. A distinctive feature of this project is the use of off-specular
neutron scattering, aided with theoretical developments and computer
simulations, to determine domain organization on the nanoscale, i.e. beyond the
resolution of optical microscopy methods. Developments in this area will open
new avenues for investigations of nanoscale membrane structures that are seldom
explored but are critical to biological applications, including artificial cells
and membrane-based biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division (Molecular
Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function clusters) and the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology Program at Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.