* 2137880
* Expanding the universe of functional metalloproteins  through AI-assisted computational design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Danielle Benoit, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 218,914.00

Metalloproteins are an abundant class of proteins. They perform some of the most
difficult and life-sustaining reactions on earth with high efficiency. They have
potential as green biocatalysts for applications in energy production and
bioremediation. Adding new functions to these proteins or generating completely
novel metalloproteins is challenging. Computational methods will be used to
design new functional metalloproteins. The project will also introduce high
school students and undergraduates to protein
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to expand the
universe of functional metalloproteins. To address the limitations of native
proteins and the current challenges facing traditional design approaches, latest
advances in machine learning in combination with protein design software will be
applied to generate: (a) a library of functional electron transfer proteins with
diverse shapes that contain a well-known 2His-1Cys copper binding motif (T1Cu
site), (b) a library of functional catalytic proteins with 3His zinc binding
motifs (hydrolase active site), and (c) a new platform for metal coordination
using the non-canonical bpy-ala amino acid. It is hoped that the results
obtained will provide new insight into the role of protein shape on tuning
properties of the metal center and the rules for designing new metalloproteins.
Methods developed in this proposal can be generalized to the design of other
metalloproteins (dinuclear, heme binding, etc.) and small molecule-binding
proteins, largely expanding the current scope of functional protein
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.