* 2137642
* QuIC - TaQS: Interconnects for a Superconducting-Atomic Hybrid Quantum Network
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Liang Jiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,487,137.00

A currently envisioned ‘quantum internet’ infrastructure consists of linked
quantum devices, such as quantum computers, simulators, and sensors, that may be
located in widely separated geographical locations. Distributing quantum
information between these devices will be key for utilizing them with a
technological advantage over classical information technologies, and making the
accessible to a wide range of researchers and commercial users. The goal of this
research program is the development and demonstration of essential interconnect
technologies that together enable long-range links between widely separated
quantum computing nodes. Specifically, three interconnects are developed: First,
a frequency converter that converts quantum signals from cryogenically operated
solid-state qubits to optical signals that can be sent through fiber networks.
Second, a repeater device that can extend the range of optical quantum signals
transmitted. And finally, a solid-state memory for cryogenic qubits that will
allow tolerating latencies in large-scale networks. Together, the realization of
these interconnect technologies are a critical stepping stone for establishing
long-distance connections between quantum devices. As part of the project, the
PIs are developing educational and outreach programs on the topic of quantum
engineering and quantum networking, and are collaborating with industry and
national lab partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project targets three
distinct and complementary quantum interconnection schemes that are tackled with
a joint theoretical and experimental effort. Microwave-to-optical conversion is
crucial for transmitting quantum states originating from superconducting qubits
over large distances at non-cryogenic temperatures. To that end, superconducting
quantum circuits are interfaced with optomechanical crystals that can couple
microwave radiation to optical light in the telecom band. The radiation emitted
by this converter system can be interfaced with optical photons emitted by Yb
atoms through quantum interference. Arrays of Yb atoms are a promising platform
for atomic quantum information processing and will be used to realize a quantum
repeater. The third interconnect is between superconducting qubits and rare-
earth ion spins in doped crystals. Such spins are a promising resource for
realizing ultra-long coherence times in the microwave domain. Because optical
conversion as well as quantum interference schemes are highly probabilistic,
very good quantum memory is required to tolerate the resulting latency in a
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.