* 2137692
* Mechanisms of a Natural Bacterial Biosensor Using RT-DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Samuel Myers, The J. David Gladstone Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,148,427.00

This project aims to determine how bacterial immune systems known as retrons
defend cell populations against viruses. Retrons are unique, and poorly
understood, immune systems that use reverse-transcribed DNA to sense bacterial
viruses and set off an immune response. This project will use quantitative
approaches to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms of retron systems. The
knowledge gained will fill in critical gaps in our understanding of natural
microbial ecosystems, such as our own human microbiome, in addition to
industrial processes that leverage bacteria. Retron components also hold
important potential for use in biomanufacturing and biomedicine. Thus, the
fundamental studies of the retron in this project will inform future development
of advanced biotechnologies. The Broader Impacts of this research include
training for underrepresented students transitioning from two and four year
colleges and working with those students to develop retron discovery kits using
3D printed parts and simple, do-it-yourself electronics, as well as the plans
and protocols for anyone who wants to build this as an experiment or lesson
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central question in this work is how a fragment
of DNA that is produced by cells can serve as the key element of a phage
biosensor. Work will progress through parallel investigations into (1) the
sequence and structure of the reverse transcribed DNA, (2) the protein
interactome of the retron, and (3) the population dynamics of retron expression
in a native host. All of these investigations will use quantitative, high-
throughput approaches, including synthesized variant libraries, quantitative
mass spectrometry, and multiplexed single cell analysis. When completed, these
experiments will answer (1) how the reverse transcribed DNA interacts with the
protein components of the retron to neutralize them in the absence of phage, (2)
how those protein components link into the broader proteome of the cell to
effect a biological response, and (3) how a population of cells balances the
costs and benefits of using a self-toxic system to defend against phage
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.