* 2137578
* LEAPS-MPS: Surface Morphological Effect on Biomolecular Attachment to Responsive Microgels for Tunable Biomimetic 3D-Cell Culture Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Michelle Gaines, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 246,925.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extracellular matrix is a 3D-biocomposite
network of proteins, minerals, and biomolecules that support the biochemical and
structural requirements for cell function in surrounding tissues. An important
challenge for biotechnologists has been to develop synthetic 3D-biocompsite
scaffolds that mimic the native biomaterial properties of the extracellular
matrix, so that malignant cell behaviors can be more effectively characterized,
diagnosed, and properly treated. The future goal for this research is to develop
biomimetic 3D-scaffolds from responsive biocompatible polymer microgel networks,
which will better reflect the indigenous 3D physical chemical properties of the
microenvironment that cells experience. The first step toward creating these
platforms and the primary objective of this proposal is to understand the
structure-function relationships that govern microgel surface functionality, one
of the most important features for directing cell behavior in target tissues
among the engineered 3D-biocompsite scaffold. This research will provide the
necessary opportunity for Spelman College – small liberal arts undergraduate
institution of Black women – to incorporate polymer materials chemistry into the
chemistry &amp; biochemistry curriculum, in the form of meritorious
undergraduate research and classroom engagement. Importantly, it will be a prime
opportunity for undergraduate students to learn a new and foundational branch of
chemistry. Participation in this research will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the STEM workforce and benefit society by training
more professionals to address emerging societal problems across more
underrepresented and underserved communities of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal supports the future goal for the research program of creating tunable,
multifunctional biomimetic 3D-cell culture scaffolds for determining the
mechanisms that govern collective cell behavior in diseased tissues by
understanding the interfacial parameters that govern biomolecular surface
attachment between reactive functional groups on responsive microgels and target
biomolecules. Responsive microgels are “smart” colloidal hydrogel particles that
can adapt their size, morphology, and physical properties in response to an
external stimulus (pH, temperature, ionic strength). Biomaterials mediate
specific cellular responses and direct new tissue formation via biomolecular
recognition, achieved by surface and bulk modification via chemical or physical
methods with bioactive molecules. The central hypothesis is that chemical
biomolecular attachment to responsive microgels is governed by microgel porosity
and the accessibility of the reactive functional groups in the microgel, and
that these factors can lead to profound changes in the mesostructure and
morphology of future microgel-based biocomposites. This proposal describes the
experimental approach for verifying the hypothesis, where biomolecular
attachment concentration will be investigated according to the polymer segment
density of structurally diverse microgel surfaces. The specific aims of the
proposed work are to identify the role that 1) microgel porosity and 2) reactive
functional group accessibility imparts on biomolecular attachment density and
distribution. This research will provide new knowledge on the influence that
surface structure has on biomolecular attachment, post surface functionalization
chemistry. These findings will contribute towards the rational development of
multifunctional hybrid biomaterials, including biomimetic 3D-cell culture
scaffolds for tissue engineering and theranostic site-specific drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.