* 2137558
* LEAPS-MPS:Revealing Key Residues and Physical Interactions Drive the Structural and Dynamic Changes in Subdomains of PICK1
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Yi He, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 246,180.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor Yi
He and their students at the University of New Mexico (UNM) will use
computational methods to study the structural and mechanical properties of
PICK1, a biomolecule that plays a role in a large number of diseases, including
breast cancer, schizophrenia, addiction, and addiction relapse. Prof. He also
plans broadening participation activities in which they would emphasize the
utility of PICK1 as a potential drug target to treat substance use disorder as a
framework for outreach. They will involve URM students in research, develop
activities that will facilitate integration of students across educational
levels (including undergraduate and graduate students at UNM, which is a
minority serving institution, MSI), and participate in outreach activities at
regional primarily undergraduate institutions and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor He will computationally probe the key
residues and physical interactions associated with the structural and mechanical
properties of each subdomain that is directly related to the biological function
of PICK1 (Protein Interacting with C Kinase-1). Computational tools will be used
to probe two key molecular domains of PICK1, PDZ and BAR. Prof. He will also
optimize the United-RESidue (UNRES) physics-based coarse-grained force field to
explore the disordered linker which connects the PDZ and BAR domain.
Understanding the biological role of each subdomain will lay the foundation to
explore how nature assembles signaling proteins through modular domains. These
goals will ultimately be achieved by applications of advanced physics-based
atomistic and coarse-grained simulations, which can now reach the relevant
timescales for small proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.