* 2137915
* LEAPS-MPS: Tunable Hybrid Materials for Studying Charge Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Monica So, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in current solar energy conversion
technologies are needed to meet the predicted 150% growth in global energy
demand by 2050. With this LEAPS-MPS project, the PI is investigating the
tunability of charge transport in thin films of hybrid metal-organic materials.
Information obtained from this research will be useful in determining the
structure-property relationships governing important charge transport-related
processes and contribute to the rational design of materials for photovoltaic
devices. Photovoltaics is considered one of the most promising technologies for
meeting global energy demands. The research is conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution. It engages a diverse array of undergraduate students,
including women, first generation college students (FGCS), and underrepresented
minorities (URM) in high-impact research experiences both in teaching and
research laboratories. To increase student participation in the STEM pipeline,
the PI develops two remotely accessible laboratory activities for chemistry and
biochemistry majors as part of this project. Additional activities include
mentoring FGCS and URM students, and conducting online outreach workshops for
local Girl Scouts (grades 4-8). To increase accessibility to thousands of people
in the community, Prof. So disseminates teaching materials through conference
presentations, workshops, online chemical education journals, and closed-
captioned, free online videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in solar energy conversion
technologies require a better understanding of the structure-property
relationships that govern charge transport. In this project, thin films of
hybrid organic-inorganic materials, metal-organic framework (MOFs), of layered
and pillared paddlewheel topologies are synthesized. The impact of the number of
molecular linkers, pillars, and ionic components coordinated in MOF thin films
on charge transport is quantified, and the relationship between guest molecules
and charge transfer pathways in MOF films is probed using ab initio calculations
and surface-sensitive spectroscopies. The obtained thermodynamic and
spectroscopic datasets provide quantitative and qualitative structure-property
relationships which relate MOF structure and composition to activation energy,
band gap, and conductivity. Complementary education activities integrate
remotely accessible laboratory activities into upper division chemistry
laboratory courses and science outreach to increase technical skills and retain
underrepresented minority, first generation students, and women in the STEM
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.