* 2137238
* AGS-PRF: Contribution of Oxygenated Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) from Chlorine Chemistry to Arctic Aerosol Production
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Hannah Kenagy, Kenagy, Hannah S
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship will support investigations into
atmospheric chlorine chemistry in the Arctic and the resulting potential for the
creation of secondary organic aerosol. Arctic tropospheric chemistry is of
particular importance for study because the Arctic is warming more rapidly than
anywhere else on Earth, causing a loss of sea ice and the introduction of more
anthropogenic emissions into the Arctic air through shipping and petroleum
extraction. Additionally, because of the pristine nature of Arctic air in which
cloud formation can be limited by the number of cloud condensation nuclei, the
production of secondary organic aerosol may alter cloud cover and radiation
balance in the Arctic. The results of this work will have implications for
understanding the effects of the changing climate on Arctic atmospheric
composition and will build insight into the chemistry of other wintertime and
marine environments where tropospheric halogen chemistry is
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed toward better
understanding the Cl-initiated oxidation of volatile organic compounds in the
Arctic and the production of oxygenated VOCs (OVOCs) and their contribution to
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) production. The following questions will be
investigated: (1) What are the products and SOA yields of Cl-initiated VOC
oxidation at low temperatures? And (2) How much do OVOCs from Cl-initiated
oxidation of VOCs contribute to the total aerosol production in the Arctic? A
combination of laboratory and modeling experiments will be used to address these
questions. A series of low-temperature flow tube experiments of VOC oxidation by
chlorine atoms will be conducted followed by the development of an updated
halogen mechanism in the GEOS-Chem global chemical transport model to include
the low-temperature SOA yields determined in the laboratory experiments. This
will be followed by a series of modeling experiments to quantify the
contribution of Cl-initiated VOC oxidation to SOA formation globally, with a
focus on the relative importance of various aerosol formation pathways in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.