* 2137629
* NSF Integrated Circuits Research, Education, and Workforce Development Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Matthew Guthaus, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2022
* USD 94,367.00

US academic integrated circuit (IC) design education and research are facing
challenges in many dimensions including access to process models and
fabrication, cost of fabrication, the complexity of Computer-Aided Design (CAD)
flows, declining enrollments, and the loss of instructional project support from
MOSIS. At the same time, foreign competitors, especially China, are investing
heavily in IC fabrication, design, and education, leading to increased
competition and national security risks. This proposal is for a workshop that
aims to gather needs from academics, and insights from industry hiring managers
as well as IC fabrication and EDA tool companies to develop a vision for the
future. The proposed workshop will consist of an initial virtual workshop for
information gathering followed by an in-person workshop to create a detailed
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this workshop will hope to provide
future guidance on the shortage of IC design engineers in the US and training a
future workforce. In particular, the workshop will examine industry and academic
needs to find the appropriate pathway for the revitalization of IC research and
education in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.