* 2137283
* IUCRC Phase II North Carolina State University: Center for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning [CAEML]
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Paul Franzon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 200,000.00

The design complexity of modern microelectronic systems, e.g., a chip with over
one billion transistors, requires automated design checks and computer
simulations for verifying the functionality and reliability of microelectronic
components or systems prior to manufacturing. The computer memory and run time
tend to increase with design complexity, and therefore it is necessary to adopt
a simplified description of the system, with reduced accuracy, to complete the
design process in a timely and cost-efficient manner. This project will apply
machine learning to microelectronic design verification and optimization that
results in reduced design cycle time, with radically improved accuracy and
reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML, the Center for Advanced Electronics
through Machine Learning, will develop a behavioral, machine-learning approach
to hardware modeling, emphasizing the accuracy of the end-to-end system model.
Uncertainty quantification is applied to reduce reliance on design guard-
banding. CAEML will research techniques for collaborative machine learning (ML),
whereby multiple organizations can jointly train ML models using their
proprietary design data but without releasing any confidential information.
Inverse models will be demonstrated as a feasible approach to design space
exploration based on specifications. CAEML includes experts on microelectronics
design and machine learning theory; North Carolina State University provides
expertise on design tool flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microelectronics
industry undergirds larger vertical markets, including computing,
communications, and transportation. CAEML serves the vitally important
microelectronics industry with its research, workforce development, and
continuing education programs. CAEML research will improve the efficiency of the
design process and the quality of the final product; the first reduces costs and
the second directly benefits the public. Microelectronic systems that are both
secure and reliable allow government and utilities to provide critical services
to the public, while low-power microelectronic systems promote environmental
sustainability. CAEML provides the microelectronics industry with a diverse pool
of new graduates who have excellent professional preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML will maintain a single repository to be used for
depositing and dissemination of data, documents, and code across the Center.
Repository files will be stored on virtual directories that reside on an
Illinois Grainger College of Engineering (GCOE) storage array. The format of the
data will be documented with metadata files that provide an explanation of the
exact format. The Repository will be backed up regularly, following GCOE
standards and practices. Experimental data will be retained for at least three
years and as governed by the policies of the institution at which the data were
gathered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.