* 2137209
* IUCRC Phase I NJIT: Center for Integrated Material Science and Engineering of Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Kathleen McEnnis, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2027
* USD 364,000.00

The pharmaceutical sector in America is a major, trillion-dollar industry,
having broad impacts on the US population through benefits to their health and
well-being. Despite US leadership, the industry is facing major problems,
including, difficulties in developing newer molecules, high cost and lengthy
time of bringing a new drug to market, lack of adequate and efficient regulatory
science, consumer drug affordability, quality issues, and drug shortages. The
COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated many of these challenges. These issues
point to an acute need for innovative research and technical advances to develop
high-quality drug products, achieve manufacturing efficiency, and support US-
based pharmaceutical manufacturing. This IUCRC phase I project addresses such
issues through establishing a joint two-university Center for Integrated
Material Science and Engineering for Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP), with
NJIT as a Lead Site and Minnesota as a Partner Site. Its mission is to advance
and promote fundamental understanding of the material properties, drug-additive
interactions at molecular and particulate level, as well as manufacturing
processes, on product quality and performance, at lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIMSEPP team will develop fundamental
understanding of structure-function-performance of drug products and process
engineering under three industry vetted Research Thrusts, which will, 1) promote
predictive enhancement of key properties of drugs, their engineered
counterparts, and their blends for improving product quality, and 2)
significantly reduce time and cost of drug product development. Key advances
include, 1) identification of critical particle properties that impact fine
particle behavior, 2) better understanding of their impact on cohesion and
behaviors of powders, and 3) enabling accurate prediction of properties of
blends as well as compacted tablets. That understanding combined with particle
and crystal engineering, will enable development of mechanistic models and
predictive tools required for enabling manufacturing decisions and better
products. NJITâ€™s expertise in particle engineering and contact-physics will
enable development of predictive models for particle agglomeration, drug content
uniformity, and tablet weight variation using dimensionless parameter(s) based
on material sparing measurements of particle properties such as size, shape, and
roughness. Compared to the data-driven approaches, such models and computer
simulations for process modeling, will enable better understanding of
traditional and emerging technologies, promoting efficient design of high-
quality products and manufacturing processes, while reducing time and cost for
product and scalable process development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.