* 2137281
* Active Control-Enabled Approaches for Handling Cyberattacks on Process Control Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Nael El-Farra, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 324,687.00

The U.S chemical industry, with manufacturing operations automated using
advanced process control systems (PCSs), is a critical component of the national
economy. However, the increasing reliance of PCSs on digital communications and
networking technologies, together with the growth in complexity and
sophistication of cyberattack techniques, have rendered industrial PCSs
vulnerable to cyberattacks by malicious agents. Cyberattacks on PCSs aim to
disrupt process operations, potentially resulting in adverse effects on public
safety and prosperity. The traditional approach for improving cybersecurity of
PCSs involves fortifying information technology (IT) systems to prevent a
cyberattacker or malicious software from gaining access to the PCS network.
However, IT-based cybersecurity approaches remain vulnerable, motivating methods
that account for the threat of cyberattacks directly in the PCS design and
operation. In this project, computational and modeling tools will be developed
to design PCS-based detection methods capable of sensing the presence of
cyberattacks in industrially relevant processes to enhance the resiliency and
cybersecurity of PCSs. The project findings will provide fundamental insights
into which cyberattacks can be detected and how detection sensitivity is linked
to PCS performance. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers will be
recruited to carry out the research activities, those which include simulated
cyberattacks on large-scale industrial processes. Overall, the transformative
impact of this project is in its creation of a cybersecurity framework that is
directly integrated into PCS design considerations and subsequent operation,
driving a paradigm shift in PCS cybersecurity away from treating cyberthreats to
PCSs exclusively as an IT-specific problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing
reliance of chemical manufacturing Process Control Systems (PCSs) on advanced
communications and networking technologies and the growing sophistication of
cyberattacks have rendered industrial PCSs vulnerable to attacks by malicious
agents. Cyberattacks on PCSs aim to disrupt operations, destabilize processes,
or cause safety incidents. Traditionally, PCS cybersecurity has been based on
fortifying Information Technology (IT) systems to prevent a cyberattacker or
malicious software from gaining access to the PCS network. While improving IT
security will prevent some cyberattacks on PCSs, an attacker may circumvent the
IT security measures over extended periods of time without the knowledge of the
process operators. This fundamental limitation of IT-based cybersecurity
motivates a control-based approach. In this project, active control-enabled
cyberattack detection methods will be developed to signal external attacks that
manipulate data communicated over the sensor-controller and controller-actuator
links. The methods will incorporate cyberattack detection considerations
directly in the PCS design and operation. The main research objectives of the
project include a) identifying the fundamental properties of cyberattack
detectability, including conditions for cyberattack detectability verification,
and elucidating the role of the PCS design in cyberattack detectability, b)
formulating a PCS design optimization problem that ensures detectability of
cyberattacks, c) developing active cyberattack design methodologies to
probe/manipulate the PCS to detect stealthy cyberattacks, and d) applying the
detection methods to simulated benchmark chemical processes to demonstrate and
analyze the performance of this new approach to cybersecurity. The project is
expected to advance the fundamental understanding of cyberattack detectability
and develop novel control-enabled software tools for cyberattack
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.