* 2137766
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Empowering Stakeholders from Ship to Store--Solving Fishery Management Challenges with Use-Inspired Genomic and Artificial Intelligence Tools
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mariah Meek, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,255.00

Title: NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Empowering stakeholders from ship to
store-- solving fishery management challenges with use-inspired genomic and
artificial intelligence tools &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
seafood sector is playing a rapidly expanding role in global food security.
However, in the last 30 years the proportion of global fish stocks experiencing
sustainable levels of harvest has dropped from 90% to 66%. Illegal, unreported,
and unregulated fishing is a major roadblock to sustainable seafood harvest. In
particular, effectively monitoring fisheries practices and enforcing existing
regulations hinges on the ability to accurately identify species, but many
species share similar morphological characteristics and can be difficult to
distinguish. The focus of this Convergence Accelerator project is to harness the
power of genomics to develop low-cost, rapid, field-deployable species
identification test kits that can be implemented throughout seafood supply
chains to genetically verify seafood products that are difficult to visually
identify, including whole fish, fillets, and fins. These genetic identification
test kits will be integrated with cutting-edge artificial intelligence
capabilities via a smartphone app to drastically increase the speed and accuracy
of testing and enable real-time monitoring of fisheries production. To ensure
widespread implementation and use-inspired design focused on practical
applications, the research team comprises a network of end users representing
federal and state agencies, non-governmental organizations, and private industry
to test prototypes, provide feedback for improvement, and integrate tools into
fisheries and seafood sectors. The research team will also work alongside
organizations to promote sustainably sourced seafood by providing a simple
method to label and market catch, thus empowering local communities and small-
scale fisheries to better compete in the marketplace. Additionally, to engage
the public in sustainable seafood practices, high school and undergraduate
students will be directly involved in developing and testing genomic and
artificial intelligence tools. Further, self-contained teaching and laboratory
modules will be developed and made broadly available to teachers, specifically
targeting schools in underserved and fishing communities. The simplicity of the
genomic test kits and smartphone app integration will make information on
fisheries practices and seafood supply chains accessible to the general public,
equipping consumers to make informed decisions about seafood consumption. These
public education efforts will be furthered by collaborations with prominent U.S.
aquariums for educational outreach in dedicated
exhibitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to confidently identify
species is of fundamental importance to the study of biology. However,
confirming species identity in organisms with conserved morphologies, or in
specimens where diagnostic morphological features have been removed, often
requires specialized equipment and expertise. This not only complicates
biological and ecological studies but also creates major roadblocks for the
sustainable use of natural resources. Difficulty distinguishing species is a
particular problem in fisheries management, where accurate species
identification is crucial to quantify and monitor levels of harvest, identify
illegal harvest, and determine and monitor speciesâ€™ conservation status. In
particular, accurate determination of species identity is central to
implementing effective strategies to counteract illegal, unreported, and
unregulated fishing practices and tracing seafood products throughout complex
seafood supply chains to enforce regulations. This Convergence Accelerator
project combines cutting-edge genomics (the CRISPR-Cas13a Specific High-
sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter unLOCKing system) and artificial intelligence
capabilities to develop low-cost, rapid, field-deployable species identification
tools. During Phase I of this project, the research team will prototype CRISPR-
Cas13a assays paired with a visual and contextual artificial intelligence
smartphone app for three species pairs to develop an efficient workflow for tool
design and implementation. This combined technology has the potential for
widespread application, for example, in seafood supply chains where the species
identity of seafood products is difficult to visually determine, including for
whole fish, fillets, and fins. Concurrently, the research team will establish a
multidisciplinary network of partnerships and end users to support a convergence
research approach that inspires product development, customization, and
implementation by bringing together members of academia, state and federal
agencies, private industry, and non-governmental organizations. During Phase I,
this network will be built to ensure that tool development is tailored to the
needs of end users for maximum efficiency and ease of use to pioneer
breakthroughs in combating illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.
Additionally, this project will increase the public understanding of genomics,
artificial intelligence, and sustainable use of ocean resources by engaging
citizens through newly developed outreach programs at prominent U.S. aquariums.
Finally, this research will contribute to training a diverse workforce by
directly involving high school and undergraduate students from traditionally
underserved communities. The project team will also develop self-contained
teaching and laboratory modules that will be made broadly available to teachers,
specifically targeting schools in underserved and fishing
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.