* 2137511
* LEAPS-MPS: Structure and Dynamics of Global Supply Chain Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Zachary Boyd, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The need for more robust and resilient global supply
chains is highlighted by numerous recent events such as COVID, the Suez Canal
obstruction, the Texas power crisis, and the Colonial Pipeline attack.
Unfortunately, the lack of global, firm-level supply chain data has led to a
proliferation of models relying on data that is either simulated, incomplete, or
overly aggregated. Without good models of supply chain behavior, it is difficult
to predict the outcome of disruptions and plan appropriate interventions to
minimize future impacts. The principal investigator has acquired complete data
on the significant supply chain dependencies of all publicly traded firms
worldwide, which opens the door to validated and predictive models. The
principal investigator will use this data to advance supply chain modeling in
three ways. The first is by creating a more realistic model of supply chain
disruption, including deriving more accurate robustness estimates. The second is
by modeling cascading failures and dependencies between different layers of the
global value chain, which goes beyond supply chain to include relationships such
as financing, intellectual property sharing, and strategic alliances. And
finally, by assessing the effect of the many unobserved private firms on supply
chain robustness. These three advances will greatly augment the ability to
predict and protect against future supply chain disruptions. This project will
enable the establishment of an interdisciplinary lab at the principal
investigator's institution that incorporates participation of under-represented
minorities and undergraduates, including building relationships with the
Lavassani lab at North Carolina Central University, an HBCU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preliminary work, the principal investigator and
coauthors assessed the robustness of a large supply chain using novel (and more
realistic) metrics, but much more work is needed to make these assessments
realistic. The three goals of the project are: (1) Incorporate firm metadata
(such as industry and revenue) to get tighter bounds on robustness compared to
existing graph-theoretical techniques. This includes creating a generative model
of the supply chain using the data and stochastic block modeling tools. (2)
Derive rules for cascading failures and dependencies between different layers of
the global value chain, thus extending existing cascading failure ideas to this
important type of data. (3) Assess boundary/missing data effects on the model
outputs. This will take inspiration from the boundary conditions techniques in
dynamical systems and partial differential equations, as well as generative
techniques in statistical physics. The development of these techniques has great
significance in the broader field of network science, where boundary effects are
common but not frequently analyzed due to lack of accepted
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.