* 2137708
* BPC-DP: Coding Like a Data Miner: A Culturally Relevant Data Analytics Intervention for High School Students
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Amanda Barany, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 335,949.00

With the advent and increased use of the internet, social media has become an
integral part of people’s lives. Platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and TikTok
generate a large volume of data that can be analyzed for a range of insights.
This underscores the need for educational opportunities in which students can
explore big data approaches to extract, visualize, and critically analyze
complex algorithms and data structures. This demonstration project will develop
a big data curriculum that uses cutting-edge social media data mining techniques
via Twitter and a culturally relevant design to engage students from
underrepresented groups in the West Texas/El Paso region. The curriculum will be
co-designed by a team of teachers and students, and then piloted in El Paso high
schools, which have a large population of students who are underrepresented. The
outcomes of this project have the potential to transform models of computing and
data literacy in which students access their own personal interests to
participate in the creation of computational artifacts and navigate the products
of others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BPC Demonstration Project aims to provide
evidence-based insights on “Big Data”-centric computer and data science teaching
and learning with underrepresented pre-college student populations. The team
will iteratively develop and pilot a culturally relevant data mining and
analytics curricular unit with groups of teachers and students who,
respectively, serve or come from underrepresented groups. The team will leverage
mixed-methodological approaches to examine learning outcomes for CS education
and the learning sciences. This research is guided by two research questions:
(1) What critical learning and instructional resources are needed to
productively sustain a CS curricular intervention that emphasizes culturally
relevant data mining and analytics?, (2) What learning experiences and outcomes
result when implementing a CS education program that emphasizes culturally
relevant data mining and analytics?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.