* 2137033
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Guiding the pursuit for sustainability by            co-developing a Sustainable Agriculture Matrix (SAM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Xin Zhang, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 70,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
formulating pathways for sustainable agriculture by engaging with stakeholders
to co-develop an indicator system and associated products that will measure
agriculture sustainability. The consortium will identify the inter-linkages
among various sustainable development goals (SDGs) related to agriculture and
identify strategies for advancing sustainable agriculture to help inform policy.
To maximize the interactions and collaborations across the boundaries of
disciplines, sectors, and nations, the consortium will organize a range of
networking and co-learning activities, such as consortium-wide meetings, regular
experience sharing and peer-learning sessions, and field visits. The research
team will also cultivate cross-country partnerships to investigate the
historical trajectories of agriculture sustainability and to analyze tradeoffs
between their developed indicators and SDGs in each region and the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.