* 2137975
* BPC-AE Collaborative Research: Researching Equity and Antiracist Learning in CS (REAL-CS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Joanna Goode, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 706,999.00

The University of Oregon, in collaboration with the University of California-Los
Angeles, will extend the REAL-CS BPC Alliance to address the historical and
current racial and gender disparities in participation in high school computer
science education. With a focus on broadening participation for Black,
Indigenous, Latinx, and Pacific Islander students, using a lens of
intersectionality, the project's reach into addressing systemic barriers in high
school computer science (CS) education will impact thousands of students,
teachers, and administrators in US public high schools. REAL-CS will support and
sustain the equity-focused and research-based Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
program. In collaboration with regional and state partner programs, REAL-CS will
prepare 250 ECS teachers per year. The Alliance will also support 32 experienced
ECS teachers through advanced professional development and an additional 30 ECS
teacher leaders as part of the ECS national facilitator workshop. In total,
REAL-CS will reach approximately 20,000 high school students who will have the
opportunity to take an equity-focused CS course from highly prepared teachers.
Further, a curricular refresh will be shared online and freely available, to be
used by an estimated 3,500 current ECS teachers nationwide. Additionally, an
administrator guide will be freely available on the project website, and the
deep-dive professional development series will train 40 administrators across
the US in collaboration with Alliance partners. Finally, research across the
teacher, administrator, and student perspectives of this Alliance will not only
inform internally-created programs, but also be disseminated across other
Alliances and CS projects nationwide to ensure that youth voice and educator
experiences inform the creation and implementation of CS initiatives. Overall,
the key goal of REAL-CS is to create the necessary conditions and capacity in
high schools that lead to equitable participation of students of color in high-
quality computer science classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BPC Alliance
Extension supports a BPC mission to challenge colorblind notions of building
capacity in schools through antiracist approaches that disrupt and address
systemic racism in high school computer science (CS). Our Extension will deepen
the Alliance's programs and scholarship to address systemic inequities in CS
education with three key groups of participants central to the high school CS
educational ecosystem: teachers, administrators, and students. Through the
nationwide Exploring Computer Science (ECS) program, the project team will
further expand curricular resources, professional development offerings to
onboard new teachers to teach ECS, and add on new professional learning
opportunities for experienced ECS teachers on emerging computing topics, such as
the new Artificial Intelligence unit. All curricular developments and teacher
learning workshops will include instructional designs that focus on inquiry,
equity, and computing concepts, while expanding understanding of antiracism and
how to put those principles into practice. The project will continue to
investigate the role administrators can play in supporting teachers who are
working to broaden participation in computing in their classrooms through
identifying and addressing systemic barriers at their school sites. Along with
research queries that will examine the efficacy of these efforts in fostering
teacher and administrator learning around equity and computing, the project team
will also further their line of student voice research to amplify the voices of
students in CS education who have been the most marginalized. By extending our
constellation of Alliance programs to infuse antiracist design principles and
pedagogy in ECS professional development, curricular resources, and research,
this work will have nationwide impacts on curricula, professional development
agendas, evaluation metrics, antiracist CS education research, and other
cohesive resources that support ECS programs. The REAL-CS Alliance Extension
will collectively create systemic change by: 1) increasing CS educator and
school administrator knowledge, capacity, and use of racially and culturally
inclusive practices; 2) refreshing existing ECS curriculum and supplementary
curricular materials with antiracist design tenets; 3) conducting deep
qualitative research across the US that investigates equity-oriented teacher
beliefs and practices, administrator beliefs and practices, and the impact of CS
learning experiences from student perspectives. Both programmatic and research
efforts from this project will contribute to the broader educational communityâ€™s
understanding of how to center antiracism in BPC
agendas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.