* 2137448
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Building Trust in Communication Systems by Addressing Misinformation-Driven Online Abuse and Harassment
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rebekah Tromble, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,222.00

This project addresses the links between two significant problems impacting
trust in contemporary communication systems: (1) the broad and rapid spread of
misinformation and (2) campaigns of abuse and harassment directed at members of
expert communities. Misinformation-driven harassment campaigns have particularly
large impacts on those at the forefront of efforts to accurately inform the
public, including journalists, scientists, and public health officials. As a
result, these harassment campaigns undermine confidence in pivotal sources of
knowledge, reduce expert participation in the information ecosystem, and
normalize behaviors such as trolling and abuse. The project aims to develop
Expert Voices Together (EVT), a platform that provides real-time support to
experts experiencing online harassment, with particular emphasis on empowering
bystanders to act in their aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of scientists,
technical specialists, civil society, and community representatives will bring
together their expertise in a wide range of fields—including psychology, human-
centered design, journalism, communication research, and systems engineering—to
create a technical system and series of protocols modeled on best practices in
trauma-informed, rapid-response crisis interventions. EVT will also provide
tools for gathering high-quality data on the sources and tactics of
misinformation-driven harassment. Finally, the project will develop new
educational programs and materials designed to help shift the broad norms,
expectations, and practices of online communities, including changing the
actions of bystanders to abuse and harassment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.