* 2137584
* LEAPS-MPS: Confinement of Organometallic Complexes within Structured Polymers for Site-Isolated Tandem Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Madalyn Radlauer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,678.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Madalyn Radlauer and her students at San Jose State University (SJSU) will work
to develop new chemical systems that can be used for tandem catalysis. Tandem
catalysis, in which two or more catalysts operate in tandem to enact multiple
reactions in a single step, provides significant benefits to efficiency and atom
economy, as no workup or change of conditions is needed as would be required for
multistep syntheses. The challenge for developing tandem catalytic systems is
that every component of both reactions must be compatible – catalysts, reagents,
products, and solvents – and the catalysts must be able to function under the
same conditions. Prof. Radlauer will also undertake an educational and mentoring
program that will help broaden participation of students underrepresented in
science, both in her research program and in her department at SJSU, which is a
Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Radlauer is addressing
the challenges of tandem catalysis by taking advantage of the three dimensional
structure of star polymers to serve as scaffolds for catalysis, allowing for the
site isolation of organometallic catalysts, shielding these highly reactive
species, and thereby permitting tandem catalysis with incompatible catalysts.
Alkane metathesis is specifically being targeted as a test tandem catalytic
sequence for its potential as a green energy process. Prof. Radlauer proposes
broadening participation activities that would include providing an
interdisciplinary undergraduate research experience to URM students from San
Jose State University (SJSU) and from local community colleges. She will also be
involved in development of a mentoring program for URM students at
SJSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.