* 2137408
* Collaborative Research:  BPC-A:  LEAP Alliance:  Diversifying Future Leadership in the Professoriate
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Stafford Hood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 541,167.00

Only 5.3% of the faculty at PhD-granting universities are from the following
underrepresented communities: Black or African-American, Hispanic, or American
Indian/Alaska Native. Diversifying the computing professoriate is critical for
providing excellent role models, shaping departmental programs and policies, and
bringing diverse perspectives into research projects and programs. The LEAP
Alliance aims to increase the diversity of leadership in the computing
professoriate by intentionally bringing together four cohorts of universities,
each with common strengths and a common agenda. This work builds upon the
lessons learned from a first cohort comprised of institutions producing a large
percentage of computing faculty and adds three additional cohorts to further
strengthen the pipeline to the computing professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the LEAP Alliance is to address the broadening participation challenge
of increasing the diversity of the future leadership in the computing
professoriate at research universities as a way to increase diversity across the
field. Key national leadership roles, such as serving on national committees
that impact the field of computing, often come from research universities,
making these institutions a critical point of focus. The Alliance has previously
piloted this effort in an initial cohort of 11 research universities who were
found to produce over 50% of the faculty at the top 55 research institutions.
They will continue to bring together similar institutions in a second cohort, as
well as cohorts that focus on institutions graduate a large percentage of
computing PhDs and computing undergraduates, respectively. Ultimately, the
Alliance aims to increase the diversity of PhD graduates from the institutions
that are the top producers of computing faculty, increase the exposure of
academic careers at the institutions that already have good diversity in their
PhD graduates, and increase the retention of diverse undergraduate students at
the institutions who send students to graduate school that go on to be
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.