* 2137806
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Actionable Sensemaking Tools for Curating and Authenticating Information in the Presence of Misinformation during Crises
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Amit Sheth, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,999.00

High volume, rapidly changing, diverse information, which often includes
misinformation, can easily overwhelm decision makers during a crisis. Decisions
made both during and long after a crisis, affect the trust between responsible
decision makers and citizens (many from vulnerable populations), who are
impacted by those decisions. This project seeks to help decision makers manage
information, promoting reliance on authentic knowledge production processes
while also reducing the impact of intentional disinformation and unintended
misinformation. The project team will develop a suite of prototype tools that
bring timely, high-quality integrated content to bear on decision making and
governance, as a routine part of operations, and especially during a crisis.
Integrated and authenticated content comprising scientific facts and technical
information coupled with citizen and stakeholder viewpoints assure the accuracy
of safety decisions and the appropriate prioritization of relief efforts. The
project team will synthesize convergent expertise across multiple disciplines;
engage and build stakeholder communities through partnerships with government
and industry to guide tool development; build a prototype tool for
authenticating data and managing misinformation; and validate the tool using
real world crisis scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will create
use-inspired personalized AI-driven sensemaking prototype tools for decision-
makers to comprehend and authenticate dynamic, uncertain, and often
contradictory information to facilitate effective decisions during crises. The
tools will focus on curation while accounting for source and explainable content
credibility. Guidance from community stakeholders obtained using ethnographic
methods will ensure that the resulting tools are practical, timely, and relevant
for informed decision making. These tools will capitalize on features of the
information environment, human cognitive abilities and limitations, and
algorithmic approaches to managing information. In particular, content and
network analyses can reveal constellations of sources with a higher probability
of producing credible information, while knowledge graphs can help surface and
organize important materials being shared while facilitating explainability. The
project team will also design and develop a microworld environment to examine
and improve tool robustness while simultaneously helping to train decision
makers in real-world settings such as school districts and public health
settings. This project represents a convergence of disciplines spanning
expertise in computer science, social sciences, linguistics, network science,
public health, cognitive science, operations, and communication that are
necessary to achieve its goals. Partnerships between communities, government
industry, and academia will ensure the deliverables are responsive to
stakeholder needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.