* 2137255
* IUCRC Phase II: Building Reliable Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 537,030.00

Disability is becoming a leading cause of healthcare concern because of the
increase in survivable trauma and an aging population. Millions of adults live
with neurological disorders, brain injury, mental illness, limb loss or
paralysis. There is a need for accessible technologies that can more effectively
address the care and rehabilitation needs of these patients. However, innovation
in neurotechnology faces several challenges: The pace of innovation exceeds the
rate of evaluation for acceptable performance; standards for the validation of
safety, efficacy, and reliability of neurotechnology are lagging; current
technologies are costly, limiting their deployment for treatment of
disabilities; and the need to train new generations of physicians and engineers
in emerging technologies steadily increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Industry-
University Cooperative Research Center for Building Reliable Advances and
Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN) will address the above challenges.
The Center’s vision is built on a convergent research approach to the design and
validation of reliable, ethical, patient-centered neurotechnologies and their
use in understanding neural systems. BRAIN leverages wide-ranging expertise from
neural, cognitive and rehabilitation engineering to neurorobotics,
neuromodulation, and ethical artificial intelligence to enhance the rate of
development and empirical validation of new neurotechnologies through
partnerships with industry and other strategic partners while developing a
highly skilled workforce; evaluating the impact of these technologies on quality
of life; and integrating knowledge across disciplines —such as the humanities
with neurotechnologies — to understand collective intelligence, and augment
physical and cognitive capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center’s mission
is multifold: to accelerate the progress of science and advance the national
health by transferring neurotechnology to end users and to promote access for
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and math by
broadening new participation and retaining current participants. BRAIN will
address problems in the neurological space that disproportionately affect
underrepresented groups. BRAIN will become a neurotechnology hub by creating a
pipeline from discoveries to solutions, while helping students, scientists, and
engineers solve one of the greatest unmet medical and health care needs of our
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Houston Site – a Hispanic-Serving
Institution and the Lead Site for the Center – will focus on multi-scale, multi-
modal, and trans-disciplinary approaches to advance our understanding of neural
function and translate discoveries to create neurotechnology for diagnostics,
neurorehabilitation, and improving the human condition. The Center will maintain
a project repository (https://nsfbrain.org/) comprised of products and services
for 10 years after the completion of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.