* 2137776
* QuIC-TAQS: Voltage-Tunable Hybrid Microwave-Acoustic Interconnects for Multi-modal Quantum Memories
* MPS,OMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Lin Zhu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,900,929.00

Quantum computers are expected to revolutionize the future of science and
technology by solving complex problems that are beyond the reach of current
classical supercomputers. So far, several physical platforms have been
demonstrated as prototypes for implementation of universal quantum processors.
Each physical implementation holds specific benefits in demonstrating coherent
manipulation of quantum state while suffering downfalls that prevent their
scalable integration. Many quantum computing tasks would benefit enormously from
the ability to coherently connect those physically distinct information
processing platforms. One such application is quantum random access memory
(QRAM), a key component in many well-known quantum algorithms that allows stored
data to be extracted in quantum superposition. This research develops a hybrid
QRAM device composed of superconducting qubits and high-quality acoustic
cavities joined together by highly tunable interconnects. The team will draw on
their expertise in materials science, nanofabrication, quantum device physics,
and quantum information theory to construct and optimize this device. This
project entails integrated research, education, and outreach efforts that
encourage full participation of underrepresented groups in quantum science and
technology, including summer camps for K-12 students and teachers, course and
outreach material development, undergraduate and graduate research and advising,
and postdoc mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although QRAM is central to many
important applications such as Grover’s search algorithm and solving linear
systems of equations on a quantum computer, its experimental implementation has
remained elusive. This is due to challenges in building a system that offers
both a high-quality multi-mode quantum memory and a high degree of
controllability. This project addresses this long-standing challenge by
combining one of the frontrunners for quantum computing---superconducting
Transmon qubits---with state-of-the-art acoustic resonator memories, which offer
highly compact, long-lived quantum information storage. A coherent switchable
interconnect needed for QRAM or transduction operation is provided by a voltage-
tunable resonator that integrates a hybrid superconductor–semiconductor
Josephson junction for on demand tuning of resonance frequency. This effort will
not only lead to the first demonstration of QRAM in the laboratory but will also
significantly advance the field of quantum transduction, where acoustic cavity
modes are widely recognized as one of the most promising ways to connect
distinct physical platforms due to their versatility and compatibility with a
range of quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.