* 2137834
* BPC-AE: Equity in Computing Education Policies, Pathways, and Practices (ECEP 3)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Debra Richardson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,599,041.00

We live in an increasingly technology-dependent world where computational
literacy and an understanding of computing’s implications on individuals and
society are vital to personal success, healthy and engaged communities, and to
our nation’s economic competitiveness and security. The lack of diversity in
K-12 computer science education, limits our nation’s ability to leverage the
full range of expertise and creativity present in our classrooms and
communities. The Equity in Computing Education Policies, Pathways, and Practices
(ECEP 3) Alliance will address the persistent problem of the lack of diversity
in K-12 computer science education and computing pathways. As a result of ECEP
support, state leaders will untangle the complex web of factors that produce
inequitable outcomes for marginalized students, interrogate their own state data
to identify specific student populations that have been excluded from computing
pathways, investigate their state’s educational ecosystems and policies to
determine the root causes of disparities in access and participation in computer
science education, and promote equity-explicit policy changes to address
systemic barriers to broadening participation in computing. ECEP will help our
nation to transform the exclusionary systems that lead to disparities in CS
education for K-12 students, thus leading to a more diverse computing workforce
and computationally literate citizenry. The ECEP team is led by the University
of Texas at Austin, the Massachusetts Green high Performance Computing Center,
Indiana University Bloomington, and University of California Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ECEP builds state-level capacity for systemic change, thus laying the
foundation for improvements in equitable Capacity for, Access to, Participation
in and Experiences (CAPE) of computer science education for students who have
been excluded from computer science education (CSEd) pathways. ECEP’s mission,
grounded in the collective impact model, is to change the deeply ingrained
policies, pathways, and practices that perpetuate inequitable outcomes
throughout the K-12 CSEd ecosystem. ECEP has four primary goals: 1) ECEP will
serve as a national hub for state leaders dedicated to collaboratively
increasing the number and diversity of K-12 students in the pipeline to
computing and computing-intensive degrees; 2) State leaders will leverage ECEP
to develop, advocate for, implement, and share equity-explicit, state-initiated
policies, pathways, and practices that promote broadening participation in
computing (BPC); 3) Utilizing the CAPE framework, state teams will develop
goals, common metrics, and data systems to track progress toward equitable K-12
CSEd; 4) State teams will implement strategies to increase capacity for and
diverse student access to, participation in, and experiences of K-12 CSEd. In
order to accomplish these goals ECEP will facilitate and nurture a robust
learning community among state leaders through monthly virtual meetings, co-
sponsorships to states that seed fund BPC interventions and research projects,
coaching of state teams, and technical assistance for the creation of CS
landscape reports, state CSEd summits, and other equity-explicit interventions
that help states to advance their BPC goals. ECEP also supports the national
dissemination of equity-explicit professional development for K-12 teachers
through its Scaling Inclusive Pedagogy project and its partnership with the
Computer Science Teachers Association. A defining feature of ECEP is the Common
Metrics Project, which will result in tools and protocols for consistent
measurement CAPE outcomes. ECEP’s research and coaching will support state
leadership teams as they establish goals for BPC, evaluate the efficacy of their
BPC initiatives, and track their progress
longitudinally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.