* 2137561
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Next Generation Biomaterials with Engineered Biodegradability to Enable Networked Swarm Sensing in the Ocean
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Allison Pieja, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 722,573.00

OIA - 2137561 NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Next generation biomaterials
with engineered biodegradability to enable networked swarm sensing in the
ocean&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on marine debris
management to facilitate a more sustainable engagement with the ocean. It
embodies a Convergence Research approach by bringing together a team of
microbiologists, materials scientists, engineers, and oceanographers from four
academic institutions collaborating with industry partners from the
oceanographic instrumentation sector and government experts. Today, plastics are
a $4-trillion industry; but less than 1% are bioplastics. This project will
pioneer a novel approach to designing materials for the marine environment by
explicitly considering the metabolism of microbes in the environment in which
they are expected to biodegrade. Expendable, networked, free-drifting
instruments are revolutionizing ocean observation, but these growing fleets of
sensors present an environmental challenge and require a necessary shift in how
society thinks about the materials used in their construction. At present, most
“biodegradable” plastics have limited biodegradation in cold, dark oceanic
conditions and were designed and tested only in industrial composting
facilities. This project will develop both sustainable materials and testing
standards that accurately reflect ocean conditions. The successful development
of materials designed to rapidly degrade in seawater is expected to transform
multiple marine sectors, such as fisheries, and permeate wider industry
applications where marine pollution by plastics is of major
concern.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will pioneer the embedding of live PHA-
degrading marine bacteria directly into plastic materials by developing
strategies for extending the viability of living cells in printed materials. The
field-deployable respiration chamber developed as part of this project is
expected to set a new industry standard for testing materials used in the marine
environment. Materials that facilitate rapid degradation of marine
instrumentation under realistic environmental conditions would transform
society’s ability to deploy swarm sensors at scale. Solving this problem
requires the convergence of intellectually distinct fields and approaches, as
well as the involvement of stakeholders that manage marine debris and end-users.
The research team will innovate, test, and integrate biomaterials designed to
rapidly degrade at end-of-life in oceanic conditions. The project will develop a
suite of novel plastic materials purpose-built for the marine environment by 3D
printing living bacteria into the biopolymer polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA),
optimized with additives to supplement microbial metabolism. Second, it will
modify existing marine instrumentation to produce a chamber for directly
measuring the respiration of plastic materials in deep ocean environments.
Finally, the research team will work with end users to prototype products
designed to be deployed in the marine environment. The overarching objective of
the project is to integrate sustainable materials into oceanographic instrument
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.