* 2137713
* LEAPS-MPS: Structural and Functional Characterization of Tick Vaccine Antigen Homologs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Erica Jacobs, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,952.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Erica Jacobs and her students at Saint John’s University will study the
relationship between the structure of a chemical (Bm86, a recombinant protein)
found in a bovine anti-tick vaccine and its function. These studies are expected
to provide insight into how Bm86 provides immunity from ticks. Prof. Jacobs’s
broadening participation plan includes paying undergraduate and MS students (at
Saint John’s University, a minority serving institution) to support their
research experiences in place of external jobs, and development of course-based
undergraduate research (CURE) experiences that will introduce a much broader
audience to research experiences than would otherwise be possible. She will also
increase her ongoing efforts to incorporate antiracist pedagogy into Chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jacobs proposes to examine structural
parameters of the recombinant protein Bm86, which is an anti-tick vaccine
antigen, and its homologs, with the hypothesis that particular structural
features of Bm86 and its homologs in the tick Ixodes scapularis underlie the
effectiveness of immune responses directed against them. She will also examine
functional parameters of Bm86 homologs by defining their protein interactomes in
tick cell homogenates and bovine blood via an affinity purification approach,
with the hypothesis that Bm86 homologs bind to cellular or extracellular matrix
receptors in the tick gut, leading to cell signaling and/or adhesion events. It
is further hypothesized that these proteins, which are expressed in the lumen of
the tick gut, may have additional binding partners in bovine blood,
identification of which may lead to insight as to function of these proteins.
Proposed work is highly collaborative and will provide research experiences to
undergraduate and MS students from groups traditionally underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.