* 2137000
* CS for All 2021 Researcher-Practitioner Partnership Development Workshops
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Maria Arce-Trigatti, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 90,465.00

There is a broad and sustained effort underway for incorporating computer
science and computational thinking into K-12 learning experiences. There are
different models for helping teachers, school leaders, and researchers plan and
implement innovations for computer science education. Researcher-practitioner
partnerships (RPPs) bring teams from schools, districts, and/or state education
agencies together with research organizations (e.g., universities or non-
profits) to design and investigate teaching and learning. These partnerships are
particularly important for creating learning experiences that broaden
participation in computer science. The set of workshops in this project support
the creation of RPPs for computer science education projects. Teams participate
in the workshop and work with a partnership coach to help them with their
computer science teaching and learning innovations. The virtual and in-person
workshops provide information about how to organize and implement an RPP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The set of workshops focuses on expanding the community of
researchers and education leaders who are developing RPPs for computer science
education. Two workshops will be held (one virtual, one in-person) to bring
together teams. Experts on RPPs serve as partnership coaches to provide tailored
support for teams, providing information about how to design resources,
collaborate, and conduct research about the changes in computer science teaching
and learning that are planned to take place on each project. The workshop also
provides information about the CS for All program and guidance about submitting
proposals to this program at the National Science Foundation. Finally, the
workshop offers evaluation expertise to support teams in crafting ways to
collect data during their project to inform project
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.