* 2137265
* IUCRC Phase I Texas A&amp;M University: Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Swaroop Darbha, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 192,693.00

The world’s aviation industry is moving towards autonomous air mobility and
sensing, where new developments in artificial intelligence, energy systems,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, advanced manufacturing, and
multidisciplinary design are enabling new air vehicle concepts and new ways of
using aviation in the daily transport of information, people, and cargo. The
Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS) will produce new
fundamental engineering knowledge, will develop new technologies, and will train
a new workforce needed by pooling the technical know-how of America’s leading
engineering research universities with innovative companies ranging from
startups to long-established leaders in the aerospace
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAAMS research focuses on improving air vehicle
performance, sustainability, safety systems, manufacturability, and reliability
by integrating research in traditional aerospace fields such as control,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, communication, and energy storage with
new disciplines including artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
robotics. Texas A&amp;M University expertise will address integrated systems
aspects (design, sensor integration and fusion, control), cybersecure air
vehicles, validation &amp; verification, and disturbance rejecting vertical
flight. Unique facilities for research synergy are the 2,000 acre RELLIS
Integrated Proving Ground of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Lone Star
Test Site, and the Disaster City training and test facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous air mobility and sensing includes a broad range
of vehicle concepts, integrated subsystems, supporting infrastructure, traffic
management tools, and applications that exploit increasingly autonomous
capabilities in aviation. These autonomous systems have the potential to improve
safety and reliability, reduce costs, and enable new missions of national and
global importance. The global market for autonomous aircraft is expected to
reach $1.5 trillion by 2040, and CAAMS will be a key asset in enhancing US
competitiveness. Center research will support dozens of students every year,
giving them hands-on experience with advanced autonomous systems and direct
understanding of industry perspectives and needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center
outcomes will be broadly disseminated through archival publications,
presentations at engineering and computer science conferences, and technical
interchanges with aviation industry members. A single center-wide data
repository will be established by the lead site with a password-protected web
portal that can be accessed by all center industry members. Project data will be
made available to center members annually and will be made available upon
request to the public two years after the center fiscal year has
ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.