* 2137454
* LEAPS-MPS:Molecular Design, Synthesis, Properties, and Application of 2,5-bis(2-(4-nitrophenyl)ethynyl)thiophene Photolabile Protecting Groups for the Synthesis of Hydroxamic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Carl Saint-Louis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,604.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and the Chemistry Division, Professor Carl Saint-
Louis and his students at Kennesaw State University (KSU) will study improved
methods for synthesizing hydroxamic acids (HAs). HAs are chemicals that are
utilized in many potential medical applications, including synthesis of drugs
used in the treatment of cancer. In the organic synthesis field, HAs are
utilized as precursors for a broad range of carbon-based chemical reactions, and
as agents designed to bind to different metals. Synthesis and purification of
HAs is challenging. Prof. Saint-Louisâ€™s research will improve the synthesis of
HA by eliminating the use of harsh and toxic conditions during the reactions and
will facilitate purification of resulting HAs by reducing the by-products
formed. Prof. Saint-Louis also plans to broaden participation in chemistry by
students underrepresented in STEM fields by developing a strong undergraduate
research program in his lab, and by building a mentoring group for
underrepresented minority students on the KSU campus. He will not only leverage
his own experiences to help support this large group of URM students, but will
also bring URM scientists from off campus as speakers and role models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Saint-Louis proposes to develop
2,5-bis(2-(4-nitrophenyl)ethynyl)thiophene (BNPET) photolabile protective groups
(PPGs) with a diagnostic fluorescent by-product that would be utilized to
quantify the amount of hydroxamic acid (HA) product formed. It has been shown
that a major limitation of most o-nitrobenzyl (o-NB) PPGs derivatives is that
their chromophores absorb light mostly in the UV region of the spectrum where
extended exposure of cells or tissues to UV light can lead to cell damage or
death. Proposed work will pave the way for the synthesis of various conjugated
PPGs that absorb in the visible region of the spectrum for efficiency in
biological applications. Prof. Saint-Louis will work to provide an improved
understanding of the electronic properties of conjugated o-NB PPGs. Results from
the planned work will have broad scientific impact by facilitating development
of a new method to synthesize highly functional biologically relevant HA via a
photo-cleavable protecting group. Work will be performed primarily by
undergraduate students, and Prof. Saint-Louis will involve a large number of URM
students directly in the planned research, in addition to serving as a mentor
and role model to URM students campus-wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.