* 2137701
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Regional Climate Change Projections to Enable Equitable Ocean Planning for the Blue Economy
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kevin St. Martin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,997.00

CBET-2137701&lt;br/&gt;NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Regional climate
change projections to enable equitable ocean planning for the blue
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coastal ocean can dramatically
enhance human well-being through sustainable seafood, clean energy production,
spiritual rejuvenation, satisfying careers, and abundant natural resources. To
make important decisions about use of the coastal ocean, humans largely rely on
past experience. With climate change, however, past experience is no longer an
adequate reference for the future. There is an urgent need for individuals and
organizations engaged in ocean activities to anticipate future changes and make
decisions that are robust to an uncertain future. The project's overarching
objectives are to: 1) Guide the development of the offshore ocean economy with
projections of climate impacts on wind energy, fisheries, and conservation, 2)
Collaboratively design web tools that empower diverse community members to
integrate climate information into their decision-making, and 3) Develop methods
for engaging marginalized communities in decisions about the development of the
regional ocean economy. Business investment in fisheries infrastructure, port
development, offshore wind energy siting, ocean planning, and conservation
planning are all examples of important decisions that climate projections can
inform. This project aims to enable climate-ready, coordinated, and inclusive
decision making throughout the blue economy and spark a new generation of
durable blue development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Informing decisions with future
climate information requires a keen understanding of and engagement with the
audience, including efforts to match the temporal and spatial scales at which
people need information, inform decisions that benefit from climate knowledge,
and respond to the policy ecosystem in which decisions are made. There has been
a persistent gap between climate data production and its use, largely because
too much climate science is useful but not readily usable. This proposal is
designed to bridge this usability gap through knowledge co-production with
diverse actors in the regional blue economy in order to translate useful climate
impact data into credible and accessible knowledge that informs more equitable
blue economy decisions. By integrating climate models with ecological and
economic models, this project will develop temporally and spatially downscaled
projections of climate impacts on fisheries, offshore wind resources, and
conservation opportunities that match the scales of decision-making. To make
these projections usable, the project will collaboratively design a prototype
decision support tool that empowers diverse community members to integrate
climate information into their decision-making and develop participatory
processes for engaging marginalized communities in regional ocean planning. The
broader impacts of the project include improved well-being through more
effective and durable ocean decisions, broadened participation of marginalized
groups in ocean planning, and broadened participation of members of
underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.