* 2137848
* LEAPS-MPS: An Ultracold Atom Platform for Quantum Hydrodynamics Research and Undergraduate Training in Quantum Technology
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Maren Mossman, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,241.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum simulation is the
practice of experimentally modelling a complex physical system using an
analogous quantum system, where the underlying fundamental nature of the system
is preserved. Ultracold quantum gas experiments provide an exceptionally
powerful and tunable platform for direct investigations of a wide variety of
physical phenomena, including non-equilibrium quantum dynamics, few-body
physics, atom interferometry, and condensed matter physics. The development and
creation of an ultracold quantum gas experiment presents many complex challenges
for student researchers to overcome, requiring one to attain a variety of
technical skills and knowledge, including electronic design and testing, ultra-
high vacuum technologies, optomechanical design, electromagnetic modeling and
control, and computational integration with automation programming. A table-top
system with these high-performance technologies is an excellent training ground
for undergraduate researchers in physics and engineering. Through small, well-
deﬁned projects, undergraduate researchers can develop highly applicable
research skills sought after in the quantum information science and technology
industry and in advanced research settings. This project will establish the
infrastructure for rigorous, accessible, hands-on quantum research at a
primarily undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
activities proposed here will build the foundations of a platform that will
elucidate phase-separation dynamics and driven turbulent behavior in dilute-gas
superfluids. Important questions that will be addressed in this project include:
(1) How does phase separation behave in a channel BEC with both miscible and
immiscible components? (2) How does quantum turbulence vary as the system
interactions are quenched from being weakly miscible to immiscible? (3) Can
hydrodynamic instabilities form between two spin states in a single isotopic
BEC? These studies have applications beyond ultracold atomic physics, from
classical fluid flow and nonlinear optical systems to supernovae and neutron
stars. The Principal Investigator’s student mentorship plan revolves around
building and strengthening a student’s physics identity. This includes
developing positive relationships and technical lab skills as well as
participating in the dissemination of research at conferences. These activities
will increase the recruitment and retention of historically underrepresented
students in physics and engineering and will provide challenging research
experiences in quantum information science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.