* 2137471
* Innovation in the Bioeconomy:  Workshops to catalyze translation and partnerships
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Anthony Boccanfuso, University Industry Demonstration Partnership
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 558,940.00

This award is intended to fund a series of five biotechnology-related workshops
around the following themes (i) Feeding the Planet Sustainably, (ii) World
Without Waste: a circular bioeconomy, (iii) Towards a Healthier Planet: from
molecules to ecosystems, (iv) Biological Mitigation of Climate Change, and (v)
Bioeconomy Ecosystem and Society. Each of these themes will have a set of four
overarching goals (a) Examine biotechnology areas associated with significant
societal challenge where increased research could yield translatable impacts;
(b) Explore interdisciplinary science areas where a virtuous cycle of discovery
and innovation over a sustained period is possible; (c) Identify areas ripe for
partnerships that will leverage expertise and resources across sectors; and (d)
Catalyze the research community to engage in translation, innovation, and
partnership at speed and scale. Overall, the workshops are intended to address
the required needs to bridge the disconnect among discovery, innovation, and
translation into practice by assembling for discussion the necessary expertise
from interdisciplinary teams across academia and industry to co-generate
knowledge, discovery, and innovation to enable the translation to practice at
speed and scale. The five workshops will be held using an on-line platform. The
series of workshop will contribute to the enhancement and improvement of
scientific, engineering, and/or educational activities by convening experts to
address the societal challenges of producing food sustainably, creating a
circular bioeconomy that will reduce waste, using advances in biotechnology to
improve health, leveraging biotechnology to mitigate the impacts of climate
change, and exploring the unique aspects of bioeconomy innovation
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in biotechnology, synthetic and
engineering biology are producing rapid economic growth and are leading to novel
biomaterials, transforming the food, agriculture and pharmaceutical industries,
enabling new capabilities for information storage and renewable energy and
creating new kinds of targeted medical therapies. To achieve the full
translational potential of these research advances, there is a need to bring
together experts and practitioners in biotechnology and associated fields from
academia, industry, and other parts of the broader ecosystem of stakeholders to
engage in a virtuous cycle of discovery and innovation that will yield societal
impacts. This series of five workshops, focused on different grand societal
challenges, contemplates new paradigms of engagement between academic and
industrial sectors that are necessary to create the requisite environment to
foster both discovery and innovation that leads to rapid
translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences; Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering;
Engineering; Geosciences; Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences; along with the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.