* 2137724
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: How Large-Scale Identification and Intervention Can Empower Professional Fact-Checkers to Improve Democracy and Public Health
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Porismita Borah, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Democracy and public health in the United States rely on trust in institutions.
Skepticism regarding the integrity of U.S. elections and hesitancy related to
COVID-19 vaccines are two consequences of a decline in confidence in basic
political processes and core medical institutions. Social media serve as a major
source of delegitimizing information about elections and vaccines, with networks
of users actively sowing doubts about election integrity and vaccine efficacy,
fueling the spread of misinformation. This project seeks to support and empower
efforts by journalists, developers, and citizens to fact-check such
misinformation. They urgently need tools that can 1) enable testing of fact-
checking stories on topics like elections and vaccines as they move across
social media platforms like Twitter, Reddit, and Facebook, and 2) deliver
feedback on how well the corrections worked in real time and with full
performance transparency. Accordingly, this project will develop an interactive
system that enables fact-checkers to perform rapid-cycle testing of fact-
checking messages and monitor their real-time performance among online
communities at-risk of misinformation exposure. To be transparent, all of the
underlying code, surveys, and data will be available to share with the social
science and computer science communities, and all evidence-based messages of
immediate utility to public health professionals and electoral administrators
will be made publicly accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated
by a desire to understand and help address two democratic and public health
crises facing the U.S.: skepticism regarding the integrity of U.S. elections and
hesitancy related to COVID-19 vaccines. Both of these crises are fueled by
online misinformation, widely circulating on social media, with networks of
users actively sowing doubts about election integrity and vaccine efficacy. The
project will deliver an innovative, three-step method to identify, test, and
correct real-world instances of these forms of online misinformation. First,
using computational means, such as techniques in natural language processing,
machine learning, social network analysis and modeling, and computer vision to
identify posts and accounts circulating and susceptible to misinformation.
Second, lab-tested corrections to the most prominent forms of misinforming
claims using recommender systems to optimize message efficacy will be produced.
And third, the project will disseminate and evaluate the effectiveness of
evidence-based corrections using various scalable intervention techniques
available through the platforms sponsored content systems. More specifically,
for the first step of the method, the project will use multimodal signal
detection and knowledge graph to engage in knowledge driven information
extraction about electoral skepticism and vaccine hesitancy on social media,
integrating user attributes, message features, and online network structural
properties to predict likely exposure to future misinformation and identify
susceptible online communities for intervention. The second step will consist of
working with professional fact-checking organizations to lab test two types of
intervention messages—pre-exposure inoculation and post-exposure correction—
aimed at mitigating electoral skepticism and vaccine hesitancy, optimizing them
using recommender system techniques. For the third step, field experiments will
be conducted that deploy the lab-developed interventions, delivered through a
combination of ad-purchasing, automated bots, and online influencers; and assess
the success of our interventions with respect to optimal decision-making in both
health and democracy-related arenas. Ultimately, this three-step approach can be
applied across a range of topics in politics and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.