* 2137662
* LEAPS-MPS: Exploration of heterogenous reactions of mercury in the Arctic environment
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Abu Asaduzzaman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 149,737.00

This award is supported by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program and the
Broadening Participation Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professor
Asaduzzaman at the Pennsylvania State University Harrisburg and his students
study the reactions of oxidized mercury species with snow and ice by performing
quantum chemical calculations. Mercury is a toxic element that poses severe
health issues to the mammalian and human body. It can be transported long
distances via the atmosphere and magnify in aquatic food ecosystems. After
oxidation in presence of halogens, ozone, and nitro compounds in the Arctic
atmosphere, it is deposited on snow and ice surfaces. The oxidized mercury
compounds then diffuse through the ice and reach the aquatic environment, where
they convert into methylmercury, which is then readily taken up by plankton and
is biomagnified in the food web. This project focuses on characterizing the
elementary steps for the interactions of oxidized mercury compounds with snow
and ice, which control the process for mercury reaching the aquatic environment.
This research has potential to understand the mechanism for mercury deposition,
reduction, and diffusion on the Arctic surface. The project provides research
opportunities for multiple undergraduate students and a high school teacher
through a research experience for teachers program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will focus on calculating the atomic scale interaction of oxidized
mercury with ice and snow using the quantum chemical methodologies. The project
will explore the deposition of oxidized mercury on the ice/snow surface, and the
reduction and re-emission of deposited mercury into the atmosphere. This project
can help understand many reactions of mercury with ice and snow, diffusion of
deposited mercury into the ice, and conversion of inorganic to organic mercury
compounds. The results will aid in determining the rate-limiting steps in the
mercury oxidation-reduction processes, and ultimately in developing more
accurate global atmospheric mercury models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.