* 2137581
* BPC-DP: DEPICT - Engaging a Diverse Student Population in Computational Thinking through Creative Writing and Performances
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,733.00

Often youth have a difficult time connecting the work of computer science with
helping society, a goal that many report as very important for their career
choices. This project aims to broaden the appeal of computing to students who
may not consider themselves as belonging in a technical field by infusing
computer science concepts into language and arts-dominant high school courses.
By highlighting the ways in which learning computing is like learning a new
language or translating between technical and more informal speech, the project
team will align the skill sets needed to those of the bilingual population of
two southern New Mexico high schools. The project will build a sequence of
opportunities to engage students in computing experiences both in and out of
school, with a focus on recruiting women and Hispanic students. At the same
time, the project will provide professional development opportunities for
teachers to better understand how to leverage computing concepts and skills to
teach creative subjects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEPICT (Discover Computational
Thinking through Creative Writing) investigates a novel intervention to broaden
participation to computing of women and Hispanic high school students. The
novelty of DEPICT lies in two aspects. First, DEPICT builds on an area that has
not been deeply exploited in the past, i.e., the combination of creative writing
and production of movies/plays. The appeal of this area comes from its
popularity among students, especially women and Hispanic, and the high level of
self-efficacy demonstrated by students in the corresponding courses. The second
novelty comes from the use of this creative domain as a target for the infusion
of CT - i.e., we use CT as a methodology to teach the creative domain,
contending that relevant concepts of CT are already present in the domain, and
they simply need to be extrapolated. This allows us to progressively build CT
competency through the learning of the creative domain, leveraging the students'
self-efficacy in the creative domain to build self-efficacy in CT. DEPICT
creates a pipeline to prepare students for the AP CS Principles test and offers
them a "preparation edge" over other students entering more formal CS courses.
High school teachers are part of DEPICT and they will be provided with
professional development and in-class help to gain ownership of the new course
materials - enabling a transformative impact that will sustain and grow over
time. DEPICT operates in two diverse high schools (a traditional rural school
and a modern urban school) in southern New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.