* 2137846
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: America's Fourth Estate at Risk: A System for Mapping the (Local) Journalism Life Cycle to Rebuild the Nation's News Trust
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Cornelia Caragea, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

In today’s world, the news industry is defined not only by the journalism it
produces but by the resulting communication it engenders across the digital
landscape. The edict that the most likely effect of communication is more
communication is best defined as a proposition rather than a scientific
principle due to a lack of empirical evidence concerning the full breadth and
depth with which one act of communication produces a multitude of subsequent
communicative engagements. Journalism is a unique setting to test this
proposition in that the utility of any one piece of news is determined by what
is done with it communicatively. While news organizations track and analyze
immediate audience reactions to their content, such as views, likes, and shares,
they have relatively little visibility and understanding of a complete news life
cycle, which consists of several stages initiated by many actors with varied
intentions. A necessary but not sufficient condition for the news media to build
stronger levels of trust with the American people is to track, analyze, and
understand the communication life cycle of their journalistic content to make
more informed decisions about their work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
undertakes a big data approach to the study of the news life cycle that will
provide news organizations with an important tool to begin to re-establish
sufficient levels of trust with the American people. A big data approach from
computer and data science, driven by agenda-setting theory from the social
sciences, will help track the communication life cycle of local news across the
Web. The journalism life cycle typically involves (i) news organizations
generating and disseminating original news content, (ii) digital platforms
(e.g., news aggregators) aiding dissemination, (iii) fellow news organizations
sharing content, and (iv) audience feedback and dissemination. While most
research in this arena has so far focused on national news organizations (e.g.,
The New York Times), we argue that local news is key to the industry re-
asserting its normative democratic value. By leveraging computational techniques
like natural language processing and network analysis, the project’s primary
goal is to develop a journalist-in-the-loop system able to track the life cycle
of local journalistic content to observe its uses and misuses across time and
across digital platforms. The proposed system will identify through reaction-
intention analyses and topic drift those stages when journalism’s intended
effects evolve into positive or negative unintended outcomes. Unintended,
negative communication effects of news include the triggering of uncivil,
polarizing discourse, audience misinterpretation, the production of
misinformation, and the perpetuation of false narratives (e.g., conspiracy
theories).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.