* 2137669
* Fabrication and Scalable Production of Nanobottles
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 11/30/2024
* USD 391,507.00

This grant supports research that will create new knowledge related to the
manufacturing of nanobottles made of diverse materials, together with
controllable dimensions, shapes, and opening sizes. Macroscopic bottles are
ubiquitous in our everyday life. The unique design of a bottle offers immediate
advantages in terms of easiness and convenience for packaging, storage, and
transportation. While there are mature technologies for manufacturing
macroscopic bottles made of glasses, metals, and polymers on an industrial
scale, it is impossible to apply the same technology to the fabrication of
nanoscopic (or even microscopic) bottles due to lack of tools capable of
handling such minuscule structures. This grant supports fundamental research to
provide needed knowledge for the development of a precise and robust method for
fabricating nanobottles and the results from this research will benefit the U.S.
economy and society. The nanobottles are increasingly preferred for applications
involving encapsulation, controlled release, and drug delivery, with immediate
impacts on biomedicine and healthcare. They are also expected to enable the
encapsulation and controlled release of chemical substances essential to
environmental remediation and agriculture. The multi-disciplinary and
collaborative nature will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research, offering a vehicle to enrich the education and training experiences
of participating students. The results from this research will be further
adapted to enhance classroom teaching, including the development of
demonstrations, e.g. animations and experiments, related to the key concepts of
materials science and biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will focus on nanobottles in the form of colloidal hollow particles of 50âˆ’500 nm
in diameter, together with a single hole in the otherwise impermeable wall. By
coating the surface of a colloidal template with a different material and then
selectively etching away the template, one can obtain a hollow particle with its
size and shape precisely defined by the template. This method has been
successfully applied to a variety of materials, but there is no reliable
strategy for generating a well-controlled hole in the wall of the hollow
particle. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on the mechanism(s) of hole
creation by swelling the shell-coated template with a solvent. When the
swelling-induced pressure reaches a critical level, it will spontaneously poke a
hole in the shell to release the pressure and allow the swollen template to
escape through the opening. This fabrication method can be applied to
essentially all types of materials, including ceramics, metals, and polymers, as
long as they can be coated on the colloidal templates as uniform shells. Both
the coating and swelling processes will be experimentally investigated and
theoretically modeled to establish a mechanistic understanding and insightful
guidance necessary for the future manufacturing of nanobottles. In a proof-of-
concept demonstration, the nanobottles will be evaluated for the encapsulation
and then controlled release of a therapeutic agent for the eradication of cancer
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.