* 2137630
* LEAPS-MPS: Accuracy and the Regulatory Reprogramming of Bacterial Chemosensing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Colin Kinz-Thompson, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,347.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Colin Kinz-Thompson and his students at Rutgers University Newark will study the
bacterial chemosensory array (CA), an important process in regulatory signal
transduction pathways. Prof. Kinz-Thompson will develop a combination of
advanced spectroscopy and microscopy techniques and sophisticated computational
modeling approaches to help understand the molecular basis of accurate bacterial
chemosensing. In addition, Prof. Kinz-Thompson will implement a plan to help
broaden participation in STEM fields by students underrepresented in the
sciences, including involving underrepresented minority (URM) undergraduate
students in the planned research, developing new courses to bring computational
and biophysical techniques to a diverse group of students, and starting a maker
lab that will participate in STEM-related outreach to local URM school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Kinz-Thompson will develop a single-
molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer assay (smFRET) to use along with
free energy perturbation (FEP) calculations to quantify the energetics of
substrate specificity for a bacterial chemoreceptor and the mechanism of anti-
cooperativity between the ligand binding sites of that chemoreceptor. Similar
smFRET experiments will also be used, along with stochastic chemical master
equation simulations, to evaluate the effectiveness of a chemosensory
proofreading mechanism involving periplasmic binding proteins. In a final
scientific aim, Prof. Kinz-Thompson will use fluorescence super-resolution
microscopy and Bayesian inference-based modeling to quantify the in vivo
quaternary structure of the bacterial chemosensory array and the subsequent
effect of a regulatory response that remodels it. Along with enabling direct
participation of undergraduate students in research activities, efforts to teach
skillsets such as programing, electronics, 3D printing, and other exciting
techniques outside of traditional chemistry curricula will enable future
interdisciplinary scientific exchanges and encourage more students to pursue
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.