* 2137157
* Collaborative Research: U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Full Atomistic Understanding of Solid-Liquid Interfaces via an Integrated Experiment-Theory Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* N Aluru, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2025
* USD 290,000.00

The worldwide deployment of renewable energy requires efficient electrochemical
systems, such as batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. In most of these
systems, the energy conversion and storage processes rely crucially on the
interface between solid electrodes and liquid electrolytes. However, the
fundamental atomic and molecular structure at these electrified interfaces
remains elusive. The goal of the project is to achieve an atomistic
understanding of the structure and reaction dynamics of electrode-electrolyte
interfaces, and provide design principles for various low-cost, carbon-based
electrochemical systems. Through international collaborations with the
University College Dublin and Ulster University, the PIs will develop an
integrated experimental imaging - atomistic simulation method. The technical
outcomes of the project will facilitate the design and engineering of efficient
electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems. The educational efforts
of the project will build and incorporate demo devices of electrochemical cells
and materials imaging platforms into a series of education and outreach
activities both domestically and internationally. The project will train the
graduate and undergraduate students with skills in both experimental and
simulation methods and provide them with an international collaborative research
experience. The project will contribute to efforts to educate the public on the
basic mechanisms of renewable energy conversion and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s aim is to achieve a thorough
atomistic understanding of electrochemical processes by determining the 3D
structure of electrode-electrolyte interfaces, including both the surface of the
solid electrodes and the liquid solvation layers. The project’s approach will
integrate molecular dynamics and density functional theory simulations with 3D
atomic-resolution force microscopy experiments to achieve a joint experiment-
theory platform for precise understanding and prediction of electrochemical
interfaces. The platform will be used to unravel the solvation layer structure
that is responsible for energy storage in carbon-based supercapacitors, and the
solvent-included atomistic kinetics of electrocatalytic reactions on single-atom
catalysts. The project will produce fundamental models of solid-liquid
interfaces that consider the inherent atomic-scale heterogeneities. Furthermore,
the thorough determination of the atomistic interfacial structure and catalytic
activities of single-atom catalysts will shed light on the unconventional
scaling relationships of catalysts with nonuniform structures. This will be an
important step towards a more predictive, molecular-level theory beyond the
widely accepted "Sabatier Principle" for heterogeneous catalysis and
electrocatalysis. The results will significantly foster the design and
engineering of electrochemical interfaces for low-cost, highly efficient
renewable energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.