* 2137331
* Collaborative Research: HSI Conference: Exploring the Realities of Contingent Latinx Faculty in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Idalis Villanueva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 154,905.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this HSI Conference project aims to more deeply
explore across Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI), the realities of contingent
(part-time, contract-bound, or non-tenure track) Latinx faculty with various
research and teaching roles. This collaborative project consists of a two-part
conference focusing on the experiences of Latinx faculty in STEM, one part for
faculty members themselves, and one for their administrators. This work will
explore the working realities of contingent faculty who represent over 46% of
the employed faculty in higher education systems. In particular, we will seek to
understand the challenges many contingent faculty, primarily from the Latinx
communities, experience in the California State University (CSU) system. CSU
schools collectively form one of the largest pools of HSIs in the nation in
terms of Latina/o undergraduate enrollment in HSIs. This work will contribute to
a fairly untapped and underexplored area of research to help uncover the hidden
barriers that prevent the success and navigation of these individuals in their
professions. Although this conference proposal is primarily focused on Latinx
contingent faculty in STEM, the anticipated work and results will serve as a
baseline for future research as well as policy-informed initiatives to support
the success of these faculty, and by extension their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are to (1) coalesce both
HSI, Latinx contingent STEM faculty, and administrators to examine the hidden
realities of Latinx contingent faculty in STEM; (2) to qualitatively analyze the
conference discussions using STEM education research methods and evaluate and
analyze conference outcomes from a policy perspective (led by RAND Corporation)
to co-generate a policy brief to share with STEM deans and HSI administrators;
and (3) develop an infographic summary to disseminate results to organizations
and stakeholders with an interest in issues of Latinx contingent faculty in STEM
and policy reform. The research methods will be purely exploratory and
qualitative in nature using case study research approaches. Qualitative data
will be analyzed through thematic and emerging coding techniques and be used
toward the development of a codebook and dissemination products that inform the
dissemination products (e.g., policy brief). With the support of RAND
Corporation, a policy think tank, we will not only disseminate the work through
academic journals but reach a wider academic audience of ways to support
contingent faculty, which in turn are in the frontlines of supporting
undergraduate (and often marginalized) students in STEM. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.