* 2137826
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Data Interfacing of Human Use, Culture, Economics, and Environment within the Blue Economy for Underserved Populations
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ross Andrew, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 686,462.00

The Blue Economy, as defined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, contributed nearly $373 billion to the United States economy in
2018 and grew faster than the nation’s economy overall. Additionally, the sector
of the Blue Economy related to tourism and recreation represents the largest
contributor overall—nearly $143 billion. While the value of such ocean resources
and sectors is immense, the benefits of these resources and commitment to their
use and conservation are not shared equally by all people. This project
addresses the following objectives 1) identification of appropriate data sources
that are relevant for connecting underserved groups to the Blue Economy 2)
analysis and packaging of data sources into applicable products that are useful
for Blue Economy networks to reach appropriate users, and 3) provision of
products/training/education to groups that help establish connections via jobs,
awareness, and commitments within the Blue Economy for underserved groups. A key
outcome of the project will be to increase awareness, engagement, and connection
to the Blue Economy for traditionally underserved populations in the United
States. This research seeks to highlight the linkage between racial/ethnic
minorities and relatively lower socioeconomic status as a relevant factor for
consideration in definition of underserved populations—through the convergence
of big data, cultural understanding, and other data sources. Specifically,
societal outcomes that will benefit Black, Brown, and Indigenous individuals as
it relates to engagement and connection to the Blue Economy. Traditionally
underserved groups may have previously established cultural connections to ocean
resources that are not captured in current assessment and quantification of the
Blue Economy. The Blue Economy should be accessible by all U.S. citizens,
regardless of their connection to ocean resources. Participation in Blue Economy
related activities can only be expanded for underserved populations when they
are fully aware of the activities and opportunities present within Blue Economy
sectors. In the medium term, awareness of Blue Economy activities and
opportunities translates to action for responsible use, marketing, and business
promotion for underserved populations. Following increases in awareness,
increases in access are the goal outcomes in the medium-term time period. This
will broaden participation in the Blue Economy for underserved populations by
inspiring confidence in ocean resources as sources of economic benefit. In the
long term, awareness and access build into attachment to ocean resources and the
Blue Economy. Finally, the project will build a foundation that supports
expansion of underserved population use and valuation of ocean resources.
Through short and medium-term expansion of awareness and access for
opportunities in the Blue Economy, societal benefits will emerge as long-term
attachment to those resources and connections. &lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the following objectives 1) identification of appropriate data sources
that are relevant for connecting underserved groups to the Blue Economy 2)
analysis and packaging of data sources into applicable products that are useful
for Blue Economy networks to reach appropriate users, and 3) provision of
products/training/education to groups that help establish connections via jobs,
awareness, and commitments within the Blue Economy for underserved groups. This
project will make use of big data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration to develop a platform that is accessible to the public. The
platform will aggregate data and stratify outputs based upon social criteria
such as desired activities, conditions, and connections to the Blue Economy. The
platform will be functional for any person with internet access, but will be
coupled with educational tools, workshops, and partnerships specifically
designed to connect underserved communities to the Blue Economy. Partners in
this convergent research effort (e.g. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Integrated Information Services) will provide indirect
communication to the program through their research and data provisioning
efforts. Educational tools, workshops, and partnerships will be tailored to the
specific audience of a particular community, knowing that cultural connections
and commitments to ocean resources differ across diverse groups. Proposed
outcomes include creation of opportunities, awareness, and
historical/contemporary context within the Blue Economy for underserved
populations in the short term. In the medium/long term, expected outcomes
include increased use, engagement, and business/job opportunities centered on
stronger attachment to the Blue Economy for underserved communities and
populations. The proposed activities address contemporary analytical challenges
that cut across multiple disciplines and require advanced analyses. Existing
data streams and models that utilize environmental and economic data to provide
information to coastal communities about weather events, transportation routing,
and impacts of hazards will be leveraged to help incorporate additional social
endpoints. By integrating human use and cultural information to such conceptual
and statistical models, description of linkages that may be influenced by
oceanic and atmospheric phenomena can be included in platforms that that benefit
society. The analysis and understanding of ocean conditions using biological and
ecological sciences is a vital component of this proposed project. Using social
and biological data to converge upon improved understanding of latent variables
that strengthen awareness, access, and attachment to ocean resources is
beneficial to society on its own. However, when considering the true impact of
awareness, access, and attachment to such resources, the dependency and
connections with economic endpoints such as employment and incomes are critical
and must be measured and justified. Economic connections extend beyond dollars
and cents, and hold potential for improvement in livelihoods of underserved
populations across components such as consumer confidence, life expectancy, and
happiness levels. Additionally, a more detailed understanding of the goods and
services provided by ocean resources beyond traditional market valuation (e.g.
shipping, fisheries harvest, etc.) offers insight into opportunities for human
engagement with the ocean and valuation of non-market goods and services
provided by coastal resources. This more complete assessment and understanding
of the Blue Economy may then offer underserved populations additional pathways
into such networks, to expand upon historical connections and create
contemporary opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.