* 2137264
* IUCRC Phase I UMN: Center for Integrated Material Science and Engineering of Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Changquan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2027
* USD 236,000.00

The pharmaceutical sector in America is a major, trillion-dollar industry,
having broad impacts on the US population through benefits to their health and
well-being. Despite US leadership, the industry is facing major problems,
including, difficulties in developing newer molecules, high cost and lengthy
time of bringing a new drug to market, lack of adequate and efficient regulatory
science, consumer drug affordability, quality issues, and drug shortages. The
COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated many of these challenges. These issues
point to an acute need for innovative research and technical advances to develop
high-quality drug products, achieve manufacturing efficiency, and support US-
based pharmaceutical manufacturing. This IUCRC phase I project addresses such
issues through establishing a joint two-university Center for Integrated
Material Science and Engineering for Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP), with New
Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) as the Lead Site and University of
Minnesota (UMN) as a Partner Site. Its mission is to advance and promote
fundamental understanding of the material properties, drug-additive interactions
at molecular and particulate level, as well as manufacturing processes, on
product quality and performance, at lower cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIMSEPP
team will develop fundamental understanding of structure-function-performance of
drug products and process engineering under three industry vetted Research
Thrusts: A) Particle and Crystal Engineering, B) Model Predictive Understanding
of Materials and Product Performance, and C) Bioavailability Enhancement and
Stability. Research at CIMSEPP will 1) promote predictive enhancement of key
properties of drugs, their engineered counterparts, and their blends for
improving product quality, and 2) significantly reduce time and cost of drug
product development. Key advances include, 1) identification of critical
particle properties that impact fine particle behavior, 2) better understanding
of their impact on cohesion and behaviors of powders, and 3) enabling accurate
prediction of properties of blends as well as compacted tablets. That
understanding will enable the development of mechanistic models and predictive
tools required for efficient manufacturing of better products. The UMN team’s
expertise in powder characterization and property enhancement through integrated
crystal engineering and particle design will 1) enable the development of both
highly effective and easy-to-adopt strategies to solve manufacturing problems
and 2) contribute to the fundamental understanding of structure – property
relationship through systematic research at length scales, ranging from
molecular dimension to single crystal/particles, to powders, and to finished
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.