* 2137221
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Towards an Extensible Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2022
* USD 21,566.00

The Internet’s basic design has remained largely unchanged since it first became
commercial in the 1990s. Now that the Internet is the centerpiece of our global
communications infrastructure, it is essentially impossible to alter its design
in any significant way. Unfortunately, such changes are needed to improve the
Internet’s performance and security. This project aims to resolve this paradox
with a design called the Extensible Internet. This is a collaborative project
which brings together investigators from Mount Holyoke College, New York
University, the University of Washington, and International Computer Science
Institute at the University of California at Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
today’s Internet, layer 3 has two basic functions: (i) connect all layer 2
networks and (ii) provide the packet delivery services on which host
applications are built. The key aspect of the Extensible Internet is that it
splits layer 3 into two layers. The first, which remains layer 3 and can use the
current Internet Protocol (IP), handles the first function of connecting layer 2
networks. The second requires a new layer (called layer 3.5) that supports an
extensible set of packet delivery services, and thus handles the second function
of providing the services on which host applications are built. In this way, the
Extensible Internet design leaves the current Internet unchanged but is able to
provide an extensible set of new packet delivery services that will improve the
Internet’s performance and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Extensible
Internet design is incrementally deployable (i.e., no unchanged applications or
domains would lose connectivity), compatible with economic incentives, and can
continue to evolve as new requirements arise. As such, it provides a practical
way for the Internet to evolve far beyond its current design. If the Extensible
Internet design is adopted, it would have a significant impact on the nature of
the Internet. In particular, transitioning to the Extensible Internet is not
just a one-time change in functionality, but transforms the Internet from a
single and unchanging service model (best-effort packet delivery) to an evolving
and expanding set of network-provided services. In addition, in pursuing this
agenda, the investigators will work to increase the diversity of the STEM
workforce through ongoing efforts in their own research groups and the outreach
programs in their respective departments. The investigators will also
incorporate their results into their courses and make the material freely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the code from this project will be
available on the project’s website at
ExtensibleInternet.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.