* 2137614
* LEAPS-MPS: Random growth models, spin glasses and stability of complex networks
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Si Tang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,210.00

This project focuses on three stochastic models that arise from natural systems
(for example ecosystems and social networks) with complex behavior, such as
phase transition, self-organization and chaos. These include a random growth
model describing cell proliferation, a spin glass model for ferromagnetic
alloys, and a dynamic model for ecosystems. The results obtained from these
projects are not only important in probability theory but also have wide
applications in other branches of sciences such as biology, statistical physics
and data sciences. The educational component includes the development of a new
graduate course, activities for local undergraduate students, and summer
programs for undergraduate students in the US. The project also provides
research training opportunities at a graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
is studying the limit shape and the fluctuations in first-passage percolation, a
classic random growth model that is often used to describe fluid flow in porous
media or the growth of cells. Moreover, the PI investigates fundamental
properties of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick and other mean-field spin glass models
using iterative schemes, especially those under the low-temperature setting.
Furthermore, the PI is studying ``stable equilibria’' of large dynamical systems
using the Kac-Rice formula and approaches from random matrix theory. The results
obtained there will be used to understand the relationship between complexity
and stability in large ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.