* 2137882
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: A Globally Coordinated, Universally-Accessible Digital Twin Network for the Coral Reef Blue Economy
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2022
* USD 747,606.00

OIA - 2137882 NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: A Globally Coordinated,
Universally-Accessible Digital Twin Network for the Coral Reef Blue EconomyThis
project proposes to develop a “digital twin” technology to improve stewardship
of coral reef ecosystems. Digital twins are virtual replicas and the use of this
technology is growing in many sectors, providing opportunities to collaborate
virtually, visualize entire systems, intake sensor data and update system status
in real time, design what-if scenarios, predict results of proposed
interventions, and create strategies to improve the real-world features that the
twin represents virtually. This technology has not yet been applied to analysis
and stewardship of coral reefs but has the potential to facilitate the
collaboration among diverse interest groups that is needed to preserve these
crucial ecosystems. The team has identified three critical gaps that limit the
utility of scientific knowledge in the management, conservation, and restoration
of coral reef ecosystems which they are confident can be addressed by the
digital twin approach: i) lack of a whole systems approach, ii) absence of a
global platform for data integration, analysis and visualization, and iii) lack
of universal access to data and knowledge, which in turn prohibits sharing and
collaboration. The end goal of the effort is a global-scale, interconnected
network of digital reefs with the potential to transform the management,
conservation, restoration, and sustainable harvest of coral ecosystems for the
21st century blue economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reef ecosystems play a
central role in the global blue economy. In the US, coral reefs contribute
billions of dollars to the blue economy each year, create jobs, and protect
coastal infrastructure. However, coral reefs everywhere are declining at a pace
and scale unprecedented in human history. This project incorporates valuable
diversity and expertise, including includes the University of Guam, an
accredited Asian American, native American, Pacific Islander-serving
institution; the Marshall Islands Conservation Society (MICS), with strong
stakeholder interests in coral reef sustainability; and the Nature Conservancy,
whose coral reef program is established in over thirty countries around the
world. All products generated as part of this research will be made publicly
available via a project-specific website and existing portals as well as other
media such as film, gamification, and collaborations with large public aquariums
in the US. This strong network will help ensure co-development with a broad
range of stakeholders and global utilization of the tools developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop the prototype Coral Reef digital
twin on Palmyra Atoll, a US territory in the Pacific, and then during Phase 2
will expand the digital twin model to priority sites identified by collaborators
from federal agencies and conservation organizations. The 3-dimensional virtual
replica of a living reef will facilitate the integration, analysis and
accessibility of a diversity of geological, physical, chemical, biological and
socio-economic data and models from anywhere in the world. The data will be
incorporated into a holistic representation of the living reef that can be
visualized in 3-D, analyzed at any point in space and time, and simulated under
different, future scenarios. Connection between the physical reef and its
digital replica, via sensors, robotics and satellites, will allow the digital
twin to receive and integrate updates on coral reef status in near-real time,
providing critical information to managers, restoration practitioners, and
stakeholders, including tourism operators, fishermen and coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.