* 2137723
* QuIC-TAQS: Integrated Lithium Niobate Quantum Photonics Platform
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Martin Fejer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,170,493.00

Quantum technology, which derives its advantage from the non-intuitive laws of
quantum physics, promises to drastically alter the course of computer, network,
and sensor development. The realization of this technology relies on the
transmission of the smallest units of energy, often across large distances. This
is challenging because each unit can be easily misidentified or lost to the
environment. Fortunately, particles of light – photons - can circumvent this,
and therefore are promising carriers of quantum information even in ambient
conditions. However, it is an outstanding challenge to efficiently interface
photons with emerging quantum technologies, such as quantum processors and
sensors. Thus, realizing so-called quantum interconnects, quantum analog of
optical networks that form the backbone of internet, is essential to enable
scalability and usability of all quantum technologies. The team is combining
expertise in microscale fabrication, non-linear optics, electronics,
superconductivity, and material science, to realize transmitter and receiver
elements of quantum interconnects for light, all integrated on a photonic chip.
This interdisciplinary program provides a unique training ground for students
and creates a pipeline for the quantum-ready workforce. The team is actively
exploring opportunities for commercialization, leveraging partnerships with
industry. Beyond the quantum realm, the team’s work is poised to advance the
state of the art in classical communication
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical photons have many attractive properties
to realize quantum interconnects, the crucial interfaces between quantum
technologies. Photons exist under ambient conditions, can travel long distances,
are generally impervious to environmental noise, and can be generated,
manipulated, and detected easily. These properties also introduce challenges to
realizing quantum technologies that require deterministic interactions between
photons, as well as efficient interactions between photons and matter qubits.
Both are essential for transmitting quantum information over lossy or long-
distance channel, by way of quantum repeaters. Overcoming limitations of
existing photonic platforms, the team will develop a scalable, ultra-low-loss,
integrated quantum photonic platform based on high-quality thin-film lithium
niobate films, and utilize it to realize quantum transmitters and receivers. The
approach uses frequency multiplexing and feed-forward to generate and distribute
entanglement, leveraging fast single-photon detectors and switches, solid-state
quantum memories, and photon pair sources, all integrated on the same chip.
Importantly, our team is developing material growth techniques to realize high-
quality and ultra-low-loss stoichiometric single-crystal lithium niobate device
layers that outperform commercially available material. As an aspirational and
stretch goal of the program, the PI and his collaborators are utilizing these
components to demonstrate a frequency multiplexed photonic quantum
repeater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.