* 2137787
* LEAPS-MPS: A Systematic Investigation of Transient Behavior in RR Lyrae Variable Stars
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kenneth Carrell, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 12/31/2023
* USD 105,535.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). RR Lyrae stars are a class of variable star whose
pulsations have a relatively straightforward relationship to their intrinsic
luminosities. As such, these stars provide a ‘standard candle’ against which to
measure distance throughout the galaxy (and even to other galaxies). Because of
their role in setting distance scales throughout the universe, pulsations of RR
Lyrae stars continue to be studied decades after the broad outline of the
mechanism was first described. Any change in that understanding could have
significant implications on other parts of astronomy. The team will study
changes in the amplitude of the fundamental mode of pulsation, along with its
first overtone, as well as non-radial pulsations on these otherwise radially
pulsing stars. They will make ground-based spectroscopic observations while the
TESS spacecraft conducts photometric observations of the same star, allowing
real-time comparison. Undergraduate students, drawn from under-represented
groups at a Hispanic Serving Institution, will be involved in all aspects of the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team recently discovered changes in the
amplitude of the fundamental pulsation mode of the double-mode RR Lyrae star
V338 Boo. The fundamental pulsation’s amplitude is found to change on the scale
of many tens of days, while the first overtone’s amplitude remains constant.
Further, other teams have recently discovered non-radial pulsations whose
amplitudes also change on the scale of tens of days. The team will observe a set
of RR-Lyrae stars to look for similar changes in pulsations, and will
furthermore conduct co-incident observsations with the TESS satellite to compare
real-time spectroscopic variations with photometric variations. The team will
observe known RR Lyrae stars; the study of these modes and variations will
inform astrophysical models of stellar interiors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.