* 2137730
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Using Recycled Glass Sand to Promote Resilience and the Blue Economy in Coastal Communities
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Ehab Meselhe, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 01/31/2023
* USD 716,823.00

Proposal # 2137730 NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Using Recycled Glass
Sand to Promote Resilience and the Blue Economy in Coastal
Communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People rely on coastal resources for food,
water, and energy. However, extraction of these natural resources over the last
century has led to pollution and coastal land loss. Protecting and restoring
coastal environments, while continuing to support local economies, has never
been more urgent. This project’s vision is to establish recycling programs in
coastal communities that will divert glass from landfills and turn it into glass
sand products to restore coasts and preserve historic sites. In this “networked
blue economy” approach, new products are also created to generate revenue for
operating the glass recycling facilities. In partnership with the New Orleans-
based glass recycling startup company Glass Half Full, this project brings
together local university researchers from the fields of chemical engineering,
civil and environmental engineering, river and coastal engineering, and ecology
and evolutionary biology to identify new markets for recycled glass products,
determine where recycled glass sand should be used to prevent coastal land loss,
ensure that recycled glass sand is safe to use in coastal environments, and
engage local Native American communities in preserving important cultural sites
that are currently threatened by land loss. This project will also create
service, research, and training opportunities for local students of all ages to
learn about the complex, ever-changing connections between technology,
economics, history, and the coastal environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
networked blue economy based on glass recycling will be established in the
greater New Orleans area through a convergent research approach that brings
together multiple science and engineering disciplines capable of engaging a
broad range of stakeholder interests, from potential industry partners (chemical
engineering) to conservationist groups (ecology) to residents whose homes are
threatened by coastal land loss (professors of practice with training in
community engagement) to the wide network of government and non-profit groups
currently working in this area (river and coastal science and engineering). The
research plan accelerates the translation of laboratory materials innovation
into practice with consideration of all perspectives – engineering, ecological,
societal, and economic – to accomplish the following deliverables: (i) develop
value-added products and identify potential markets for these products,
including (a) stimuli-responsive natural clay particle-based additives to
recycled glass sand that release surfactants to sequester oil/chemical
contaminants only when needed and (b) recycled glass sand treated with natural
polymeric additives to improve material properties (e.g., erosion resistance);
(ii) obtain approval from relevant State and Federal agencies for use of
recycled glass sand as an Erosion Control Product on the Louisiana coast; (iii)
disseminate results of vegetation ecological testing and suspended sediment
exposure experiments with marine animals to demonstrate safety to conservation
groups and residents; (iv) identify demonstration project sites by combining
coastal modeling and community engagement; (v) broaden participation through (a)
outreach to coastal Native American communities to identify historic sites
threatened by coastal land loss; (b) engagement of undergraduate students in
service-learning and research projects through elective and core courses in the
Tulane Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering Departments; (c) participation of graduate and undergraduate
students in cross-disciplinary research project meetings; and (d) development of
a K-12 outreach workshop on soil stabilization to be delivered to students in
partnering Native American communities as well as Tulane’s biannual outreach
programs, Girls in STEM at Tulane and Boys at Tulane in STEM, which recruit more
than 50% of their participating students from underrepresented groups and under-
resourced schools in the New Orleans area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.