* 2137235
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Health and agriculture sustainability through interdisciplinary surveillance and risk assessment platform of global emerging zoonotic diseases
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Beatriz Martinez Lopez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 70,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
develop and build a platform to help understand and predict the transmission
dynamics of important zoonotic diseases at the interface of ecology, wildlife
and humans. The platform will integrate various tiers of databases and
analytical approaches developed by diverse research studies to a single
platform, allowing better accessibility to different regions of the world to
help monitor and control disease outbreaks. Eco2Health will specifically target
avian influenza virus transmission in their platform development and will
integrate several analytical tools from existing databases, including the
following: a database generated by citizen scientist such as eBird or breeding
bird survey with self-developed statistical package; a viral sequence from
GenBank database or self-generated from local isolates; and local meteorological
parameters and regional climate phenomenon database including El Nino-Southern
Oscillation and Indian Ocean Dipole. Eco2Health will also generate an early
warning system and risk map by combining different statistical/mathematical and
machine-learning based approaches to better understand and predict transmission
dynamics of avian influenza viruses over time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.