* 2137469
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Misinformation Judgments with Public Legitimacy
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Paul Resnick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

There have been increasingly frequent calls for communication platforms to take
action to reduce the impact of misinformation, either by marking articles and
posts as misleading or by reducing their distribution. But there is little
agreement on what process should be used to determine which articles and posts
should receive such enforcement actions. Platforms are reluctant to be fully
transparent about their policies and procedures, in part because those
procedures depend on human judgments whose public legitimacy is not established.
What is needed is a clear conceptual foundation that allows platforms to
describe policies in terms of a "subjective ground truth" and be publicly
accountable for how well their procedures enact their
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop two services. The first
is a "golden set" service that, for a sample of items each month, convenes a
jury to render judgments. A jury will consider evidence that has been assembled
about an item and deliberate with each other. Each juror will then report out an
individual judgment about whether the item is misinforming in a way that
deserves enforcement action. Those individual judgments provide a partial view
of the hypothetical subjective ground truth, which is defined as the
distribution of judgments that would be made by all potential jurors if they all
participated in a similar jury process. Platforms can then express policies
transparently in terms of the actions they intend to take as a function of the
subjective ground truth. The golden sets will provide a way to evaluate, after
the fact, how well a platform's procedures implement its policies, creating
accountability for the outcome of the procedures without requiring the platforms
to make details of those procedures public. The second service is a forecasting
API that can be used as part of a platform's decision procedures. It will
provide, for any content item, a forecast of the subjective ground
truth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.