* 2137567
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: An Algorithmic Observatory to Address Financial Misinformation and Disinformation in Minoritized Communities (LOI ID: L02616265)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* William Maurer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Smartphones and other mobile platforms are increasingly being used to access
financial services. This is especially the case for the underbanked population
who rely on prepaid cards and mobile applications to send and receive funds. In
this process, financial service platforms are also becoming content platforms,
while banks and credit unions continue to lose ground to financial technology
(fintech) services and apps, and to other fringe services. Unfortunately, this
shift is also contributing to the spread of disinformation about finance. This
project seeks to address a particular harm to minoritized communities arising as
a result of disinformation, viz, the harm of being excluded from financial
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost all extant research on disinformation has
focused on political communications. Most studies have also focused on the white
populationâ€”in particular, younger white men as producers of disinformation and
the older white population as consumers and spreaders of political
disinformation. New research suggests that there are racial asymmetries in the
circulation of disinformation. Recognizing that humans are social creatures who
learn in social groupings and epistemic communities, modeling the spread of
disinformation in networks of varying structures provides insight into which
social structures best provide resilience against bad information. Social
learning models can also help explain how groups can place trust in other group
members on widely divergent topics or domains of knowledge or belief. Such
models can inform the design of new epistemic communities. This project focuses
on disinformation and misinformation about money, banking, and finance among
racialized and marginalized communities in the United States. It seeks to
address such dis- and misinformation through a convergence science approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New forms of cooperative organizational structures will be
explored to address the issue, proceeding from the notion that disinformation is
a social problem requiring a societal response, including new institutions to
track and confront disinformation and new forms of inclusive democratic
participation in the process. The project will partner with the U.S. credit
union system as a laboratory for cooperative democracy and will pilot a
community-driven forum for a) monitoring misinformation and disinformation and
developing appropriate approaches to counter it; and b) empowering people to
deal with the rapid rise of digital credit scoring and other algorithmic
processes in financial services. In doing so, the cooperative model of the
credit union system will be harnessed for modeling trustworthy and authentic
information sharing as part of democratic practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project partners include community organizations focused
on racial economic equity who will provide their expertise and assist in the
development of new models for understanding and addressing disinformation. A
model infrastructure for digital inclusion will be piloted, that will ensure
that it does not itself become a form of predatory inclusion. Trusted
information flows will be developed that deal with issues of mistrust. In
addition to the credit union network, the project partnership also includes
PolicyLink, a national research and action institute advancing racial and
economic equity, and the Filene Research Institute for enhancing the financial
capabilities of minoritized households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.