* 2137903
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Developing Blue Economy from Micro to Macro-Scale in Kelp Aquaculture
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Torre Polizzi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 557,577.00

The need for aquaculture expansion in the United States is well recognized as a
means of stimulating&lt;br/&gt;coastal economies, securing seafood supplies,
restoring damaged ecosystems, and generating innovative&lt;br/&gt;solutions to
our global climate issues. Seaweed aquaculture is experiencing a global boom and
is now&lt;br/&gt;considered one of the fastest growing marine industries in the
Northeastern US. The combination of these&lt;br/&gt;farming economies has the
potential to bolster economic growth and play a key role in our
climate&lt;br/&gt;solution. This project will bring together a wide-ranging team
of scientific investigators, tribal groups, and kelp farmers to explore ways to
enhance seaweed farming along the west coast of the USA. The project team will
explore the role of microbial communities and their gene functions in promoting
seaweed health, and nutritional and industrial quality, The ultimate goal is to
determine whether these microbiomes can play a crucial role in expanding seaweed
aquaculture. The role of seaweed genetics is being increasingly appreciated in
the field of seaweed farming and restoration efforts, especially as the oceans
warm. The team will convene several in-person and on-line meetings with team
members in California and Alaska, travel to seaweed farms to train farmers in
microbial sampling techniques, and ultimately build a “Guide for best Practices”
for seaweed farming that can be used by this expanding sector. The overarching
goal is to provide a framework to enhance Blue Economy and habitat restoration
efforts along the west coast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
focuses on the understudied, yet critically important microbial communities
associated with seaweed farms throughout the west coast of North America, the
microbiome. The project goal is to elucidate which species are present and what
their functions in kelp farming are. Specifically, the project team seeks to
answer the following questions: what the role of each microbial species is; what
interactions occur among species and with their host in the microbial
environment; and how do microbes change in the environment. This project will
improve understanding of spatial and temporal variation in seaweed microbial
communities at taxonomic and functional metabolism levels throughout the west
coast, correlating this knowledge with kelp health and chemical composition.
This will provide better information for the kelp aquaculture industry
concerning best practices for farm management and ecosystem restoration, optimal
farm designs and site locations, and approaches for increasing desirable
attributes associated with seaweed aquaculture (polysaccharide and alginate
production, carbohydrate and lipid production, heat shock resistance and overall
biomass production yields). Educational outreach activities will train and
inform students and the public. Project results will be incorporated with
existing K-12 outreach activities at the Kasitsna Bay Laboratory and San Diego
State University. Social media will be used to highlight research discoveries,
including a dedicated project web page and corresponding blog posts, which will
allow this research to reach a diverse range of people differing in age, class,
race, etc. Ultimately, a Guide to Best Practices will be generated to teach
seaweed farmers how to sample microbiomes, and how to incorporate this knowledge
into their farm designs to enhance Blue Economy activities and habitat
restoration from Alaska to California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.