* 2137582
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Innovative Seafood Traceability Network for Sustainable Use, Improved Market Access, and Enhanced Blue Economy
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ian Gleadall, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,599.00

Proposal # 2137582 NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Innovative seafood
traceability network for sustainable use, improved market access, and enhanced
blue economy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the global
challenge of feeding the growing human population will require a solution from
the ocean. To prevent reoccurrences of overfishing and its negative ecological
impacts, major fisheries require reimagined monitoring and management
strategies. Leveraging leading-edge machine learning computer technology and
environmental DNA (an organism’s DNA that can be detected in the water)
techniques, this project builds a broad network to implement a powerful
traceability tool for marine fisheries. This project focuses on octopus (known
as cephalopods), a fishery currently at severe risk due to unsustainable
exploitation as an animal protein source. While the United States catches a fair
number of octopus to supply the domestic market, it also relies on imports from
both neighboring and distant countries. Regardless of origin, octopus products
on the market should meet the same requirements of other seafoods to ensure
consumer protection and fishery sustainability and reduced illegal fishing
practices. This project will develop and pilot reliable tools to achieve these
goals for the American market and consumers. Deliverables will also help to
combat the fraudulent practice of species substitution – the dishonest labeling
and selling of a cheap species under the name of an expensive one. Proper, easy
to deploy and affordable environmental DNA traceability techniques will help
combat this practice that damages the seafood management chain. Most
importantly, this project will help make these tools and techniques available
and affordable for octopus-exporting countries, thus allowing for critical check
points through the supply chain – from the fishing net to the dinner plate. From
a development perspective, it can help small-scale octopus harvesters in
developing countries access the lucrative American market without facing tariff
barriers to trade. This will promote fair trade practices. Ultimately, this
project applies convergence research concepts that integrate knowledge, methods,
and expertise across disciplines to advance science and lay the foundation for
solving the simultaneous global challenges of food security, sustainable
consumption, and marine resource conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cephalopods
are currently undergoing accelerating misuse and mismanagement with octopus
species particularly vulnerable due to their exploitation as an important
animal-derived protein. This problem originates from a dearth of data on octopus
recruitment and a general lack of infrastructure within the fishery. Hence, the
utility of traceability methods rooted in real-time detection and reliable
predictions offer promise to robustly assess stocks and their potential for
exploitation in the octopus seafood supply chain. Seafood traceability methods
must be easily replicable and affordable for the management of seafood to
control Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing. Furthermore, transparent
activities between the producers and the consumers will facilitate data
collection under proper regulations and, ultimately, appropriate decisions
towards stock improvements. This NSF Convergence Accelerator project will: (1)
Develop a dashboard prototype traceability tool that allows affordable
identification of species and area of capture for wild octopus fisheries within
the United States and abroad using a machine learning model “SeaTraceBlueNet”
trained on legacy data of environmental metadata, species occurrence and images;
(2) Develop a community-based citizen-science network (fishers, researchers,
industry partners, students, etc.) to gather new data (images, metadata and
environmental DNA (eDNA)), train on and test the portable eDNA kits and
SeaTraceBlueNet prototype to build the collaborative capacity to establish a
standardized traceability system; and, (3) Set a system in place to connect
traceability, sustainability and legality to support the development of a blue
economy around the octopus value chain, incorporating the best practices and
existing standards from stakeholders. This project is forward-thinking in
drawing upon the perspective, ideas, expertise, and skillsets of the team
members that represent a diversity of backgrounds, races, ethnicities, ages, and
geographic regions. Over half of the team of co-PIs and Senior Personnel are
women and/or persons of color. Most of the research team and industry partners
are geographically located within the United States, yet this project is further
strengthened by experts based in both developed and emerging nations as seafood
traceability requires a global solution. Broadly, this project promotes
coordinated use of multiple new and existing fisheries knowledge and data for
transformative, accurate monitoring of key marine
bioresources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.