* 2137554
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Ecological and coevolutionary feedbacks in multi-mutualist communities
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2026
* David Althoff, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 936,605.00

Mutualisms are beneficial interactions between species that are important in
natural communities and agricultural systems because they generate critical
resources and services needed for species to persist. For example, pollination
mutualisms are essential for fruit production in many crop plants, and
pollinators are dependent on the food they obtain from those flowers.
Mutualisms, in general, usually involve many species interacting with one
another in complex communities, yet we know relatively little about the factors
that govern them. Thus, as global change continues to alter ecosystems on Earth,
there is a strong need to understand how species that form mutualisms change in
response to the environment and to one another. For instance, the presence of
competitive species that use the resources made by mutualists could alter the
way in which the mutualists change in response to one another. This research
will examine how large groups of mutualist species change in response to each
other across different environments and how other competitive species can
influence these changes. The project uses an experimental system based on
brewerâ€™s yeast to understand how species change in response to one another in
complex mutualisms involving many species. In addition to testing how mutualisms
change in species rich communities, an engaging video game will be developed to
teach high school students about the economic value of mutualisms and how they
change over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a laboratory-based
nutritional mutualism composed of strains of budding yeast that exchange
nutrient resources with each other, thus simulating mutualistic species. Using
this system, the researchers will manipulate the number of mutualist species in
the communities and the amount of environmentally-available resources to address
the following goals: 1) Evaluate how reciprocal trait changes (i.e.,
coevolution) vary in complex mutualist communities with and without traded
resources additionally available from the local environment, 2) Test how
coevolution influences the establishment of new mutualists in species-rich
mutualist communities, 3) Test how a competitive species alters the coevolution
of mutualists and how coevolution impacts mutualism resistance to these
competitors. Results from the proposed study will identify the ecological
contexts that affect coevolution in mutualisms, the evolutionary contexts that
allows establishment of nonresident species, and how coevolution impacts
ecological persistence of mutualists and competitive
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.