* 2137745
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Reconfiguring Urban Shorelines for Resilience:  Convergence Research Meshing Ecology, Engineering and Architecture
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Steven Handel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,688.00

Abstract - Reconfiguring urban shorelines for resilience: convergence research
meshing ecology, engineering and architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses a significant national infrastructure need, the replacement of failing
shoreline protection in urban areas. It will produce designs that increase
protection, benefit social communities, and maximize the development of
shoreline biological communities and the services they provide, including
enhancing fisheries. The blue economy includes traditional marine industries,
such as fisheries, mining, and trade, as well as emerging industries like
offshore renewable energy, and the ecosystem services provided by natural
communities, such as carbon sequestration and coastal protection. Urbanized
coastal zones drive much of the blue economy, but are increasingly vulnerable to
damage from waves, flooding, storms, and sea level rise associated with
continued climate change. Hardened or armored shorelines, such as bulkheads and
sea walls, have been the major tool for protecting shorelines from erosion and
storms, particularly in urban settings. But, current infrastructure is failing
and must be replaced. It is failing physically and functionally as it cannot
adapt to changing sea conditions and is deteriorating due to age in many
locations. These structures neither support diverse ecological communities nor
provides a place for humans to experience and understand the valuable nature of
the urban coastal ecosystem. This failure is not only a cause of the
impoverishment of urban life, but a contributing factor to the lack of
resilience in cities. Therefore, there is a need for innovating a new generation
of replacements for existing hardened shorelines that will protect the urban
edge, while supporting biodiversity and expanding human experience at the
coastal interface. This project will design a digital prototype that is not only
a solution to an urgent problem, but is also scalable and transportable to other
urbanized shores within the US and elsewhere. Solving problems that are complex
and socially relevant requires expertise in a wide range of fields, including
fields that do not normally collaborate. This project involves a team from
fields that rarely work together including ecologists, engineers, architects,
and social scientists. This project will also engage local stakeholders,
including underserved communities, to provide education about shoreline issues,
science and design evaluation tools, and include their feedback in development
of the model. This project will include engagement with industry, agencies, and
regulatory bodies, as well as citizen groups and students. To integrate
disciplinary knowledge of natural sciences, social sciences, engineering and
architecture, with local knowledge, the team will conduct workshop sessions with
stakeholders, including students. Interested students will be encouraged to
engage as “citizen-scientist/citizen-designers” for the duration of the project.
The research team aims to advance knowledge in 3 ways: 1) within and among
disciplines, 2) among citizens, and 3) between experts and citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal zones are an essential element of the blue
economy. They represent the most urbanized and economically productive areas,
provide habitat and nursery areas for marine biodiversity, and support important
fisheries and aquaculture. However, sea level rise and increased risk of storm
surge are threatening the people and economic value of urban coastal areas.
Shoreline hardening has been the major tool for protecting urban areas, but
existing structures are failing and need replacement. They have depauperate
ecological communities, reduced nursery areas for fish, are ineffective during
storm surges, and limit human interaction with the waterfront. Therefore, there
is urgent need for innovative replacements to protect the urban edge, support
biodiversity, and elevate human experience. The goal of this project is to
design a new type of infrastructure to better protect urban shorelines while
simultaneously enhancing local biological communities and human engagement with
the coastline. This project will use a convergence, transdisciplinary approach
with use of new materials, complex architectural morphologies, and advanced
hydrological computer analyses to design new multi-scalar structures and spaces
for the urban edge. It will: develop a transdisciplinary framework of
structural, material, biotic, economic and social parameters for building new
infrastructure to enhance biological and social communities, while advancing
protection from sea-level rise and storm surge; use architectural design and
engineering modeling to propose new approaches to constructed coastal
reinforcements that provide protection for cities and harbors from storm surges
and climate change while maximizing development of biotic communities and the
services to people. It will be developed as a digital prototype and will engage
local stakeholders, including underserved communities, in design activities that
will integrate education about shoreline issues, science and design evaluation
tools, and will include their feedback. These outcomes will be used to develop
guidelines and design principles to improve coastal infrastructure. This project
will create pragmatic scenarios on which to base decision-making for climate-
resilient shoreline structures that have greater ecological and social value
while upgrading urgently needed mechanical function. The prototype design will
deliver a novel model capable of increasing well-being for people, ocean edges,
and shoreline species, boost disaster risk reduction, and increase ecosystem and
urban services. It will represent a benchmark approach for future research on
the development and application of shoreline infrastructure. The team will link
fields that rarely interact (natural and social sciences, engineering, and
architectural design), with local users, stakeholders, regulatory agencies, and
industry through a convergence framework. This project will help advance
knowledge, collaboration, and education in 3 ways: within and among previously
isolated disciplines, among citizen groups, and between experts and citizens.
Local users, stakeholders, regulatory agencies and industry will be important
components of this interactive team. This project will serve as a platform for
developing and implementing this approach through collaboration with the team’s
convergence network, curriculum integration, strategic network expansion, and
pursuit of new allies. Network partners will be brought directly into the
processes of public space and infrastructure design. This project will have an
important outreach to high schools and will engage citizens and students from
underserved communities and members of underrepresented groups. Project
progress, process, and results will be shared to the wider public through a
project website, active engagement through various social media and traditional
scientific conference presentations and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.