* 2137680
* Active Glass Theory for Dendritic Spine Plasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Andrei Gasic, Gasic, Andrei G
* Fellowship Award
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (MPS-Ascend). Each fellowship
supports a research and training project at a host institution in the
mathematical and physical sciences, including applications to other disciplines,
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. This fellowship to Dr. Andrei
Gasic supports his research project entitled “Active Glass Theory for Dendritic
Spine Plasticity." The host institution for the fellowship is Rice University,
and the sponsoring scientists is Dr. Peter G. Wolynes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Gasic proposes to develop a theoretical framework to model the morphological
plasticity of dendritic spines as an “active glass”. The active glass theory
will be used to examine the mechanical properties of the underlying actin
network of the spine, such as the stress response as it grows in response to
signals. In addition, the relation between the chemical reaction dynamics of
gelation and the elastic properties of the network glass will be examined. This
new theoretical framework will be validated through extensive numerical
simulations. This will also be useful for understanding cellular condensates or
membraneless organelles. The fellow will participate as a mentor for the
Frontiers In Science (FIS) summer research program, which recruits from
minority-serving institutions, and he will continue to be an advocate for
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.