* 2137047
* The Eighth International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Amy Veprauskas, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2023
* USD 26,247.00

The Eighth International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of
Populations in Biological Systems (ICMA-VIII) will be held at the University of
Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, LA, on March 25-27, 2022. Research in
mathematical biology investigates the principles that govern the structure,
development, or behavior of biological systems. It can be used to test
hypotheses and help make informed decisions to address issues such as epidemic
spread, tumor growth and treatment, agricultural pests, and invasive or
endangered species. The main objectives of this conference are to facilitate the
exchange of novel research developments and ideas, to promote the development of
new collaborations and enhance existing collaborations, and to provide
opportunities for early career researchers and students to interact with
internationally renowned scientists. This conference series brings together a
diverse range of participants from a wide variety of backgrounds, including
various career levels, ranks, and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad, general theme of the conference is the
formulation, validation, analysis, and simulation of mathematical models for
gaining insight into the spatiotemporal dynamics of biological populations. A
special emphasis at this eighth conference will be on multiple scale dynamics in
ecology, epidemiology, and systems biology. Specific topics include, but are not
limited to, immune epidemiological and vector-host systems, molecular-cellular
modeling in systems biology and oncology, biological invasions and persistence,
adaptation and evolutionary dynamics, and biological systems operating on
multiple spatial or temporal scales. The plenary speakers at this conference are
encouraged to reach out to a broader audience, to give surveys of the current
state of the research in their field of study, and to suggest new directions of
research. The Journal of Biological Dynamics will publish a special issue of
papers authored by speakers and participants at ICMA-VIII, making the
advancements presented at this conference available to a broader audience. More
information about this conference can be found at https://userweb.ucs.louisiana.
edu/~C00424602/ICMA2022/index.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.