* 2137970
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Equipping Underserved Communities with Ocean Intelligence Platforms
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sebastien Boulay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The goal of this project is to create ocean-observing buoy systems for
indigenous communities in three regions through co-developed Community Research
Implementation &amp; Stewardship Plans. The buoy systems will be deployed in
Alaska, the Pacific Northwest, and the Pacific Islands and will provide wave
data and other sensor-based insights, with the specific tools and resources
identified through co-creation with the communities that will use and maintain
them. The co-development process is supported through engagement with three U.S.
Integrated Ocean Observing System Regional Associations (Alaska Ocean Observing
System, Northwest Association of Networked Ocean Observing Systems, and Pacific
Islands Ocean Observing System), all with long-standing, trusted relationships
with Indigenous and coastal communities forged over decades of collaboration.
The work will serve the needs of underserved communities, providing data that
will help them adapt to the changing ocean environment and allowing them to
identify the resources and insights they need most. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is taking advantage of two main innovations, one in engineering and one
in co-development of locally stewarded systems to sustain the blue economy in
the context of each community’s specific needs. The project includes
collaboration with Sofar Ocean Technologies which will provide an existing buoy
technology – designed to be affordable and convenient – that includes measures
of waves, sea surface temperature, turbidity, and water level as well as
integrated solar power, satellite data connectivity, and modular sensor payload
capabilities that allow expansion. Outreach specialists, local liaisons, and
local partners will engage communities to assess coastal ocean data needs that
these assets can meet, and work with the communities to determine the tools to
best present those data for effective decision making and monitoring of
resources. The team expects to contribute to an increasing body of methodologies
for co design and democratization of ocean observing data, which then can be
extended to other ocean observing systems worldwide. The project will also
create new repositories of hyper-local wave and temperature data that can be
used by ocean modelers, coastal planners, and wave scientists for model
optimization, adaptation, planning, and large-scale scientific research. The
initial focus is on Indigenous communities in remote areas, whose lives,
livelihoods, and cultures depend on sustainable use of ocean resources. However,
the project has national and global scalability because it is piloted in three
very different regions with diverse environmental conditions and varied ocean
uses, providing an opportunity for comprehensive field testing of efforts that
can be applied to other locations. The project will give communities access to
information and insights to empower their own blue economy goals, while creating
a system for stewarding these valuable data and observation resources through
local ownership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.