* 2137725
* BPC-DP: Building Ecosystems of Belonging for Neurodiverse Computer Science Students
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Adrienne Decker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 293,110.00

The University at Buffalo’s Open Education Lab is designing and testing
neurodiversity micro-credentials to create an ecosystem of belonging in
undergraduate Computer Science programs. Micro-credentials, similar to digital
badges, are tools that can deliver bite-size curriculum and then both assess and
verify learning for a given audience. In this case, students are the audience;
this training is designed to increase instructor preparedness for teaching
neurodiverse Computer Science students in undergraduate programs while
presenting students with information about their instructors’ training through
digital badges. Neurodiversity refers to differences in cognition and brain
development common to conditions such as autism spectrum disorder and attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). These students are often attracted to
STEM career paths and possess traits that would make them valuable members of
the United States’ computing workforce, but drop out before graduation when they
encounter misaligned teaching practices or instructors who discourage
accommodations and supports for students with invisible disabilities. These
micro-credentials are designed to give instructors the training they need to be
able to transform their practice for neurodiverse undergraduate Computer Science
students, as well as providing students with opportunities to identify trained
instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a process guided by the Universal Design
for Learning framework, which is used to create educational interventions that
will meet the needs of as many students as possible, the project consists of two
major components. The curriculum for the training is comprised of prior, piloted
ADHD training course for teachers and additional evidence-based strategies for
improving educational success among diverse Computer Science students. The
digital badges (micro-credentials) are co-designed with students and faculty to
design a system of delivering curriculum to instructors and displaying
instructor training to students. As instructors complete courses, badges display
instructor preparation and willingness to learn about student needs directly to
students. This allows students to identify instructors who will be safe to talk
to about their needs and trained to support them, whether choosing mentors or
making class selections. Micro-credentials are evaluated at multiple stages of
the co-design and implementation process to iterate on the design. The micro-
credentials and curriculum will be published on the Open Education Lab’s website
at the completion of the project to allow other schools to access and update the
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.