* 2137519
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Co-Designing for Trust: Reimagining Online Information Literacies with Underserved Communities
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Katie Davis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 04/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Problematic information—inaccurate or misleading information—has emerged as a
growing threat to American democracy since it undermines citizen trust in public
information and institutions. It often does so by exploiting personal beliefs,
emotions, and identity, thereby triggering responses that expand social divides
and encourage individuals to actively resist competing claims. Solutions
therefore require more than just providing the public with skills and tools for
determining the truthfulness of claims; they also require resources for
addressing the social and emotional impacts of problematic information. Creation
of these educational resources requires a fundamental reimagining of digital
literacy, so that it is better grounded in the everyday realities of the
communities most impacted by problematic information. The project will address
this need by establishing deep partnerships among academic institutions,
community organizations, news and fact checking networks, industry, public
libraries and museums, K12 schools, and national non-profits to create new
educational resources that address problematic information as a critical threat
to communication. The work will advance knowledge about how trust in
communication systems is shaped by local social, cultural, and emotional
contexts. This knowledge will inform the development of educational resources
and platforms to empower librarians, journalists, educators, and community
organizers to deliver holistic and locally-contextualized responses to
problematic information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop these
educational tools by leveraging participatory design (PD) to support convergence
thinking amongst a broad range of stakeholders. At its core, this project posits
that digital literacy interventions could be strengthened by better leveraging
sociocultural and emotional strengths that exist within communities alongside
the cultivation of critical reasoning skills. This requires not only
interdisciplinary expertise from across the social sciences, computer and
information science, journalism, and education, but also the integration of
diverse sociocultural perspectives from community practitioners. The project
team includes partners that represent perspectives often overlooked within
existing research on problematic information. This includes organizations that
perform formal and informal educational work with urban and rural populations,
that support digital equity within Black, Indigenous, and People of Color
(BIPOC) communities, that engage all age ranges, and that incorporate
journalists and technology leaders. These academic and practitioner partners
will carry out a series of seven community workshops that will build community
ownership in the project, identify design requirements, and identify potential
usability concerns for project outputs. These insights will then be used in a
series of PD sessions to design and evaluate an educational toolkit prototype
for addressing problematic information in BIPOC communities. The project plans
to expand, customize, and co-develop this prototype and design process with
other underserved communities in Phase II, including under-resourced
journalists, rural public librarians, and K12 educators. Ultimately, the project
will produce a scalable platform and PD model that diverse organizations can use
to produce locally tailored digital literacy toolkits of their own. This ensures
that the platform will continue to be scaled out to new users, to ensure long-
term impact on trust in national communication
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.