* 2137749
* ERI: Exploiting Dynamic Origami for Reconfigurable and Versatile Control of Acoustic Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Chen Shen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables
increased flexibility in the control of sound propagating through civil
infrastructure, mechanical machinery, and aerospace systems, including for
applications in acoustic imaging, defect detection, and noise control, thereby
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity and
welfare. Acoustic metasurfaces are two-dimensional thin artificial materials
that are empowered with extraordinary control over the scattering of sound
waves. Until recently, such metasurfaces had fixed configurations that were
difficult to tune in real time, thereby limiting their potential use and
performance. A recent focus on tunable, reconfigurable, and programmable
acoustic metasurfaces promises efficient and smart control of sound waves, but
existing solutions suffer from sophisticated tuning mechanisms, use of active
elements, and poor efficiency. This project will overcome these limitations by
demonstrating new and simple mechanisms for reconfigurable acoustic wave control
using flexible structures designed by origami principles, whose folded geometry
may be modulated in real time. Although origami principles have been widely used
in robotics, soft materials, and flexible electronics, the relationship between
dynamic origami and acoustic wave control has been largely unexplored. The
knowledge and tools generated by this research will enable the next generation
of reconfigurable wave-based devices that are adaptive to changing environments
and performance objectives. Activities aiming to engage new generations of
students in STEM education and research include outreach programs to K-12
students and extensive planned participation of undergraduate students in team-
based technical research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
make fundamental contributions to a practical understanding of how the shape,
periodicity, and size of origami structures change dynamically as they undergo
deformation and the concomitant impact on acoustic wave propagation. It will
achieve this outcome by building a theoretical and computational framework for
characterizing and predicting acoustic wave interactions with dynamic origami
structures, by developing design strategies that enable application-specific
synthesis of dynamic origami structures with target functionalities, and by
investigating different tuning mechanisms. Experimental validation and testing
will be performed on prototype reconfigurable acoustic metasurfaces that
leverage principles of origami highlighted by the theoretical analysis. Such
experimental realization will be used to demonstrate wave steering and wave
focusing functionalities typical of sensing, communication, imaging, and energy
harvesting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.