* 2137622
* LEAPS-MPS: Advancing Approximation of Heterogeneous Multi-Objective Set Covering Problems with Modeling and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lakmali Weerasena, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,860.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The goal of this project is to approximate large-scale
optimization solutions associated with decision-making in conservation planning
and emergency medical service management, through theoretically-sound and
efficient models and algorithms. The broad applicability of the project is in
advancing optimization tools to integrate voluminous spatial data to effectively
allocate resources and analyze information such as species distribution,
population parameters, the spatial configuration of reserves, land costs, and
environmental dynamics. In establishing a strategy it is necessary to estimate
the quality of the approximation beforehand to efficiently use the available
resources and successfully address future adverse conditions. To better
understand the limits of approximating the solution of an optimization question,
a significant component of the developed algorithms is the predetermined quality
measure, where the optimal solution set is always guaranteed to be within a
predetermined error. The project integrates educational and outreach activities
with the goal of broadening participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on multiobjective
optimization (MO), and specifically on generalized set covering questions
(MOSCPs) and approximation algorithms with predetermined quality measures, to
enable the solutions of decision-making optimization in conservation planning
and emergency medical service management. Among MO techniques, the generalized
MOSCP emerges as a computationally intensive challenging method whose theory and
methodology remain underdeveloped, the technical theme of this project is the
theoretical and computations investigation of its structural properties using
mathematical programming. MO questions typically do not have optimal solutions
in the totally ordered sense of single objective optimization; instead, they
have optimal solutions in a partially ordered sense appropriate in the presence
of multiple conflicting objectives, and the success of their application depends
on the ability to compute the elements of the solution set, the so-called Pareto
set. A large portion of this project is devoted to investigating computationally
efficient alternative methods to approximate the Pareto set in mixed integer
multiobjective optimization questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.