* 2137740
* QuIC ‐ TAQS: A Photon‐Phonon Quantum Interconnect via Brillouin‐Based Optomechanics in Quartz and Superfluid
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Daniel Blumenthal, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,941,518.00

Quantum particles of light (photons) are used to transmit quantum information
over long distances within an optical quantum network. However, increased
versatility and performance of these networks also requires the ability to store
and retrieve quantum information in local devices. Quantized particles of sound
(phonons) are promising candidates for the storage of quantum information but
achieving efficient photon-phonon conversion and long storage times remains
challenging. This program addresses these challenges by creating new chip-based
technologies that combine the world’s best photonic cavities with new phononic
resonators fashioned from ultra-high purity crystals and quantum fluids. Using
resonantly enhanced material couplings to access long-lived phonons within
crystalline and superfluid resonators, a new approach for an efficient and
scalable quantum interconnect becomes possible. Using a hybrid integration
strategy that builds on wafer-scale photonic integrated circuit technologies,
this work paves the way for scalable quantum memories, quantum sensors, and
quantum repeaters. The educational and outreach activities of this project also
provide special research opportunities for community college transfer students,
undergraduate research, and international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photons are used to transmit quantum
information over long distances within quantum networks. However, increased
versatility and performance of these networks also requires the ability to store
and retrieve quantum information from long-lived local quantum excitations.
Phonons are promising candidates for such local excitations but achieving an
efficient photon-phonon interconnect is challenging. This research program meets
this challenge by combining the world’s best on-chip optical cavities with new
phononic resonators fashioned from ultra-high purity crystalline quartz and
superfluid helium. Efficient access to the long-lived phonon modes within these
media is created by tailoring the device geometry to create strong Brillouin
coupling. Through Brillouin processes, an incident photon scatters to a phonon
and a red-shifted photon; these scattered particles form a quantum-entangled
pair. By combining and detecting scattered photons produced by two such systems,
phonons stored in cavities at remote locations become entangled. Combining rapid
photon-phonon conversion and long coherence times, many quantum operations can
be performed within the phonon lifetime making more complex operations possible.
Employing a hybrid integration approach that leverages the benefits of wafer-
scale photonic integrated circuit technologies, these new quantum devices pave
the way for scalable quantum memories, quantum sensors, and quantum
repeaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.