* 2137842
* BPC-DP: Developing Shared Measures Among the BPC Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Burcin Tamer, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The computing community’s efforts to broaden participation in computing (BPC)
take many different forms but ultimately, these efforts are all working toward
the common goals of increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion in the field of
computing. Measuring the progress of these efforts is critical in improving
these activities and assessing their impact. However, such measurement is
difficult given the variance of these activities. Recognizing the challenges of
measuring progress across organizations that engage in a wide variety of
activities, this BPC Demonstration Project will produce common definitions and a
framework to enable comparable measurement across the BPC community of practice
(including BPC Alliances and demonstration projects). These shared frameworks
and definitions will facilitate learning across the BPC community about model
practices for BPC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of shared measures is of
great interest to all stakeholders, including the BPC Alliances and
demonstration projects. This project will closely collaborate with the existing
BPC Alliances to represent the efforts of the BPC community while also
maintaining open communication with demonstration projects, new BPC Alliances,
and others actively working in broadening participation. By providing shared
measures for understanding the impact of BPC Alliances and other BPC
interventions (e.g., demonstration projects), this project will benefit efforts
to increase all underrepresented groups these efforts are intending to support.
These include groups identified as underrepresented in computing by NSF (i.e.,
women, persons with disabilities, Blacks and African Americans, Hispanics,
American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders) as
well as others who are disadvantaged based on other identities (e.g., sexual
orientation) and factors such as socio-economic background. This project will
result in a number of tools and resources to help sustain these efforts long-
term. The outcomes of this project will add to our knowledge of collective
impact measurement in a way that reflects the cumulative experiences of
organizations who have been engaged in BPC for more than a decade. This project
will enable knowledge exchange and assist in capacity building across BPC
Alliances by strengthening the connections and collaboration among the Alliances
and, therefore, expanding their potential for impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.