* 2137067
* Workshop Series on Thermal Issues in Climate Change
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Laura Schaefer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 25,310.00

Climate change is one of the most important issues of our time. The consequences
of a changing climate have implications on local and global economies and human
health and can exacerbate existing inequalities. Researchers in the thermal
community have contributed significantly to providing engineering solutions to
climate change, including improved heat transfer mechanisms for higher
efficiencies, the food-energy-water nexus, and advanced material and flow
behavior for renewable energy. This award is to support a series of virtual
mini-workshops on thermal issues in climate change that bring together
researchers from the thermal community to nucleate and promote interdisciplinary
collaborations and to collectively tackle this grand challenge. The outcome of
the mini-workshops includes a roadmap for how the thermal community can work to
address climate change and its societal impacts, with both short- and long-term
items for implementation. The series will strengthen a community of researchers
that collaborate across institutions and fields, and will provide professional
development opportunities, particularly for junior colleagues, with a focus on
including members of historically under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this virtual series on thermal issues
in climate change is to facilitate collaboration through biweekly discussion
sessions that bring together multidisciplinary researchers to find
intersectional areas for advancement. Each session will revolve a topic central
to the impact or prevention of climate change, and feature four to six speed
talks of no more than three minutes apiece, followed by a brief general
discussion and breakout rooms to delve more deeply into both potential
collaborations and specific topics of interest that might evolve into future
funding opportunities. For each session, there are fundamental questions
underpinning the ability of the research community to address these focus areas.
For example, thermal-electrical energy storage is a crucial technology in
decarbonizing the current grid, as well as addressing space conditioning needs,
but the underlying thermophysical phase change mechanisms of the advanced
materials that can accelerate its adoption are still not well understood,
including the conjugate modes of heat transfer in an active bed and the dynamic
controls needed for precise operation. Beyond the advancements in discrete
topics in science and engineering, the discussion series will also aid in
communication between researchers at different institutions and fields, which
will contribute to the thorough identification of key research and development
needs for addressing climate change. The published outcomes of the discussion
series will further this goal beyond the bounds of the series itself as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.