* 2137301
* EAGER: Parallelized Measurements of Kapitza Resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Troy Munro, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2023
* USD 149,977.00

Grain boundaries are common in most metals and ceramics, and the orientation of
the grain boundary can impact the ability of the material to conduct heat.
Having a material with good heat conduction is useful in energy applications
like ceramic fuels in nuclear reactors, thermoelectric generators, solid oxide
fuel cells producing electricity from hydrogen, and polycrystalline diamond for
high power electronics. Measuring the thermal resistance at grain boundaries has
been limited to slow, point-by-point measurements, resulting in not enough data
to fully understand how the orientation of the grain boundary affects heat
conduction. This project aims to develop a rapid, parallelized thermal
resistance measurement device based on existing point-by-point technologies but
applying it at 100 sites simultaneously. This would increase the rate at which
these measurements are done by 100x, shortening the time needed for measurements
from several months to a couple of days. The proposed research can potentially
transform the field of thermal measurements by enabling high-throughput
approaches. In addition to the technical aspects, this project will engage
graduate and undergraduate students with a special effort to recruit students
from the university’s Women in Engineering group and provide demonstrations and
lesson plans for local 4th grade classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If high-
fidelity structure-property models for grain boundaries could be determined from
a large data set, the thermal transport performance of nuclear fuels and other
high value materials could be designed for enhanced energy production,
reliability, and safety. The intellectual merit of this research is the
potentially transformative nature of parallelized, microscopic thermal
measurements. Before this can be realized, the limitations of a parallelized
implementation of thermoreflectance techniques need to be determined, as well as
how well the properties of interest can be distinguished, such as individual
grain thermal conductivity, grain boundary thermal resistance, and the role of
defects within grains and near the grain boundaries on thermal transport.To
resolve these issues and achieve the needed paradigm shift to a new class of
high-throughput thermal characterization techniques, this EAGER project will
focus on: (i) Developing a high-throughput thermal characterization device based
on parallelization of a spatial domain, thermoreflectance method. (ii)
Determining the measurement range and resolution of thermal contact resistances
that can be detected with the proposed parallelized characterization
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.