* 2137340
* Collaborative Research: Interactive physiological controls of trait expression, nutrient allocation, and the elemental stoichiometry of Synechococcus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Simon Levin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,992.00

The phytoplankton elemental composition is a fundamental property of ocean
science as variation in elemental ratios (C:N:P) have widespread implications
for marine biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and atmospheric CO2 levels.
There are several competing hypotheses for mechanisms controlling phytoplankton
elemental ratios including shifting biodiversity vs. cellular physiological
responses to various environmental changes. Due to strong regional co-variance
of all the possible drivers, each hypothesis predicts current ocean field
observations equally well. To test each hypothesis, the project will employ
continuous culture experiments of common phytoplankton strains combined with
detailed biochemical analyses. All the data will be integrated into novel
genome-based metabolic models. An outreach program aims at describing the
importance of marine phytoplankton and ocean ecosystem functions to student
groups visiting a local state park. Together, the proposed project will lead to
an empirical and mechanistic understanding of how biological processes integrate
to control plankton resource allocations in marine ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The C:N:P of phytoplankton is a fundamental property of
ocean science and variation in these ratios have widespread implications for
marine biodiversity, biogeochemical functioning and atmospheric CO2 levels.
Competing hypotheses for mechanisms controlling marine phytoplankton C:N:P are
shifting phytoplankton biodiversity vs. the physiological impacts of either
nutrient limitation or temperature. Due to strong regional co-variance, each
hypothesis predicts current ocean field observations equally well. The project
will use strains representing ecotypes from major ocean biomes within the
globally abundant Synechococcus ‘collective’. First, the elemental quotas and
stoichiometric ratios will be quantified across a gradient of nutrient supply
ratios (and limitations), temperature, and growth rates using chemostats.
Second, the macromolecular cellular composition is quantified to directly link
the observed elemental differences with changes in biochemical composition.
Third, genome-wide protein analyses will be applied to identify how changes in
growth conditions and elemental and biochemical composition are linked to the
expression of specific cellular subsystems and associated functional traits.
Fourth, experimental data will be integrated into a trait-based phytoplankton
model to quantify the relative role of acclimation vs. adaptation. Together, the
proposed project will lead to an empirical and mechanistic understanding of how
processes at different levels of biological organization integrate to control
C:N:P among marine phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.