* 2137984
* QuIC-TAQS: A high-dimensional multi-access scalable testbed for the interconnected quantum network
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,942,269.00

Recent efforts have demonstrated remarkable interconnects between solid-state
qubits, atomic qubits, quantum sensing platforms, and solid-state ensembles.
This not only provides for the next-generation of scalable compact quantum
microprocessors, but also lays the foundation towards a transformative
interconnected quantum network for quantum state transfer, sensing, computation,
and communications. Advancing from the recent quantum intra-chip interconnects
and processors demonstrated by the community, this team leads and advances the
interdisciplinary frontier for quantum communications and interconnects – that
of distributed entanglement and interconnected quantum networks. This is enabled
by the team’s experimental contributions in high-dimensional time-frequency
qubits for quantum communications, spin-photon readout of rare-earth ion-based
quantum memories towards repeaters in network links, unique error correction
algorithms and coding, and fundamental theoretical bounds and numerical
computations. The interdisciplinary effort spans across Applied Physics,
Chemistry, Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, Materials Science,
Mathematics, and Physics. Working together with our industry and national
laboratory colleagues, this team effort allows the examination of interconnected
quantum network performance parameters, even in the presence of non-idealities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This QuIC-TAQS team studies three synergistic Thrusts to
establish the cross-foundations towards a chip-scalable Interconnected Quantum
Network. In Thrust I, the QuIC-TAQS team examines high-dimensional high-rate
quantum photonic transmitters with integrated chip measurements. This includes a
8192-Hilbert space dimensionality in a high-rate link encoding, along with Bell
state measurements and low-jitter detection. In Thrust II, the QuIC-TAQS team
examines high-fidelity high-efficiency chip-scale quantum memories, in joint
measurements between UCLA and Caltech. This is based on solid-state erbium-ions
with dynamical control towards network repeaters. Unique protocols and coherence
time improvements will be studied. In Thrust III, the QuIC-TAQS team examines
robust quantum links, including coding and architecture, to establish a quantum
network testbed at UCLA. Supporting the measurements, protocol improvements and
numerical simulations of the network performance will be examined. The examined
QuIC-TAQS Thrusts spans across integrated quantum photonic platforms, modular
quantum sources and memory units, towards a secure interconnected quantum
network. The scientific Thrusts of this QuIC-TAQS team is complemented with
training of a diverse workforce, with priority emphasis on underrepresented
graduate and undergraduate students. This involves recruitment from minority
undergraduate and community college research site programs, focused mentorship
efforts at UCLA-Colorado-Caltech in quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.