* 2137275
* IUCRC Phase II University of Alabama: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EVSTS)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Hwan-Sik Yoon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2027
* USD 200,000.00

The University of Alabama (UA) is part of a multi-institution Industry
University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Efficient Vehicles and
Sustainable Transportation Systems (EVSTS) that supports the U.S. automotive
industry’s effort to meet demanding federal regulations governing vehicle fuel
economy and emissions, and society’s expectations for improved sustainability.
Achieving environmental sustainability is a generational problem that represents
perhaps the most critical technological challenge of our time. Electricity
generation (31%) and transportation (27%) are the largest contributors to U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions. Wheeled ground vehicles, in turn, generate most of the
transportation emissions and have an increasing impact on emissions from
electricity generation. Solutions must address vehicle sustainability without
unduly disrupting an industry that is central to the nation’s economic health
and its citizens’ lifestyles. The EVSTS Center engages the automotive industry’s
critical stakeholders - vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers,
fleet operators, ground transportation infrastructure providers, and state /
local governments - in yielding transformational improvements in the energy
efficiency and environmental sustainability of ground vehicles. Scope of the
work encompasses passenger cars, trucks, and motorized non-road equipment, as
well as vehicle-level technologies and transportation system infrastructure,
reflecting the complexity and global nature of the automotive and ground
transportation industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EVSTS center leverages
collaborations among corporate, government, and academic partners to conduct and
disseminate industry-relevant research on technologies and tools that facilitate
the design, manufacture, deployment, and operation of energy efficient,
environmentally sustainable ground vehicles. Research is conducted in five
technical focus areas: 1) electrified vehicle powertrains, 2) conventional
powertrains and alternative fuels, 3) non-powertrain vehicle systems
optimization, 4) efficient / sustainable autonomous vehicles, and 5)
transportation systems and infrastructure. Specifically, the UA site focuses on
realizing sustainable electrified vehicles through the following site-specific
research areas - magnetic materials for electric motors and generators, ferrite
spoke-type motors for electric trucks, high-performance electric motor controls,
and machine learning-based vehicle component
prognostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.