* 2137437
* LEAPS-MPS: Interrogating Negative Thermal Expansion in Earth-Abundant Oxide Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Joya Cooley, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 239,204.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Thermal expansion, the way materials change shape when you
heat or cool them, is an important property to be able to understand and
control. Many objects that people rely on every day (i.e. building materials,
aerospace parts, etc.) can wear out or fail more easily if their thermal
expansion is not matched well, thus creating more waste and higher costs in the
world. While many materials expand as you heat them, some materials shrink as
you heat them and are important to study. Therefore, it is important to
understand how to control these properties so that new types of materials can be
engineered. With this LEAPS-MPS project, Professor Joya Cooley at California
State University, Fullerton, will focus on understanding why certain classes of
materials which consist of earth-abundant elements shrink instead of expanding
upon heating. The research is conducted at a primarily undergraduate institution
where undergraduate students will be trained in a variety of synthetic and
characterization techniques. Specifically, students from historically
underserved backgrounds will be recruited to work on this project and will
disseminate findings to the public through local outreach, allowing
participating students to serve as role models for future scientists from
historically underserved backgrounds. Furthermore, this local outreach will work
to increase the amount of citizen science, public scientific literacy, and
overall public interest in materials
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This
LEAPS-MPS award is aimed at understanding structural and chemical driving forces
that lead to technologically relevant negative thermal expansion (NTE) in
materials. This work will interrogate local and long-range structure in
materials crystallizing as metal pyrophosphates and pyrovanadates (A2B2O7) using
inexpensive and readily accessible elements (e.g., A = Mg, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu; B =
P, V). The goal is to achieve the following: (1) investigate the role of A and B
site elements and their influence on parent crystal structure; (2) understand
the role of A and B site elements and their role in tuning temperature and range
of NTE. The ability to vary metal (A) and nonmetal (B) identities in
pyrophosphate (A2P2O7) and pyrovanadate (A2V2O7) materials by creating solid
solutions provides a wealth of exploration possibilities for uncovering the
structural drivers for NTE. By creating solid solutions between end members with
properties at the extremes, this work will seek to elucidate the structural and
chemical variables important to O motion that results in systematic control of
NTE. This project will make use of (a) high resolution structural techniques,
such as synchrotron diffraction; (a) techniques sensitive to light elements like
O, such as neutron diffraction; (c) and techniques that provide a local
understanding of atom motion, such as temperature dependent microscopy.
Undergraduate students will be trained in solid-state chemistry techniques,
including the opportunities to work with national laboratories for remote or
hands-on experiments. Historically underserved students will be recruited to be
part of this project and will engage in local outreach to increase public
scientific interest and literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.