* 2137891
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Linking the Green Economy to the Blue Economy at the Coast
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Maya Burke, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The US Exclusive Economic Zone is a formal jurisdiction that extends the US
territory 200 nautical miles from the coast into the ocean. It includes coastal
and offshore areas covering nearly 4.4 million square miles in the Atlantic and
Pacific oceans. This is about 15% larger than the US land mass and is the second
largest Exclusive Economic Zone in the world. This zone supports major
industries, like shipping, tourism, seafood, pharmaceuticals, oil, wind and
other renewable energy, and national priority areas such as academic research
and defense. Coastal areas are at the core of local recreation and many cultural
activities. These activities translate into local jobs, with nearly 50% of the
US population living in coastal watershed counties, but also farther away from
any specific coastal region. Many coastal communities, both in the US and
internationally, are at the forefront of impacts of climate change and upstream
activities associated with land-based agriculture practices, other industries,
and urbanization. Those upstream Green Economy activities have impacted water
quantity and quality downstream, diminishing the ability of many coastal
communities to develop the full and sustainable potential of their ocean-based
Blue Economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team will work with a diverse
cross-section of coastal communities to co-develop solutions to these challenges
and to improve their health and economy. Particular focus will be on the
linkages between Blue-Green ‘frontline’ communities, which often are
disadvantaged for a number of historical reasons, and face substantial
challenges from climate change and human activities within each watershed. The
“NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Linking the Green Economy to the Blue
Economy at the Coast” project will examine links and opportunities to strengthen
both the Blue economy of coastal frontline communities and Green economy
activities of upstream communities, and develop a framework and platform for
exchanging information to ultimately improve lives. This project will improve
success in understanding and protecting coastal ecosystems, part of the US
decadal vision to promote American security and prosperity. It will also create
an ocean-literate workforce through public engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
“NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Linking the Green Economy to the Blue
Economy at the Coast” project will combine expertise from social scientists,
natural sciences including ecologists, and engineers and technologists to work
with coastal frontline communities that are affected by Green economy activities
in three watersheds of different geographic scales. The objectives are to: 1)
Co-create inclusive mechanisms for dialogue and planning between coastal and
upstream communities to better facilitate Blue and Green Economy opportunities,
and identify new partners for developing our Blue-Green Accelerator platform; 2)
Characterize linkages and dynamics between coastal and upstream communities and
identify Blue and Green Economy tradeoffs, including other related tradeoffs
such as water quality, health, or transportation connectivity; 3) Select a small
number of information sets for prototype platform development, and identify
linkages between, and scales of, natural and social processes relevant for
frontline communities, 4) Deliver relevant scientific information co-developed
with and for communities in an understandable, inclusive, and actionable form
and assess its usage with frontline communities. The project objectives will be
achieved through three case studies: a) Tampa Bay watershed water quality
improvement which is a recognized success story; b) Salt River estuary in the
U.S. Virgin Islands, a smaller estuary that is under intense pressure due to
land development upstream; and c) a national-scale study with coastal
communities in the northern Gulf of Mexico that requires action in the
Mississippi River watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
National Academy of Engineering’s grand challenges of managing the nitrogen
cycle, sequestering carbon, and restoring and improving urban infrastructure, as
well as the five grand challenges for environmental engineering, especially that
of fostering informed decisions and actions. The 13 member research team (6
women and 3 underrepresented minorities) represents two large academic
institutions from the south and midwest with interdisciplinary food-energy-water
systems National Research Traineeship programs (University of South Florida and
the University of Iowa), one National Estuary Program (Tampa Bay Estuary
Program), one local government entity (US Virgin Islands Department of Planning
and Natural Resources), and one non-governmental organization committed to
broadening participation in Marine Sciences (Black in Marine Science). The
disciplinary expertise of the project includes researchers and practitioners
from Anthropology, Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering, Electrical
Engineering, and Marine Science, with personnel who cover policy, community
engaged research, ethnographic research, fisheries, systems dynamics,
interdisciplinary education, big data, remote sensing, in situ monitoring, and
public education and outreach. The principles of diversity, equity, and
inclusion will guide all project activities. Three main workshops with diverse
stakeholders and site visits for the targeted watersheds will result in valuable
outputs (reports, multimedia, systems dynamics models, papers) that will be
disseminated via conference and community presentations, and through
dissemination pathways of the various partners. Recruitment of workshop
participants will be done to ensure diverse perspectives from across the US,
including those of early career scientists, and frontline community
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.