* 2137396
* RI: Small: Learning to Retrieve Structured Information for Summarization and Translation  of Unstructured Text
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Meng Jiang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2025
* USD 515,982.00

Computers are becoming ever more adept at generating natural language, in
settings that range from totally unconstrained (tell a random story) to highly
constrained (translate a text from one language to another). In more constrained
generation tasks, like translation and summarization, the status quo is for
computers to be trained primarily, if not exclusively, on example input-output
pairs, which can lead to natural-sounding but incorrect outputs. For example, a
news summarizer could easily, but erroneously, replace the name of a victim in a
terror attack with the name of his or her spouse. By contrast, when humans learn
to translate and summarize, example input-output pairs make up only a small
fraction of our "training data"; we also draw on a vast amount of background
knowledge that we've either learned or can look up in sources. This project is
building automatic translation and summarization systems that use knowledge
sources to improve faithfulness and factual correctness, increasing the
usability of such systems, which are already widely used for information
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to many previous approaches that try to
shoehorn knowledge into the data (e.g., by inserting dictionary definitions into
the training data as ersatz parallel sentences) or into the model (e.g., by
trying to improve word embeddings), this project's approach is to make knowledge
available to the generation system directly. It focuses on adding table data to
summarization and dictionary data (which can be thought of as a kind of table)
to translation, and on adding knowledge graphs to both summarization and
translation. The approach has three stages, which mirror similar setups in many
question-answering and dialogue systems. First, the project is developing novel
methods for learning how to retrieve useful information from these sources.
Second, retrieved knowledge is made available to the generation system by
directly integrating it into the system's input using a graph-structured
representation. Finally, novel extensions of graph-to-text transformers generate
text from these augmented inputs. The project is also investigating systems that
generate translated text augmented with information from their knowledge
sources, which may improve information access by helping to bridge national and
cultural barriers in ways that conventional MT has not been able
to.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.