* 2137285
* IUCRC Planning Grant: Tulane: Center for Applied Artificial Intelligence (CAAI)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Aron Culotta, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2023
* USD 19,999.00

Rapid innovation in artificial intelligence (AI) -- in areas such as machine
learning, natural language processing, vision, and autonomous decision making --
has led to growing adoption of this new technology across industries. However,
the speed with which AI is evolving presents fundamental challenges in
transferring new technology to industry in an effective, safe, and beneficial
way. This planning grant establishes partnerships among academia, industry, and
government to accelerate innovation, technology transfer, and student training
in AI and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this planning phase,
Tulane University will conduct a two-day workshop to engage potential partners
from healthcare, energy, and software services industries. Several pilot
projects will be assessed for feasibility, including: (i) privacy-preserving
analysis of medical records, (ii) AI in resource-constrained settings, (iii)
ethical constraints in AI-decision making, (iv) language processing in medical
and legal domains, and (v) time-series prediction from multi-modal
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This synergistic industry-funded research program
will conduct multidisciplinary research, education, and training program for
career growth and development. Resulting technologies and training programs will
support economic development and improve workforce readiness. Diversity and K-12
outreach programs will be developed to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tulane University will
maintain a project repository and website to disseminate publications, key
findings, and software, consistent with data sharing
agreements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.