* 2137952
* LEAPS-MPS: Dispersive Coupling of Light to Surface Plasmons for Biosensing
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Aftab Ahmed, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2023
* USD 239,327.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of electromagnetic fields
and radiation and the study of their interactions with matter has resulted in
significant scientific and technological advances. These interactions at smaller
length scale led to new physical effects enabling novel applications such as
artificial atoms, metamaterials, negative refraction, and plasmonics. Innovative
control and manipulation of these interactions at nanometer length scale holds
promise to transform various fields including biomedical sensing, imaging,
energy, communications, and computing. In the field of biomedical sensing,
surface plasmon resonance-based biosensors represent the state-of-the-art
platforms in terms of sensitivity and limit of detection. This award will
investigate a novel method for coupling radiations to surface plasmons with the
goal to develop next generation biomedical sensors based on plasmonic effects.
The work addresses a current technological barrier in sensing and results of
this work will enable advancement of the biomedical diagnostic technology. In
addition, this project will open new science directions and lead to alternative
strategies in designing novel photonic devices and structures for spectroscopy
and optical communications. Further, the work will provide research and training
opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this award is to re-envision the working principal of surface
plasmon resonance-based biosensors by introducing a new coupling mechanism that
can lead to unprecedented increase in sensitivity. Early detection is the key to
successful treatment, which requires detection of small molecular weight
analytes in low concentrations such as short sequence biomolecules, cancer
biomarkers, antibodies, etc. Significant increase in sensitivity is required to
allow for label-free detection of these biomolecules. This study aims to develop
analytical relations describing the characteristics of surface plasmon waves
excited via the proposed excitation method. It will explore design parameters,
suggest guidelines for ultrasensitive biomedical sensors and develop a sensor
platform. Results of this work are envisioned to revolutionize the fields of
biosensing, nano-photonics and spectroscopy. The proposed idea of coupling
represents a fundamentally new concept and a paradigm shift in the field and
will have implications in several areas exploiting the unique capabilities of
plasmonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.