* 2137148
* IUCRC Planning Proposal  Grant University of Miami: Center for Standards and Ethics in Artificial Intelligence CSEAI
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Goodman, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The last twenty years have seen an unprecedented growth of AI-enabled
technologies in practically every industry. More recently, an emphasis has been
placed on ensuring industry and government agencies that use or produce AI-
enabled technology have a social responsibility to protect consumers and
increase trustworthiness in products and services. As a result, regulatory
groups are producing standards for artificial intelligence (AI) ethics
worldwide. The Center for Standards and Ethics in Artificial Intelligence
(CSEAI) aims to provide industry and government the necessary resources for
adopting and efficiently implementing standards and ethical practices in AI
through research, outreach, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEAIâ€™s mission
is to work closely with industry and government research partners to study AI
protocols, procedures, and technologies that enable the design, implementation,
and adoption of safe, effective, and ethical AI standards. The varied AI
skillsets of CSEAI faculty enable the center to address various fundamental
research challenges associated with the responsible, equitable, traceable,
reliable, and governable development of AI-fueled technologies. The center site
at the University of Miami will focus, among others, on examining the presence
of bias in statistical developments and the influence of programmers in
algorithms, with its corresponding proposal to ensure debiasing and
reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSEAI will help industry and
government organizations that use or produce AI technology to provide
standardized, ethical products safe for consumers and users, helping the public
regain trust and confidence in AI technology. The center will recruit, train,
and mentor undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs from diverse
backgrounds, motivating them to pursue careers in AI ethics and producing a
diverse workforce trained in standardized and ethical AI. The center will
release specific ethics assessment tools, and AI best practices will be licensed
or made available to various stakeholders through publications, conference
presentations, and the CSEAI summer school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both a publicly
accessible repository and a secured members-only repository (comprising meeting
materials, workshop information, research topics and details, publications,
etc.) will be maintained either on-site at Baylor University and/or on a
government/DoD-approved cloud service. A single public and secured repository
will be used for CSEAI, where permissible, to facilitate continuity of efforts
and information between the different sites. This repository will be accessible
at a publicly listed URL at Baylor University, https://cseai.center, for the
lifetime of the center and moved to an archiving service once no longer
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.