* 2137983
* LEAPS-MPS: Statistical Learning on Next Generation Sequencing of T/B Cell Receptor Repertoire Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Tao He, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 245,681.00

Two crucial components of the adaptive immune system are the so-called T cells
and B cells, whose function is identifying and responding to “body invaders”,
such as for example coronavirus or cancer cells. Following each of the identify-
and-respond processes, B cells and T cells leave a lifetime lasting legacy on
cell surfaces known as B/T cell receptors, or BCRs/TCRs, which the body uses to
respond quickly and strongly once the pathogen is detected again. BCR/TCR
repertoire, which are continually shaped throughout the lifetime of an
individual in response to diseases and infections, can also serve as a
fingerprint of one’s current immunological profile. Recently, new technologies
have enabled the profiling of BCR/TCR repertoire from a single sample of blood
or tissue. However, due to the complex nature of the repertoire data, there is a
need for novel statistical machine learning approaches and computational tools
for immune repertoire data analysis. This project will produce statistical
analysis methods, which will not only help us understand how the immune system
is responding to disease or infection, but also help us advance precision
medicine and immunotherapy, where treatments are developed and tailored to an
individual for greater efficacy. This research has been designed to engage
undergraduate and graduate students of mathematics and statistics, thus exposing
them to the excitement of scientific discovery and preparing them for success in
advanced degree programs and careers in academia and industry. By focusing on
recruiting and training students from underrepresented groups, the PI will
contribute to the diversification of the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T cells and B cells represent a crucial
component of the adaptive immune system and have been shown to mediate anti-
humoral immunity and mediate immune response to respiratory coronavirus. Next
generation sequencing of the T and B cell receptors (TCRs and BCRs) can be used
as a platform to profile the TCR/BCR repertoire. Due to the complex
characteristics of repertoire data (heterogeneous, high-dimensional, presents
three layers of information: gene usage, abundance, clone network), there are
very limited statistical models and inference tools existing in the literature.
The current analyses tools lack the ability to identify the repertoire
signatures that are associated with the outcome of interest or to integrate
multiple layers of information. The main goal of this project is to develop
advanced statistical methods and machine learning methods to 1) identify the
gene and gene families associated with the outcome using the gene usage layer of
repertoire; 2) prioritize the network properties associated with outcome using
the network layer of repertoire; 3) integrate the multiple layers of repertoire
to evaluate the joint effect of heterogenous repertoire profile on the outcome.
Particularly, a Bayesian hierarchical model will be developed to differential
gene usages, a permutation-assisted group lasso will be developed to prioritize
both local and global properties for network analysis, and various kernel
methods will be utilized to model the complex relationship between repertoire
features and outcome. Simulation studies and real data analysis on a public-
available covid database will be performed to demonstrate the
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.