* 2137743
* LEAPS-MPS: Elliptic theory for the Schrodinger operator
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Blair Davey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 119,626.00

The Laplace equation is the prototypical second-order elliptic partial
differential equation (PDE). Consequently, solutions to the Laplace equation,
known as harmonic functions, are a fundamental component of PDE theory. But
these functions are also important to many other areas of science and
engineering, like complex analysis, harmonic analysis, geometry, physics, and
engineering. As such, harmonic functions have been extensively studied and are
well understood. While the Laplace equation models steady-state phenomena in a
uniform environment, the world that we live in is not an isotropic vacuum. The
mathematical equations that govern many natural phenomena like electromagnetism,
astronomy, and fluid dynamics are often more complicated than Laplace’s
equation. For example, the Schrodinger equation describes the behavior of
quantum-mechanical waves, while its generalizations describe even more complex
settings. Therefore, there is a need to understand the properties of solutions
to such general elliptic PDEs. This project combines mathematical pursuits in
harmonic analysis with the goal of promoting the inclusion and retention of a
diverse mathematical community. The latter objective will be achieved through an
orientation program for incoming graduate students along with extra-curricular
mentorship programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will explore
how and to what extent the presence of lower-order terms and variable
coefficients affects the behavior of solutions to elliptic equations. With the
Schrodinger equation serving as the standard example, these effects will be
examined through the three distinct perspectives of unique continuation,
homogenization, and solvability. Harmonic functions have the following unique
continuation properties: locally, they cannot vanish to infinite order; and if
defined globally, Liouville’s Theorem asserts that they cannot be bounded
everywhere. Motivated by Landis’ conjecture, one facet of this program seeks to
precisely quantify these kinds of local and global behaviors for solutions to
generalized Schrodinger equations. By going further and considering elliptic
equations with periodic coefficients, this program also explores the interplay
between homogenization theory and unique continuation. Carleman estimates and
complex analysis techniques will be combined with compactness arguments to
accomplish this feat. Work on the solvability of the Dirichlet and Neumann
boundary value problems for the Laplace equation led to a huge development in
the theory of PDEs and harmonic analysis. The PI’s previous work will be used to
explore the questions of solvability for general systems of elliptic PDEs with
lower order terms, and further knowledge will be gained while bringing together
ideas from distinct areas of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.