* 2137197
* I-Corps: Application of deep generative models for simulating biological systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial intelligence (AI) based platform for simulated
biological systems that can predict the true phenotypic outcome of any
perturbation prior to wet lab experimentation. The development of the proposed
technology addresses the need for a highly predictive, efficient, and cost-
effective platform that has potential applications in drug discovery, gene
therapy and personalized medicine in the biopharmaceutical industry.
Traditionally, the development of drugs, vaccines, and therapies is carried out
in biological wet lab settings from preclinical cell and animal models to
clinical phase human trials. This research is often expensive, requires years of
effort, and can struggle to achieve suitable efficacy. The proposed technology
may offer prediction of biochemical changes with high accuracy and maximum
efficacy and safety, thereby reducing the burden on payers and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project leverages artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) through deep generative models
(DGMs) to accelerate prediction of phenotypic outcomes in biological systems.
Deep neural networks combined with progress in stochastic optimization methods
have enabled scalable modeling of complex, high-dimensional data and has become
the often preferred artificial intelligence method in computer vision, speech
and natural language processing, graph mining, and reinforcement learning.
However, there are few examples of its application to biological systems. This
project combines the biological processes and DGMs to train the deep neural
network in characterizing the phenotype unique to each process. The trained DGMs
can then predict the best outcome for any perturbation to these processes in any
given environment. The proposed technology is reproducible and scalable, and
designed to provide high-content structural, phenotypic, and morphological
profiles of the effects of biological and pharmacological
substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.