* 2137997
* Nonlinear Surface Spectroscopic Investigations into the Molecular Mechanism Governing Cell Membrane Repair
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Carpenter, Carpenter, Andrew P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Andrew P. Carpenter is awarded a FY21 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research (NSF MPS-Ascend) Fellowship to conduct a program
of research and activities related to broadening participation by groups
underrepresented in Chemistry at Oregon State University. The project being
performed by Andrew Carpenter, entitled Nonlinear Surface Spectroscopic
Investigations into the Molecular Mechanism Governing Cell Membrane Repair, is
to be conducted under the guidance of mentoring scientist Joe Baio. This project
is supported by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Chemistry
Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by the Molecular
Biophysics Program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane-bound proteins
carry out many cellular functions, including repair of tears in the cellular
plasma membrane. This process is not well understood, and this project will
utilize vibrational sum-frequency generation (VSF) spectroscopy to investigate
the mechanism governing membrane repair by the specific protein dysferlin,
including determining the phospholipids that dysferlin binds at membrane
surfaces to initiate the membrane repair process, elucidating the membrane
packing conditions necessary for dysferlin binding, directly interrogating
dysferlin at vesicle surfaces using VSF scattering spectroscopy, and
establishing experimental and computational methodology needed to extract
structural information from VSF spectra of multi-domain proteins. Broadening
participation of Native Americans in science, technology, math and engineering
will be supported by partnering with efforts at Oregon State University that
focus on providing research opportunities and targeted STEM outreach events for
students and teachers from the local Chemawa Indian
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.