* 2137907
* BPC-DP: Distributed REsearch Apprenticeships for Master’s (DREAM)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Tracy Camp, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

People who identify as Female, Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, Native
American, Hawaiian, Alaskan, Asian Pacific Islander, and people with
disabilities have been traditionally marginalized in the computing and tech
fields. To reverse this trend and attract more students from these populations
to the field, the 13 universities in the MSCS Pathways to Computing Consortium
created “bridge to an MS in Computer Science” programs for students with non-CS
bachelor’s degrees. The primary goal of the Distributed REsearch Apprenticeships
for Master’s (DREAM) project is to increase the number of students pursuing a
Ph.D. in CS from the groups mentioned previously and, ultimately, increase the
diversity of the computing professoriate. DREAM is modeled after the Computing
Research Association’s Committee on Widening Participation’s (CRA-WP)
Distributed Research Experiences for Undergraduates (DREU) program, which has
been very successful at encouraging diverse undergraduate students to enroll in
CS graduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DREAM funds Consortium students from
diverse backgrounds to participate in a research experience during their M.S.
degree program. In this cohort model, students participate in a robust mentoring
program, various community building and networking opportunities, guided
research, professional development, and have opportunities to attend technical
conferences. At the end of their research experience, students will begin to see
themselves as researchers in computing and be inspired to pursue further
research through a Ph.D. The diverse demographics of the Consortium programs
provide a unique opportunity to recruit Ph.D. students from a previously
untapped population of students. Beyond the immediate impact on the cohort of
participating students, DREAM creates a pathway to a Ph.D. for students
traditionally marginalized away from the computing field that can be scaled
nationally. The project team is working in close collaboration with CRA-WP to
ensure a smooth handoff of the program at the conclusion of the pilot
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.