* 2137923
* LEAPS-MPS: Exploring Centrifugal Jet Spinning of Ultra-High-Temperature Ceramic Nanofibers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Rogelio Benitez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,927.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This
research project consists of a novel method to fabricate micro- and nano-sized
ceramic fibers that can withstand several thousand degrees Celsius without
melting. A metal salt and a polymer are dissolved to make a viscous solution
that is subsequently spun into fibers. The fibers are then heat treated to react
the metal with the carbon in the polymer and form the ultra-high-temperature
ceramic fiber. The effects of high temperatures and oxygen in the atmosphere on
the fibersâ€™ microstructure are also studied. This research makes it possible to
fabricate, in large quantities and at low temperature, ceramic nanofiber mats of
compounds not available in fiber form. These ultra-high temperature ceramic
fiber mats can contribute to thermal protection systems that allow aircraft,
missiles, and rockets to travel faster and for a longer period at hypersonic
speed. Two undergraduate students and two graduate students from a minority-
serving institution are obtaining laboratory experience in ceramic manufacturing
and testing. Another 8 to 16 undergraduate students are engaged in designing,
fabricating, and testing equipment for ceramic materials characterization.
Graduates typically find employment in the high-tech industry or further pursue
graduate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Several synthesis
methods exist for the fabrication of transition metal carbide nanocrystalline
nanoparticles, nanorods, nano-powders, and nanowires; however, it is still a
great challenge to fabricate long and continuous ultra-high-temperature
transition metal carbide nanofibers using scalable techniques for mass
production. In this project, novel transition-metal carbide nanofibers are
fabricated by the carbothermal reduction of polymer precursor nanofibers
manufactured by centrifugal jet spinning. Centrifugal jet spinning uses
centrifugal forces to produce fibers from solutions at speeds and costs similar
to melt-blown and glass fiber methods and is used in this project to leverage
the energy-efficient polymer precursor synthesis method with the added benefit
of being easily scalable for mass production. The oxidation behavior of the
fibers is also investigated. The knowledge obtained from this project can be
useful to fabricate other ceramic fibers in large quantities. In addition, this
research provides opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students of
underrepresented groups to obtain hands-on experience in materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.