* 2137659
* LEAPS-MPS: Isolated Points on Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Abbey Bourdon, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 189,448.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The study of systems of polynomial equations has been a
central theme in mathematics for thousands of years, and today related
techniques have found applications in fields ranging from cryptography and
computer science to mathematical biology. One approach to understanding the
solution set of such a system of equations—which dates back to the Greek
mathematician Diophantus—is to try to find only those solutions with coordinates
in the integers or rational numbers. In cases where our polynomial equations
define an algebraic curve, these rational solutions often sit inside a larger,
finite set called the set of isolated points of the curve. These can be thought
of as “unexpected” solutions to the system of equations, and the ultimate goal
of this proposal is to develop new tools for identifying when these solutions
occur. Several components of the investigation are suitable for graduate
students and other early-career researchers, and their involvement constitutes
one of the educational impacts of the proposed work. A second educational
endeavor is a research training program involving both incoming Master’s degree
students and early undergraduates. At all levels, this program will actively
recruit students belonging to groups traditionally underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this proposal is to
characterize isolated points on modular curves of genus at least 2, motivated by
ties to several well-known classification problems and open conjectures. For a
fixed family of modular curves, the work proposed falls into two main
categories: (1) find all isolated points of any degree corresponding to a
certain class of elliptic curves or (2) find all isolated points of a fixed
degree corresponding to any elliptic curve. The project pursues several new
explanations for isolated points, either by exploiting algebraic structures
associated to the curve’s Jacobian or via Arakelov intersection theory. A
specific aim is to apply these results to explain certain unexpected isogenies
of elliptic curves over quadratic fields. In a different direction, the PI will
study classes of isolated points associated to Q-curves motivated by ties to
Serre’s Uniformity Conjecture for Galois representations attached to elliptic
curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.