* 2137376
* Collaborative Research: Role of Nutrient Limitation and Viral Interactions on Antarctic Microbial Community Assembly: A Cryoconite Microcosm Study
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Dorota Porazinska, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 04/30/2024
* USD 98,926.00

Cryoconite holes are sediment-filled melt holes in the surface of glaciers that
can be important sites of active microbial life in an otherwise mostly frozen
and barren landscape. Previous studies in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
suggest that viral infections of microbes, and a general lack of fertilizers
(i.e., nutrients), may be important factors shaping the development and
functioning of microbial communities in cryoconite holes. The researchers
propose an experimental approach to understand how nutrient limitation affects
diversity (number of species) and overall abundance of microbes, and how the
diversity and abundance of microbes in turn affects the diversity, abundance,
and infection type of viruses that parasitize the microbes in cryoconite
sediments. The researchers will use sediments previously collected from
Antarctic glaciers that have varying concentrations of viruses and nutrients, to
set up a nutrient-addition experiment to determine how nutrients affect
microbial and viral population dynamics. The results will deepen our
understanding of how microbial communities in general are shaped by nutrients
and viruses and give new insights into the functioning of viruses in extremely
cold environments. The researchers will publish their findings in scientific
journals and will share their discoveries with K-12 students from rural schools
in collaboration with the Pinhead Institute and will connect undergraduate
students from under-represented minorities to polar research through
participation in the university’s Science, Technology, Engineering &amp;
Mathematics Routes Uplift Research Program. Outreach will be achieved through
videos produced and distributed by a professional science communicator. The
research advances a National Science Foundation goal of expanding fundamental
knowledge of Antarctic systems, biota, and processes by utilizing the unique
characteristics of the Antarctic region as a science observing platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators propose an experimental
approach to understand how nutrient limitation affects microbial diversity and
abundances and their cascading effects on virus diversity, abundance, and mode
of infection (lysis vs. lysogeny) in Antarctic cryoconite holes. Cryoconite
holes are ideal natural microcosms for manipulative studies, not available in
other cryospheric ecosystems. The PIs will use previously collected cryoconite
from across a gradient of both viral diversity and nutrient levels to address
questions about key limiting nutrients and microbial-viral community dynamics in
cryoconite sediments. Nutrient manipulation experiments will be conducted in a
growth chamber that closely approximates the light and temperature regime of in
situ cryoconite holes to test three core hypotheses: (1) phosphorus availability
limits microbial productivity and abundance in cryoconite holes; (2) relaxing
nutrient limitation in cryoconite from low-diversity glaciers will increase
species diversity, leading microbial communities to resemble those found on more
nutrient-rich glaciers; (3) relaxing nutrient limitation will increase the
diversity and abundance of viruses by increasing the availability of suitable
hosts, and decrease the prevalence of lysogenic infections. By manipulating
nutrient limitation within a realistic range, this project will help verify
hypothesized phosphorus limitation of Antarctic cryoconite holes and will extend
understanding of the connections between nutrients, diversity, and viral
infection dynamics in the cryosphere more generally. A better understanding of
these dynamics in cryoconite sediments improves the ability of scientists to
forecast future impacts of environmental changes in the
cryosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.