* 2137057
* EAGER:CCF:AF:Sublinear Data Structures for Approximate Queries
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rahul Shah, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 225,768.00

Computer science is a fast growing field which has opened up new possibilities
with more and more availability of data and novel applications. Efficiency in
computing becomes an important issue not only due to speed and hardware
requirements but also because computers consume a significant chunk of world’s
energy resources. The main challenge is to efficiently store, organize and
manage data so that one can retrieve and infer intelligent information from the
data in real time. In modern applications, data lies in the cloud, and to answer
queries on the data one makes data structural index – which resides locally or
in fast memory. This project considers design and development of sublinear data
structures which will enable answering of queries on massive data sets. These
data structures will serve as building blocks for fields like databases,
information retrieval, bioinformatics and geographic information systems. Data
structures being a core course in all computer science curricula, the outcomes
of this project will be enrich the course on data structures that the
investigator teaches at LSU. Many of the results worked out here could become
interesting implementation and algorithmic experimentation projects for the
students taking the course. LSU Computer Science has high percentage of minority
students who will benefit from this exposure. The investigator plans to continue
high school and middle school outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Main goal in the field of succinct data structures is to design a
data structure which takes the space equivalent to information theoretic minimum
space required to represent the data and execute queries in polylogarithmic
time. By separating the space for raw data and the space for indexing, this
project explores the relationship between the space required for the indexing
part and query type. The project will further explores if the space can be
reduced by allowing the query answers to be approximate. The investigator will
be considering fundamental queries like range-topk, range mode, and range
quantiles along with different notions of approximations like approximate
values, approximate ranks, approximate range boundaries and allowing additive
errors in approximations. The main goal is to achieve meaningful sublinear
indexes for an overarching range of problems and queries for which allow
sublinear bounds. The investigator's attempt will be to categorize fundamental
problems along with their upper and lower bounds. The project will identify
meaningful models and fundamental problems which can be further used as
primitives for wider range of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.