* 2137030
* CMMI-EPSRC: Enhanced Control Methods for Aerial and Space Vehicles Equipped with Limited Force Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Christopher Richards, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 329,631.00

This research was funded under the NSF Directorate for Engineering - UKRI
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead Agency Opportunity (ENG-
EPSRC), NSF 20-510.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund research that
enables improved design of aerial and space vehicles, such as drones, missiles,
rockets, and planetary landers, while ensuring desired flight performance,
thereby promoting the progress of science and securing the national defense.
Propellers and thrusters used by aerial and space vehicles to control their
flight path are limited in the forces they can produce. If the vehicle’s flight
control system requests forces that exceed such limits, a consequence may be
undesirable flight performance that hinders the mission. To avoid this,
engineers presently exploit over-sized thrusters at the expense of increased
vehicle weight and cost. In contrast, the control methods developed in this
project allow vehicles to be designed with smaller-sized actuators while
safeguarding against unstable flight behavior. Applications include Martian
landers and ascent vehicles that need to be lightweight in order to reduce costs
of production and energy consumption, yet require flight control systems that
can compensate for unpredictable environmental forces that otherwise prevent the
vehicles from following a desired trajectory. Integrated research, teaching, and
outreach activities will be carried out through affiliations with university
institutes and external centers that foster multidisciplinary collaboration
among engineering and other STEM departments, and through collaborations with
scholarly organizations that serve currently underrepresented populations.
Unique opportunities for broader impact will result from jointly organized
workshops and cross-border mentorship of graduate students by researchers in the
United States and the United Kingdom. Engagement with industry and federal
research agencies will allow knowledge transfer and possible technology
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to the application of anti-windup compensation theory to nonlinear
systems governed by rigid body dynamics, and to problems of actuator control
allocation and actuator quantization that naturally arise in such systems. It
achieves this outcome by purposely exploiting the particular nonlinear structure
of rigid body dynamics and by enhancing anti-windup compensation design methods
for linear systems in order to handle prolonged periods of actuator saturation.
The outcomes from the research will yield new realistic control architectures
that ensure stability across a wide range of flight conditions, with rigorous
performance guarantees also when saturated control signals exist, even when
nonlinear dynamics are prevalent. Simulations of high-fidelity lander and ascent
vehicle models, as well as experiments with quadcopters, will be used to
demonstrate the design methods and validate the theoretical performance
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.