* 2137187
* "IUCRC Phase I: University of Maryland at Baltimore: Center for Medical Innovations in Extended Reality (MIXR) UMB"
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Sarah Murthi, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 249,610.00

The Center for Medical Innovations in Extended Reality (MIXR) integrates
computer science and engineering with medical and clinical sciences to develop
and establish scientific foundations for designing and assessing medical
extended reality (XR) applications. Working with industry partners to broaden
the safe deployment of XR, the Center focuses on new technologies and regulatory
pathways to improve healthcare equity and access, patient management, and
medical outcomes across all areas of clinical
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIXR has identified driving applications in
clinical practice, medical education and training, and regulatory standards. The
University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) contributes to the Center with unique
capabilities in: predictive modeling (AI-assisted methods to identify anomalies
in medical data), human factors (pilot and field evaluation of XR solutions),
and imaging and displays (conceptual design and iterative user studies for
prototype XR tools in medical environments). The team at UMB will work from the
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center at the University of Maryland School of
Medicine focusing on XR in trauma, surgery, and critical care
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XR device evaluation lags significantly
behind technological innovation, increasing the risk of ineffective or unsafe
applications and delaying clinical implementation. This effort’s broader impact
will be addressing open research questions for the evaluation of medical XR
devices. Supporting NSF’s mission, this will assure public safety around these
technologies and improve health care outcomes. In collaboration with the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, project outcomes will provide the scientific
foundation supporting regulatory requirements on and decisions regarding medical
XR devices. Further, MIXR’s multi-faceted strategic approach for creating
educational opportunities for underrepresented students focuses on access,
community, and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data, software, findings, and
publications resulting from this project will be archived across the sites, but
with a central server at http://mixr.umd.edu to facilitate ease of discovery.
Research and archival staff will review the data collected during this project
before release to the public. It shall be publicly available for at least three
years after the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.