* 2137883
* LEAPS-MPS: Tailoring the Thermal Properties of Flexible Two-Dimensional (2D) Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Xian Zhang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. Recent
advances in atomically thin crystals derived from layered materials have enabled
the creation of two-dimensional (2D) heterostructures with unique properties.
These heterostructures have a variety of applications, including wearable
devices, microelectronics cooling, and generation of electricity from waste heat
(thermoelectricity). One challenge for flexible electronics based on 2D
materials is managing heat under mechanical stress while maintaining
performance. Further innovations require an efficient thermal control strategy
to address this issue. The objective of this project is to examine the
fundamental aspects of thermal transport in 2D heterostructures and achieve
efficient thermal control via structural tailoring. This research advances the
current frontiers of two-dimensional materials and devices. This study is
expected to elucidate the essential thermal physics and open a new route for the
exploration of future electronics by leveraging unique thermal properties of 2D
materials and structures. This work addresses the grand challenge of global
sustainable energy solutions by enabling innovative design solutions of
electronic devices. The project will use thermal technology as a motivator to
engage students via interactive games about the wave nature of thermal
transport, workshops and curriculum crosslinking art and engineering, and
mentorships for women students. The PI will work with a broad range of students,
from K-12 to graduate students, with students with developmental delays and
those underrepresented in STEM. This project will generate extraordinary
materials and inspire students through educational activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. The research objective of this
project is to investigate and control the fundamental thermal behavior in two-
dimensional heterostructures via structural tailoring. Understanding structural
effects on thermal properties will be harnessed to derive a learning-based
framework and directly validated by experiments. Experimental approaches of
materials synthesis, device nanofabrication and thermal characterization are
emphasized and reinforced by analytical modeling and computer simulations.
Specifically, a dual laser at same side opto-thermal Raman technique will be
used to perform direction-dependent and anisotropic thermal characterizations on
structurally tailored two-dimensional heterostructures. The proposed research
activities, aiming at investigating new thermal physics and developing novel
device technological precursors, provide a firsthand, in-depth understanding of
how to control thermal behavior of two-dimensional materials via structural
tailoring and provide a pathway to the development of innovative two-dimensional
heterostructure devices with ultra-efficient performance. The outcome of this
project is expected to be a major leap in fundamental understanding of
structure-thermal couplings, enabling unprecedented thermal control methods, and
revolutionize future electronic platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.