* 2137226
* Planning Grant, University of Washington: Center for Data-driven High-rate Composites Manufacturing (DH-COM)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Santosh Devasia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 12/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

This planning grant aims to establish an IUCRC Center on Data-driven High-rate
Composites Manufacturing (DH-COM) at the University of Washington. The vision of
the DH-COM center is to act as a vibrant innovation ecosystem of industry,
academia and government agencies, establishing manufacturing of the future
composites rooted in data-driven and advanced analytics methods, high-rate
fabrication technologies, and advanced composite materials. The proposed center
addresses an important challenge facing the US industries, especially in
aerospace, automotive, defense and energy sectors - the increasing demand for
lightweight and high-performance materials. Located in the Pacific Northwest,
the proposed center is surrounded by and closely connected with national leaders
in aerospace, composites, trucking and data science industries. By developing
data-driven high-rate composites manufacturing, the center will support US
global competitiveness by enabling: 1) lean and cost-effective manufacturing of
complex composites with much less energy consumption, 2) composites to be used
in applications that are currently done with other more costly and lower
performance materials, 3) recyclable materials and products with much smaller
environmental footprint, 4) fast development, testing and implementation of
novel composites manufacturing processes, and 5) training and job opportunity
for a diverse workforce with advanced composites science and technology
knowledge that will become tomorrowâ€™s leaders in the composites
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing demand for lightweight and high-
performance materials is driving the global composites market to expand at a
rapid speed. The primary objective of the proposed center is to address the
currently unmet and underserved needs in composites manufacturing, especially
those that limit the further expansion and adoption of various high-rate
composites manufacturing technologies, and development of low-cost high-
performance recyclable composites. Physics-based data-driven methods will be
applied to all stages of composites manufacturing to develop an integrated
technology from materials development, process control to performance prediction
and health monitoring, as well as sustainability. Initial research will be
conducted in several key areas including high-rate manufacturing, surface and
interface science, physics-informed data-enabled closed-loop manufacturing, and
cradle-to-cradle simulation. The proposed research will enable significant
science discoveries and technology advancement, such as improved understanding
of the complex material behavior under extreme conditions in the high-rate
manufacturing processes; development and implementation of eco-friendly and
recyclable composites; novel multifunctional coatings with superior resistance
against ultra-violet degradation, corrosion, and thermal fatigue; and in-situ
monitoring/sensing, active-control and multiscale multi-physics simulation tools
for understanding the effect of processing defects and service degradations on
composites failure and performance of reprocessed
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.