* 2137953
* QuIC-TAQS: Quantum Networking with Multipartite Entangled Photons
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Paul Kwiat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,970,439.00

Optical photons are the only qubits that can traverse long distances at room
temperature. They are thus uniquely suitable for interconnecting remote quantum
nodes for secure quantum communication, distributed quantum information
processing, and distributed quantum sensing. A key enabler for these
applications is the capability to efficiently generate, measure, and transform
entangled photons. However, these tasks are extremely challenging since photons
normally do not interact with each other. In this program, the principal
investigators will develop a set of new technologies for efficient generation,
transformation, and characterization of multi-photon entangled states, and
explore their new enabling applications in quantum networking and quantum
interconnects. The project will contribute to the development of quantum
repeaters and the quantum internet. The program also includes a strong education
and outreach effort that will contribute to the growing movement to introduce
quantum mechanics and information to high-school and early undergraduate
curricula. This effort includes designing online quantum games that highlight
the novel capabilities that quantum mechanics affords in communication and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-photon entangled states are fundamental
resources for quantum networking, distributed and photonic quantum computing,
and quantum sensing. However, efficient generation, characterization, and
transformation of multi-photon entangled states remain an outstanding challenge.
In this program, a cross-disciplinary team consisting of mathematicians,
information theorists, quantum physicists, photonic engineers, and materials
scientists will develop a set of new technologies for creating, evaluating, and
using multi-photon entangled states for quantum networking and quantum
interconnects. The team has recently made an enabling theoretical breakthrough,
showing that it is possible to deterministically generate a variety of multi-
photon entangled states by using only a single spin-tagged quantum emitter
coupled with a few ancillary qubits. Guided by these theoretical discoveries,
the team will experimentally demonstrate efficient generation of photonic
entangled states by using solid-state quantum emitters coupled with a
nanophotonic cavity. They will also employ integrated nonlinear photonics for
efficient transformation of multi-photon entangled states. Quantum state
verification protocols will be developed for efficient state characterization to
overcome scaling challenges associated with quantum state tomography. The
experimental efforts will be informed by quantum information theory that
explores new and optimized state engineering protocols as well as novel
applications of multipartite entangled photons in quantum communication and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.