* 2137288
* IUCRC Phase II University of Illinois Urbana Champaign: Center for Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning (CAEML)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Paul Franzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 200,000.00

The design complexity of modern microelectronic systems, e.g., a chip with over
one billion transistors, necessitates the use of automated design checks and
computer simulations to verify the functionality and reliability of
microelectronic components and systems prior to manufacturing. The computer
memory and run time increase with design complexity, and thus one typically
adopts a simplified description of the system, with reduced accuracy, to
complete the design process in a timely and cost-efficient manner. This project
will apply machine learning to microelectronic design verification and
optimization, improving accuracy and resulting in a reduced design cycle time
and radically improved reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML, the Center for
Advanced Electronics through Machine Learning, will develop a behavioral,
machine-learning approach to hardware modeling, emphasizing the accuracy of the
end-to-end system model. Uncertainty quantification is applied to reduce
reliance on design guard-banding. CAEML will research techniques for
collaborative machine learning (ML), whereby multiple organizations can jointly
train ML models using their proprietary design data but without releasing any
confidential information. Inverse models will be demonstrated as a feasible
approach to design space exploration based on specifications. CAEML brings
together experts on microelectronics design and machine learning; Illinois
provides expertise on signal integrity and nonlinear dynamical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microelectronics industry undergirds larger vertical
markets, including computing, communications, and transportation. CAEML serves
the vitally important microelectronics industry with its research, workforce
development, and continuing education programs. CAEML research will improve the
efficiency of the design process and the quality of the final product; the first
reduces costs and the second directly benefits the public. Microelectronic
systems that are both secure and reliable allow government and utilities to
provide critical services to the public, while low-power microelectronic systems
promote environmental sustainability. CAEML provides the microelectronics
industry with a diverse pool of new graduates who have excellent professional
preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAEML will maintain a single repository to be
used for depositing and dissemination of data, documents, and code across the
Center. Repository files will be stored on virtual directories that reside on an
Illinois Grainger College of Engineering (GCOE) storage array. The format of the
data will be documented with metadata files that provide an explanation of the
exact format. The Repository will be backed up regularly, following GCOE
standards and practices. Experimental data will be retained for at least three
years and as governed by the policies of the institution at which the data were
gathered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.