* 2137647
* BPC-DP: BPC Education Hub: Resources and Research to Support Inclusive Mentoring and Teaching
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Colleen Lewis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 316,000.00

There is a wealth of research affirming the critical importance of inclusive
learning environments and supportive relationships with faculty on student
success, particularly for students from groups underrepresented in computing.
However, faculty members and teaching assistants often receive little, if any,
training on how their interactions with students may support or threaten equity.
The lack of resources and structures to train individuals in inclusive teaching
and mentoring practices is a barrier to advancing Broadening Participation in
Computing (BPC) efforts. BPC Education Hub will equip educators with the
appropriate training to advance their knowledge and skills in understanding
social and structural barriers to BPC with the aim of fostering more inclusive
learning environments. The project addresses two critical positions within the
computing communityâ€”teaching assistants (TAs) and prospective faculty members
(current graduate students or postdoctoral scholars) because of their regular
contact with students and their increasing responsibilities amidst the rising
enrollment boom. The team will develop a landscape study of BPC training in
computing departments across the country, measure the effectiveness of BPC
training interventions, and examine attitudes of TAs and prospective faculty
regarding their approach, buy-in, and self-efficacy to cultivate inclusive
learning environments through mentoring and teaching practices. Through these
interventions, the project has the potential to train a cadre of change agents
who will shape current and future learning environments for all computing
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BPC Demonstration Project has three primary
aims. First, it aims to understand the landscape of BPC training in computing
departments and to identify barriers and opportunities for institutionalizing
BPC education. Second, it will evaluate the efficacy of three interventions: an
existing TA training workshop, an existing TA Training course, and a new course
for prospective faculty. Lastly, the third aim is to examine attitudes of TAs
and prospective faculty regarding their approach, buy-in, and self-efficacy to
cultivate inclusive learning environments through mentoring and teaching
practices. Collectively, the project will revise, research, and disseminate
content for TA and prospective faculty training to create a multi-pronged
approach to BPC education to expand inclusive mentoring and teaching. The
project will advance knowledge in several key areas: (1) understanding the
landscape for BPC training and identifying institutional opportunities and
barriers to BPC education, (2) evaluating curriculum and delivery mechanisms for
training TAs and prospective faculty, and (3) examining attitudes and self-
efficacy regarding BPC education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.