* 2137798
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Convergence Towards Nationwide Smart Precision Aquaculture Networks for Sustainable Shellfish Farming
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Miao Yu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This convergence accelerator project is intended to address the sustainability
issues of shellfish aquaculture. As an important driver of the coastal economy,
shellfish aquaculture is the most ecologically sustainable form of aquaculture.
Shellfish aquaculture offers numerous environmental benefits, and shellfish can
serve as a healthy source of protein to enhance human health. However, current
domestic shellfish production is bottlenecked by outdated technology and tools.
Many shellfish farming practices are inefficient, labor intensive, and
environmentally destructive. This is particularly true for on-bottom oyster
farming, which has changed little in the past 200 years. This convergence
accelerator project will develop a novel framework on nationwide smart precision
aquaculture networks (SPAN) to achieve sustainable shellfish production, while
preserving healthy marine ecosystems. In the long term, this project will
address the global issues of food, climate change, and health as identified by
the United Nations. . The planned education effort will bring philanthropy and
social change as a core value for science and engineering education as well as
promote diversity and inclusion. This will help prepare the next-generation
workforce to advance the networked blue economy and to improve the health of the
planet and quality of life for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPAN framework will
be established by using revolutionary concepts empowered by advanced
technologies (e.g., Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, and artificial
intelligence (AI)), scientific discoveries in biology, environmental science,
and ocean sciences, and stakeholder-driven economic development. The project
will fundamentally push research boundaries in the following specific
directions: i) IoT sensor networks will be established to advance the monitoring
capabilities for future shellfish aquaculture; ii) Novel smart precision
harvesting tools based on robotics and automation solutions will be developed to
improve farming efficiency and productivity, reduce labor and energy usage, and
minimize environmental impact; iii) Empirical dynamic models will be created to
gain new understanding on feedback between production and environment, as well
as to make production predictions; and iv) An optimization framework based on
economic models will be established to support production decision-making to
gain environmental and economic benefits. Collectively, these research
activities will ultimately lead to better farm management, economic
optimization, and better coping with climate change, and thus enhance production
and sustainability. This convergent accelerator project brings together an
interdisciplinary team with extensive expertise in sensing and imaging, AI and
computer vision, underwater robotics and controls, shellfish biology, climate
and ocean dynamics and oceanography, environmental economics, and aquaculture
extension, along with readily-engaged stakeholders, in pursuit of research with
high potential for societal impact. The planned education effort will bring
philanthropy and social change as a core value for science and engineering
education as well as promote diversity and inclusion. This will help prepare the
next-generation workforce to advance the networked blue economy and to improve
the health of the planet and quality of life for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.