* 2137811
* BPC-DP: Culturally Relevant Physical Computing for Sustainability Programs for Native Hawaiian Students
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Derek Esibill, Pacific American Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2023
* USD 245,000.00

This demonstration project builds and deploys culturally relevant computing
curricula for Native Hawaiian M/K-8 students. By collaborating with existing
programs and partners in Kāneʻohe, Hawaiʻi, including the Pacific American
Foundation and Ke Kula Kaiapuni ʻo Pūʻōhala School, this project supports
students in developing place-based education and Hawaiian cultural restoration
practices alongside concepts of computer science. The project enables students
to learn to program using the BBC Micro:bit, a pocket-sized computer with built-
in sensors that can be programmed using Microsoft’s Makecode interface. In
learning how to program the BBC Micro:bit, students collect data using sensors,
embedded systems, and wearables to support local natural resource preservation
efforts. Students learn about integrating computing and sustainability at the
Waikalua Loko Iʻa, a Native Hawaiian fishpond and cultural landmark supported by
the Pacific American Foundation, by engaging in culturally relevant
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
computing education curricula for Native Hawaiian students at Ke Kula Kaiapuni
ʻo Pūʻōhala School, a Hawaiian immersion bi-lingual public school. This project
employs concepts of practice-linked learning to facilitate an environment for
students to explore the role of computing and cultural identity across various
problem-solving activities and experiences. This demonstration project is a
community-oriented effort that emphasizes student interaction between the
environment and computing technologies. The ongoing goals of this project are to
support a team of educators, curriculum developers, ʻŌlelo Hawaiʻi language
experts, and content specialists in curriculum and resource development.
Furthermore, the project provides students with integrated computing
opportunities during school, after-school, and summer activities, interweaving
with existing place-based education at the Waikalua Loko Iʻa. Lastly, the
project promotes community collaboration by reflecting on experiences, working
with an advisory board, and expanding online computing education resources for
Native Hawaiian learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.