* 2137530
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track F: Adapting and Scaling Existing Educational Programs to Combat Inauthenticity and Instill Trust in Information
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Learning how to find information and assess its quality is essential to making
informed personal and civic decisions -- and to the health of a democracy. This
project will shift attention from public education--leveraging existing
effective, low-cost k-12 interventions--to education of the public. Through a
three-year road map, and with partners in academia, industry, nonprofit, and
government, a multidisciplinary human-centered design process for adapting
effective interventions to new contexts will be produced--based on the team’s
expertise in the sociology of information, effective web reading practices,
curriculum development, and online delivery at scale. Effective approaches will
be disseminated through an open software platform that integrates educational
interventions and assessment. This approach will be tested with populations
often excluded from information literacy efforts and who may be more vulnerable
to misinformation campaigns, such as rural and indigenous communities with
limited access to high-speed internet, military veterans, older adults, and
military families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s Phase I output will be to
co-design, test, adapt, and scale misinformation interventions that have proven
effective within educational settings to the broader public. In Phase I, the
project will work with Humanities Montana, a convener of libraries and cultural
institutions and advocate for engaged citizenship, to adapt proven educational
interventions to serve rural, low-income citizens, including indigenous
populations, in libraries and other community settings. In Phase II, this design
process will be used to create targeted interventions for a range of groups
outside the formal educational system who are vulnerable to misinformation
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.