* 2137467
* Continuing Operations Proposal: the Polar Rock Repository - a Sample and Data Resource for the Earth Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Anne Grunow, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,896,987.00

Geological field expeditions in polar regions are logistically difficult,
financially expensive, and can have a significant environmental impact on
pristine regions. The scarcity of exposed rock outcrop in Antarctica, which is
98% ice-covered, makes previously collected rock samples very valuable to the
science community in disciplines like long term climate change, planetary
science, paleontology, geology, marine science, and more. The U.S. Polar Rock
Repository was established at the Ohio State University in 2003 to meet the need
for preserving rock, dredge, and terrestrial core samples from polar areas. The
Polar Rock Repository seeks out, accepts, and curates geological samples
collected primarily from Antarctica and the southern oceans. The existence of
the Polar Rock Repository allows samples collected at a high financial cost to
be used to their full scientific potential. Currently more than 55,000 samples
are available as no-cost loans for research, education, and museum exhibits. In
addition to the physical samples, the repository archives supporting materials
from the collector, such as images of the samples, field maps, air photos, thin
sections, and any associated bibliography/Digital Object Identifiers.
Scientists, graduate students, and undergraduate students routinely use samples
from the Polar Rock Repository for their research projects. The Polar Rock
Repository also freely loans an educational 'rock box' that contains
representative rock, fossil and mineral samples, books and activities about
geology and Antarctica to pre-college teachers from across the United States.
The Polar Rock Repository recently developed a “virtual rock box” to allow
similar activities to occur outside of the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
U.S. Polar Rock Repository (PRR) provides stewardship of polar rock sample
collections and metadata. It is one of the few lending rock repositories to
allow destructive research techniques to be used on samples. The PRR website and
in-house digital metadata archive provides for global dissemination of data and
a unique resource for pilot studies, proposal preparation and field logistics
planning. The PRR provides free, full and open access to metadata and
collections. Over the course of this award, the PRR will work proactively with
the research community to acquire scientifically valuable rock collections and
supplementary materials that will enhance the PRR collection. Samples will be
cataloged following standard curatorial practices and will be made discoverable
through the public facing portion of the Collections Management system developed
at the Byrd Polar Climate and Research Center. The preservation of these
physical samples, along with archiving of associated metadata, and inclusion of
Digital Object Identifiers in a discoverable online database, allows for
transparency and reproducibility in polar earth science research. The
Collections Management System will continue to be updated and improved. The
Curator will continue to advance the discoverability of the PRR by attending
meetings, creating a webinar and contacting scientists about new collections at
the facility. The PRR will continue to fulfill loans of samples and enhance the
links with other repositories and data management entities to better enable
interdisciplinary research. Educational outreach to pre-college schools will
continue with the 'polar rock box' being freely available to schools with in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.