* 2137718
* LEAPS-MPS: Experimental Nuclear Structure Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Ram Yadav, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2023
* USD 229,706.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund a research
program in fundamental nuclear structure physics at South Carolina State
University (SC State). The Principal Investigator and his group will investigate
the structure of neutron-rich nuclei with mass numbers near 165 and so-called
mirror nuclei with mass numbers near 70 that do not exist naturally in nature
but can be produced at an accelerator facility. Understanding these nuclei is
important for advancing knowledge of the process by which nucleons (protons and
neutrons) organize into nuclei and what patterns (prolate, oblate or triaxial)
emerge from those organizations. The project enhances understanding of these
basic questions by accelerating nuclei to high energies or angular momentum and
measuring gamma- and beta-particle radiation that is emitted when they interact
with other atomic nuclei. Experiments will be performed using state-of-the-art
instruments and accelerator facilities in the United States. The research
activities will involve SC State University undergraduate students; the student
population there is 93% African American and 55% female. Participation in this
research will prepare and motivate minority students to continue their studies
to graduate school or enter the workforce in STEM fields. These students will
not only advance their professional skill set and become better scientists, but
they will also be exposed to diverse areas such as national nuclear facilities,
government laboratories, and medical diagnostic and treatment facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central goal of the project is to build an active
research program in nuclear structure at SC State. The research supported by
this award will help to gain insights into the properties of nuclei by
establishing and studying their basic modes of excitation i.e. gamma and beta-
decays. Experiments will be performed using the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator
System (ATLAS) and Californium Rare Isotope Breeder Upgrade (CARIBU) radioactive
beam facilities at Argonne National Laboratory. Gamma-rays will be detected
using one of the most powerful detectors in the world (Gammasphere). Neutron-
rich nuclei in the mass region A ~ 165 are of special interest for the study of
nuclear structure because of the rapid onset of deformation between 88 and 90
neutrons. The observation of detailed changes in nuclear structures within this
mass region continues to provide insights into the nuclear force. The isospin
symmetry breaking in the A ~ 70 mirror nuclei is another subject of interest in
this study. It will also help to describe very important nuclear properties.
Investigations following gamma- and beta-decays, aided by potential energy
surface and shell-model calculations, are helpful to the analysis of the effects
of the nuclear force governing nuclear shapes and the resulting sequence of
single-particle orbitals. The structure of deformed, neutron-rich nuclei in the
rare-earth region is also of significant interest for the field of astrophysics.
Although much progress is being made in our understanding of the r-process, a
satisfactory explanation for the elemental peak in abundance near A = 165 is
still elusive. The quest to understand the origin of this peak may be key to
correctly identifying the astrophysical conditions for the r-process. In order
to address these issues, additional experiments are needed. The proposed project
will explore deformed structures and other nuclear properties of the A ~ 70 and
165 nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.