* 2137977
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Ocean Vision AI: Scaling up Visual Observations of Life in the Ocean Using Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Henry Ruhl, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 747,174.00

OIA - 2137977 NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Ocean Vision AI: Scaling up
visual observations of life in the ocean using artificial
intelligence&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will scale up society’s
observational capabilities to fully explore the ocean and discover the full
spectrum of animals that live there. The ocean represents the largest habitable
ecosystem on the planet, yet less than 5% of that volume has been explored, and
nearly 50% of marine life are yet to be described. To close this gap, underwater
imaging, a major sensing modality for marine biology, is being deployed on a
diverse array of platforms. However, as more visual data are collected, the
community faces a data analysis backlog. This project, Ocean Vision AI, will
deploy artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to address this backlog
by automating underwater image and video analysis. The research activities
include contributions from the research community as well as the general public,
video game players, and advanced high school and community college students.
Together, Ocean Vision AI will be used to directly accelerate the automated
analysis of underwater visual data to enable scientists, explorers,
policymakers, storytellers, and the public, to learn, understand, and care more
about the life that inhabits the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;The research team will engage
researchers and innovators across numerous sectors (e.g., academic, government,
non-profit, for-profit) to advance society’s observational capabilities of
marine life. Ocean Vision AI (artificial intelligence) aims to provide a central
hub for incubating groups conducting research that use imaging, AI, open data,
and hardware/software; create data pipelines from existing image and video data
repositories; and provide project tools for coordination. In addition, Ocean
Vision AI will leverage public participation and engagement via game
development, and will result in data products that are shared with researchers
as well as other US and global open data repositories. This research will
facilitate large-scale, spatiotemporal surveys of underwater communities,
geomorphology, and marine debris, and accelerate the discovery of marine life by
making well classified images widely available to experts using taxonomic
metadata standards. Moreover, this project will be able to coordinate and scale
underwater computer vision research and machine learning algorithm development
via novel training data through the FathomNet database. This project will
ultimately enable innovative intellectual pursuits in fields as diverse as
marine biology, fisheries, biological oceanography, underwater optics and
computer vision, artificial intelligence, ocean engineering, biomechanics,
environmental biology, human-computer interaction, game-based education, and
community contributions to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.