* 2137245
* IUCRC Planning Grant Rutgers University: Center for Standards and Ethics in Artificial Intelligence (CSEAI)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Jie Gao, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The last twenty years have seen an unprecedented growth of AI-enabled
technologies in practically every industry. More recently, an emphasis has been
placed on ensuring industry and government agencies that use or produce AI-
enabled technology have a social responsibility to protect consumers and
increase trustworthiness in products and services. As a result, regulatory
groups are producing standards for artificial intelligence (AI) ethics
worldwide. The Center for Standards and Ethics in Artificial Intelligence
(CSEAI) aims to provide industry and government the necessary resources for
adopting and efficiently implementing standards and ethical practices in AI
through research, outreach, and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSEAIâ€™s mission
is to work closely with industry and government research partners to study AI
protocols, procedures, and technologies that enable the design, implementation,
and adoption of safe, effective, and ethical AI standards. The varied AI
skillsets of CSEAI faculty enable the center to address various fundamental
research challenges associated with the responsible, equitable, traceable,
reliable, and governable development of AI-fueled technologies. For example, the
center site at Rutgers University will examine intelligible model explanations
for deeply sensed environments and cyber-physical systems, privacy-aware
learning for sensing applications, and federated learning for nonconvex
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSEAI will help industry and government
organizations that use or produce AI technology to provide standardized, ethical
products safe for consumers and users, helping the public regain trust and
confidence in AI technology. The center will recruit, train, and mentor
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs from diverse backgrounds,
motivating them to pursue careers in AI ethics and producing a diverse workforce
trained in standardized and ethical AI. The center will release specific ethics
assessment tools, and AI best practices will be licensed or made available to
various stakeholders through publications, conference presentations, and the
CSEAI summer school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both a publicly accessible repository
and a secured members-only repository (comprising meeting materials, workshop
information, research topics and details, publications, etc.) will be maintained
either on-site at Baylor University and/or on a government/DoD-approved cloud
service. A single public and secured repository will be used for CSEAI, where
permissible, to facilitate continuity of efforts and information between the
different sites. This repository will be accessible at a publicly listed URL at
Baylor University, https://cseai.center, for the lifetime of the center and
moved to an archiving service once no longer
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.