* 2137509
* LEAPS-MPS: Emergent Mechanics of a Living Material
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Pasha Tabatabai, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2025
* USD 181,274.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature provides fantastic
examples of behaviors that are not currently possible with engineered materials.
For example, fish within a school process information to stay together as an
organized unit, yet the school is capable of reorganizing quickly and changing
its overall shape. This award investigates the structural organization, and
changes therein, of a school of fish as a way to identify the mechanical
possibilities of self-driven materials. Applications of this work are to define
new rules and design principles for materials engineering. This award supports
the expansion of interdisciplinary research topics for undergraduate students at
Seattle University and generates opportunities for undergraduate students to
present work at academic conferences. Furthermore, this award initiates early
career development and support for local high school students by funding
immersive traineeships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective behaviors as seen in
schools of fish and flocks of birds demonstrate the ability for individuals to
form dynamic ordered groups. These behaviors are a consequence of simple
interactions between each constituent. However, simple interactions between
individuals are also observed in pair-wise interactions that determine
traditional materials structure (ex: crystal lattice spacing) and mechanical
properties (ex: bond spring constant). This award uses motivations from
equilibrium materials to characterize the structure and define mechanical
properties of non-equilibrium schools of fish, allowing a comparison between
traditional materials science and living materials. Consequently, this will
increase fundamental understandings of living systems and inspire new materials
design. This award addresses the need for simple and controllable experimental
realizations of active materials. Further, this formulates a perspective to
treat an active system as a material with bulk mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.