* 2137661
* LEAPS-MPS: Foundational Connections in Number Theory, Coding Theory, Graphs, and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Beth Malmskog, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,926.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project addresses two important and timely
problems. First, this work considers how to ensure the reliability, efficiency,
and security of cloud storage and computing. Error-correcting codes are
mathematical methods of adding redundancy to information so that the data is
stored and communicated correctly, despite the fact that errors and erasures
occur constantly. The PI will use number theory and geometry to expand the
theory of and create examples of locally recoverable codes, a type of error-
correcting code motivated by the special challenges of cloud computing
facilities. Secondly, this project will use the mathematical framework of
ensemble analysis in new settings and applications, including applications with
a societal impact. Activities to broaden participation include a collaboration
incubator for new and early-career mathematics faculty members, developing
inquiry-based learning modules and accompanying expository articles to broaden
the scope of undergraduate discrete math education and widen the doorway into
mathematics, developing and teaching a course using these materials to early
undergraduates who are transitioning to college including many students from
underrepresented groups and low-income families, and mentoring undergraduates in
summer research and senior thesis projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the PI plans to exploit the structure of curves and higher-
dimensional varieties over finite fields to create locally recoverable algebraic
geometry codes with availability, i.e. evaluation codes where each position in
any codeword is efficiently recoverable in many ways. Further, this project
seeks to expand and unite the theory of locally recoverable codes, to pursue
applications in private information retrieval, and to address relevant questions
in arithmetic geometry. In the application arena, the PI proposes to address
questions that are relevant to current societal issues in Colorado, to improve
and refine weighted graph techniques that create more representative random maps
for ensemble analysis, to broaden the scope of questions addressed by ensemble
analysis, and to solve underlying problems in graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.