* 2137212
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Pittsburgh: Center for Advanced Magnetics for Power and Energy Development (AMPED)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Daniel Mosse', University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 01/31/2023
* USD 19,967.00

Trends towards electrification are driving the needs for improved soft magnetic
materials that can operate at unprecedented combinations of switching
frequencies and power levels, as well as engineered components which are highly
power dense yet extremely efficient. These trends are also creating major new
economic opportunities for the domestic US, through anticipated growth in
electric vehicles, hybrid-electric aircraft, and distributed renewable
generation amongst others. The primary emphasis of the proposed Center for
Advanced Magnetics for Power and Energy Development (AMPED) will be the
critically important area of high-power magnetics and the optimization of
interfaces with both established and emerging electrical machine topologies and
designs within this application class. Successfully tackling challenges and
exploiting these opportunities as a nation and an economy requires
interdisciplinary skills spanning materials science, applied physics, and
electrical engineering, as well as collaborations between end-users of
components (motors, transformers, inductors, etc.) and the materials and
manufacturing community. The proposed AMPED center seeks to address this need
for a new generation of an interdisciplinary workforce of the future that is
prepared and eager to take on the new challenges presented by widespread
adoption of electrification and growth in electric power conversion
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary research thrust areas included within
the AMPED portfolio include: (1) new magnetic materials and manufacturing for
wide bandgap and ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors, (2) advanced electric
machine design concepts, (3) new design and optimization techniques for magnetic
components, (4) interactions between wide bandgap power electronics converters
and magnetics, (5) advanced power electronics converter topologies enabled by
and leveraging next generation magnetics, e.g., multiport power conversion, and
(6) tunable and variable magnetics technologies and their applications in
advanced power conversion schemes. Strong collaborations between sites are
planned, with unique capabilities residing at each institution: Carnegie Mellon
University - amorphous and nanocrystalline magnetic materials and manufacturing,
North Carolina State University – wide bandgap-based semiconductor power
electronics and high-speed motor controls and testing, University of Pittsburgh
– ferrite based soft magnetic materials and electromagnetic field assisted
advanced manufacturing, component design strategies, and magnetics / power
electronics interfaces. University of Pittsburgh will serve as lead site and
will ensure integration of emerging magnetic materials and manufacturing
technologies with advanced magnetic component designs and, ultimately, the
integration within electrical machines. More specifically, University of
Pittsburgh will leverage its capabilities and facilities for research spanning:
(1) design, synthesis, and characterization of new soft magnetic materials; (2)
advanced manufacturing processes including electromagnetic field assisted
processing and additive manufacturing; (3) multi-objective optimization and
machine learning based design methods for advanced magnetic components and their
interface with power electronics converters and motors; (4) power electronics
and motor hardware prototype development; and (5) testing and characterization
of magnetic components, power electronics converters, high speed motors, and
controllers. University of Pittsburgh offers facilities for medium voltage
electric power conversion research and development (up to 15kV, 5MVA) as well as
full-scale magnetic material and component manufacturing, design, and testing
under conditions directly relevant for electric machine
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.