* 2137694
* LEAPS-MPS: Predator Competition in Systems with Seasonal Birth
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Amanda Laubmeier, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2024
* USD 192,908.00

In many ecosystems, seasonal processes are experienced as sudden events,
disrupting continuous processes. These disparate processes are closely linked,
for example when resource consumption (a continuous behavior) determines
reproductive capacity (a seasonal event). Describing the links between these
processes is fundamental to long-term descriptions of seasonal ecosystems. This
project bridges a gap between common mathematical methods which describe these
processes separately, combining them into a hybrid framework. The framework
permits long-term models of seasonal ecosystems. Long-term models are necessary
for ecological forecasts and seasonal behavior is especially relevant for
incorporating sensitivities to annual climate. Hybrid models are therefore
broadly applicable to a range of ecological problems. This project focuses on
hybrid descriptions of competition between predatory insects which consume pests
in agricultural ecosystems, with attention to how changing temperatures affect
pest control. The project also assesses hybrid model performance in arbitrary
ecosystems, building broader capacity to address conservation and management
problems. The project is hosted at a Hispanic Serving Institution and supports
undergraduate research in ecological modelling, which is an accessible entry
point to mathematical research and fosters computational skills applicable to a
multitude of technical careers. Participation includes travel to a scientific
conference for postgraduate planning and community building among groups
underrepresented in mathematics, where the PI will also seek applicants for
supported graduate student research. The project improves institutional capacity
to support students from groups underrepresented in mathematics through the
development of tailored resources for retention and job placement, which also
amplifies existing initiatives broadening participation in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Describing the interface between long-term
(discrete) and short-term (continuous) changes to an ecological population
requires mathematical models which couple continuous differential equations and
discrete difference equations. This coupling results in a hybrid model, which
incorporates population processes over disparate timescales and describes
seasonal ecosystems’ long-term development. However, dynamics of such models are
difficult to assess if the continuous equations incorporate complex behaviors,
as is necessary for the target model of predator-prey interactions in a
community of generalist predators. This project investigates the effects of
competition and seasonal birth on long-term prey abundance and predator
coexistence in hybrid models in three stages: (1) through the analysis of
simple, two-predator models to build intuition for the interplay between
predator competition and seasonal birth; (2) by extending the hybrid model to
investigate the effects of predator diversity and temperature variability on
pest control in a real agricultural ecosystem; and (3) through the numerical
simulation of many complex, theoretical ecosystems to compare persistence
outcomes between hybrid and continuous models. Preliminary theoretical analysis
of fixed points and other stable outcomes yields a thorough understanding of how
specific behaviors influence population trajectories, facilitating later work.
Parameterizing the hybrid competition model from prior abundance data and
empirical observations provides insight into the effects of similar behaviors in
real agricultural ecosystems. Simulating hybrid models for a range of parameters
and feeding interactions establishes the conditions under which species
persistence is affected by seasonal behaviors. Together, the three stages
establish a foundational understanding of hybrid models in seasonal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.