* 2137628
* LEAPS-MPS: The representation theory of combinatorial categories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Ramos, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 105,432.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In mathematics, a finite graph refers to a finite
collection of points with line segments, called edges, connecting them. For
example, a triangle is a graph with three points and three edges, while the
letter "H" could be viewed as a graph with 6 points and 5 edges. Despite the
simplicity of this description, graphs have proven themselves to be one of the
most important tools in the modern mathematical toolkit, being critical in
applications to, for instance, large networks and robotics. The projects of the
current award seek to further the state of the art in the study of graphs in key
ways related with the two aforementioned applications. In particular, one
project seeks to understand the sizes of large independent (without a single
edge connecting them) collections of points within the graph, whereas another
relates to ways in which large networks expand over time. The final project
considers scenarios of a collection of robots randomly moving on the graph as if
it were a track, while not being allowed to collide, and showing the extremely
interesting behavior that can result from this. In addition to these research
concerns, this grant will be used in furthering educational standards for
students of various backgrounds and skill levels. This includes attaching a
"Growing Up in Science" series to existing student seminars, supplying funding
for the local AWM chapter, using funds to send students to national conferences
which specialize in diversity in research, and funding for summer research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous work, which
developed a framework for studying families of highly symmetric graphs using
combinatorial categories. This work lends itself to a variety of natural
conjectures, including one that would imply certain regular behaviors in the
independence numbers of graphs in these families. These conjectures comprise the
first proposed project. The second project applies a similar categorical
framework to families of discrete groups, including automorphism groups of free
groups and integral special linear groups. It has been observed that various
group theoretic properties, such as Kazhdan's property (T), seem to behave
stably in these families. It is our belief that this framework can illuminate
and expand upon our understanding of groups with property (T) and thereby our
understanding of expander graphs. Finally, recent work has presented a model for
random braiding in the configuration space of a tree. This model has an
associated covariance matrix, which has been conjectured to uniquely identify
the tree; a feature which the topology of the configuration space lacks.
Furthermore, the PI has also devised a random model for graph configuration
spaces that may be used to detect the presence of exotic torsions in
homology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.