* 2137312
* BPC-AE: AccessComputing Fourth Extension
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,955,985.00

People with disabilities are underrepresented in computing fields, yet their
perspectives and expertise can benefit these fields greatly. The goals of the
AccessComputing Fourth Extension are to (1) increase the participation of people
with disabilities in computing careers and (2) serve as a catalyst and national
resource to help make computing educational and career opportunities more
welcoming and accessible to people with disabilities. AccessComputing is one of
a family of Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC) Alliances that are
working with other BPC projects to benefit computing fields in terms of
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility. These benefits to computing
fields translate to benefits to the nation by helping to improve the ability of
its technology workforce to respond to national needs that depend, more and
more, on computing technology. AccessComputing, although centered at the
University of Washington, partners with over 75 academic institutions, computing
organizations, and tech companies to achieve its common goals. The
AccessComputing leadership team represents the Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Information School, and DO-IT Center at the University
of Washington; University of California, Irvine; Gallaudet University; and Tufts
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to meet the project goals,
AccessComputing has four objectives: (1) Individual engagement in computing:
implement evidence-based practices to increase the number of individuals with
disabilities moving through critical junctures through their pathways to
education to computing careers; (2) Organizational capacity development and
collaboration: increase the capacity of postsecondary institutions, BPC
alliances and projects, organizations, and industry to fully include individuals
with disabilities in computing fields and promote accessible, inclusive,
universal design practices; (3) Curriculum development: develop the capacity of
faculty to integrate accessibility and disability content into computing courses
to increase knowledge and skills of future computing professionals; and (4)
Alliance impact and sustainability: foster relationships among stakeholders to
promote systemic changes, expand online resources, develop the next generation
of leaders in BPC and accessibility, and develop sustainable products and
initiatives. Several initiatives are new to AccessComputing Fourth Extension.
They include: (1) Expanding the AccessComputing leadership beyond the University
of Washington to include emerging leaders from three new institutions; (2)
Expanding the academic partners to include more community and technical
colleges; (3) Expanding the AccessComputing students and the services available
to them; (4) Joining the new BPC-A Accelerator that will help coordinate and
synergize BPC efforts related to gender, race, ethnicity, and disability; (5)
Expanding the industry partners and interactions with them; (6) Expanding the
organizational partners to include more subdisciplines in computing fields; and
(7) Developing a comprehensive and adaptable e-book for teaching accessibility
and disability topics in computing courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.