* 2137672
* LEAPS-MPS: Photodynamic Hybrid Polymer Network Sponges and their Structure-Property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Furgal, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,857.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of a series of selective, light activated smart
material sponges useful for environmental remediation of omnipresent toxic
pollutants such as perfluoroalkyl (PFAS) “forever chemicals.” This project will
also meld together a diverse team of researchers to carry out this work and to
influence, train, and mentor a broad representation of middle, high school and
undergraduate students to recruit and train them for future success in the U.S.
science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the PI's group will
synthesize silicon-based light-responsive sponges that can capture specific
substances and undergo unique reversible shrinking phenomena to then expel them
on demand with certain light wavelengths and energies. This light-driven process
is quite complex in solid materials such as silicon networks and this research
will aid in gaining an understanding of how these responsive sponges behave when
having different building blocks that either change shape or break apart using
light. The investigation will also determine how the structures of the material
influence their behavior and ability to selectively soak up and release explicit
substances on demand. Lastly, their abilities and efficiencies in remediation of
PFAS type compounds, which are difficult to selectively isolate from water
sources, will be detailed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Racially and ethnically diverse
high school and undergraduate students will have the opportunity to contribute
to the development of this project and gain laboratory training with scientists
at BGSU to aid in the diversification of the student body toward science-based
careers. A series of workshops focused on smart light responsive materials,
environmental remediation and health priorities as well as the opportunity to
spend time shadowing student scientists in the laboratory will be conducted in
local areas with high concentrations of under-represented minorities (Warren, MI
/ Toledo, OH). These opportunities will assist in both attracting and retaining
an expansive array of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group will develop reusable and
robust high porosity "smart" sponges that can experience large volume changes
after light irradiation to ultimately be used for environmental remediation of
persistent pollutants (e.g. PFAS). Gels and solids of Q-silsesquioxane networks
will be cross-linked with designed photoswitchable and dynamic groups that
feature allyl or vinyl functionalization. Structure-property relationships of
these novel photoresponsive materials will be determined to improve
photoresponsive behaviors, determine what makes a high-performance material and
its substance uptake/release ability (i.e. petrochemicals). Silsesquioxanes’ use
as dynamic materials remains less explored than traditional polymers due to the
intricacies of functionalization and silsesquioxanes’ inherent rigidity, despite
the prevalence of silicone materials in a variety of household and industrial
products. These materials offer advantages over typical photodynamic sponges
(i.e. hydrogels, organogels), by overcoming synthetic, structural, and actuation
limitations. These include increased environmental stabilities and better
mechanical properties due to siloxane cores, excellent control of tunability to
work with many target substances, and facile structural assembly. This research
will also expand the exploration of improved methods for the capture of cancer-
causing persistent “forever chemicals” such as perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
for the improvement of human and environmental health. For educational
initiatives, university students will participate in scientific endeavors with
regional companies to build career development relationships and experience
real-world scientific challenges as part of public impact outreach. Mentorship
will be given to a diverse set of middle and high school students as they
participate in polymer workshops and laboratory research experiences to provide
insight on the importance of science and how the proposed research may impact
society on an individual and broader scale. These initiatives aim to increase
youth involvement in the STEM fields by hands-on interactions, connections, and
working with a diverse group of scientists from various
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.