* 2137600
* LEAPS-MPS: Development of New Photoacid Catalyzed Reactions for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Joseph Badillo, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,797.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and housed in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Joseph Badillo and his students at Seton Hall University will study photoacids
and photoacid catalysis to help design new chemical reactions that will be
important in synthesizing new organic (carbon-based) molecules. A photoacid is a
weak acid in its normal state, and only upon irradiation with light does it
become a strong acid, and thus catalytically active (able to speed up
reactions). This dependence on light-activation offers temporal- and spatial-
control not possible with traditional acid catalysis. Despite the unique
possibilities of photoacid catalysis, the synthesis and characterization of new
photoacids and the development of new photoacid catalyzed reactions remains
relatively unexplored. Prof. Badillo also proposes a broadening participation
plan that includes having his students present their research at URM-serving
conferences such as NOBCChE, working with ACS Project SEED to provide research
experiences for URM high school students, and working with several Seton Hall
University student organizations to bring science outreach to local minority-
serving high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Badillo will perform
experiments leading to improved understanding of common photoacid catalysts’
photophysical properties by measuring excited state lifetimes (t) and acidities
(pKa*). A series of non-photoracemizable chiral photoacids will be designed,
synthesized and characterized, and the use of photoacid catalysis will be
explored in the context of C–X (X = H, O, C) bond-forming reactions, including
asymmetric excited-state proton transfer, glycosylation, and acetalization
reactions. The use of photoacid generators such as halonium and sulfonium ions
in the context of catalysis will also be investigated. Prof. Badillo’s plan for
integrating research and broadening participation-oriented outreach activities
will both bring underrepresented minority high school students to Seton Hall
University for research experiences, and send Seton Hall students into local
schools for science outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.