* 2137274
* IUCRC Phase II UT Austin Site: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EVSTS)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Ronald Matthews, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2027
* USD 199,998.00

The University of Texas at Austin (UT) is part of a multi-institution Industry
University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Efficient Vehicles and
Sustainable Transportation Systems (EVSTS) that supports the U.S. automotive
industry’s effort to meet demanding federal regulations governing vehicle fuel
economy and emissions, and society’s expectations for improved sustainability.
Achieving environmental sustainability is a generational problem that represents
a critical technological challenge of our time. Electricity generation (31%) and
transportation (27%) are the largest contributors to U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions. Wheeled ground vehicles, in turn, generate most of the transportation
emissions and have an increasing impact on emissions from electricity
generation. Solutions must address vehicle sustainability without unduly
disrupting an industry that is central to the nation’s economic health and its
citizens’ lifestyles. The EVSTS Center engages the automotive industry’s
critical stakeholders - vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers,
fleet operators, ground transportation infrastructure providers, and state /
local governments - in yielding transformational improvements in the energy
efficiency and environmental sustainability of ground vehicles. Work scope
encompasses passenger cars, trucks, and motorized non-road equipment, as well as
vehicle-level technologies and transportation system infrastructure, reflecting
the complexity and global nature of the automotive and ground transportation
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EVSTS center leverages collaborations among
corporate, government, and academic partners to conduct and disseminate
industry-relevant research on technologies and tools that facilitate the design,
manufacture, deployment, and operation of energy efficient, environmentally
sustainable ground vehicles. Research is conducted in five technical focus
areas: 1) electrified vehicle powertrains, 2) conventional powertrains and
alternative fuels, 3) non-powertrain vehicle systems optimization, 4) efficient
/ sustainable autonomous vehicles, and 5) transportation systems and
infrastructure. Specifically, UT’s four faculty cover thrusts 2, 3, 4 and 5. Two
or these researchers supervise experimental and numerical modeling research
regarding engine and vehicle emissions and fuel efficiency. Another optimizes
2-way interactions between EVs and power grids, along with EV charging station
designs. The final researcher simulates shared, autonomous, all-electric vehicle
(SAEV) systems for passenger service, optimally sites EV charging stations
(across the nation and regions) and specifies local electric bus deployments
(with smart bus charging to protect local power grids). Texas’ Advanced
Computing Center’s clusters are used for parallel runs of computationally
intensive modeling, including 1) agent-based simulations of Austinites’ millions
of trips each day, as served by hundreds of thousands of SAEVs, 2) the starting
process of downsized, turbocharged engines, and 3) the spark ignition
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.