* 2137207
* "IUCRC Phase I University of Michigan: Center for Medical Innovations in Extended Reality (MIXR)"
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Mark Cohen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 250,000.00

The Center for Medical Innovations in Extended Reality (MIXR) integrates
computer science and engineering with medical and clinical sciences to develop
and establish scientific foundations for designing and assessing medical
extended reality (XR) applications. Working with industry partners to broaden
the safe deployment of XR, the Center focuses on new technologies and regulatory
pathways to improve healthcare equity and access, patient management, and
medical outcomes across all areas of clinical
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIXR has identified driving applications in
clinical practice, education, and regulatory standards for XR. The University of
Michigan will focus on unmet research needs related to 1) education and
simulation (using mixed and virtual reality headsets) 2) telemedicine (using
mixed reality headsets and smart glasses over 5G/6G network); and 3) artificial
intelligence and deep machine learning methods for clinical decision making.
Quantitative and qualitative analysis will be used to evaluate new technologies,
while research outcomes will provide the scientific foundation in support of
regulatory requirements, evaluation, and implementation of XR devices across a
range of clinical and educational applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XR device
evaluation lags significantly behind technological innovation, increasing the
risk of ineffective or unsafe applications and delaying clinical implementation.
This effort’s broader impact will be addressing open research questions for the
evaluation of medical XR devices. Supporting NSF’s mission, this will assure
public safety around these technologies and improve health care outcomes. In
collaboration with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, project outcomes will
provide the scientific foundation supporting regulatory requirements on and
decisions regarding medical XR devices. Further, MIXR’s multi-faceted strategic
approach for creating educational opportunities for underrepresented students
focuses on access, community, and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data,
software, findings, and publications resulting from this project will be
archived across the sites, but with a central server at http://mixr.umd.edu to
facilitate ease of discovery. Research and archival staff will review the data
collected during this project before release to the public. It shall be publicly
available for at least three years after the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.