* 2137604
* Study of the Strong Nuclear Interaction at Short Distances
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Carlos Yero, Yero, Carlos
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Carlos Yero is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education
at Old Dominion University. Yero will lead two experiments at Jefferson
Laboratory in Newport News, Virginia, that will investigate the short-range
correlations between pairs of nucleons (neutrons and protons) to better
understand the short-range part of the nucleon-nucleon interaction. One
experiment will measure electron scattering from Ca-40 and Ca-48, two isotopes
of calcium, to explore how the pairing up of neutrons and protons is affected by
the eight extra neutrons in Ca-48. The other experiment will measure electron
scattering from deuterons, which are made from a single neutron bound to a
single proton and are the simplest of all nuclei. The deuteron experiment will
be done at very high momentum and provide information on the nucleon-nucleon
(NN) interaction over very small distances. Yero will involve high school and
undergraduate students in this research through the Old Dominion University
HALES and REYES outreach programs, both through research mentorships and through
lectures in both English and Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At extremely short
range, pairs of nucleons interact very strongly, and briefly fluctuate into a
Short Range Correlation (SRC) pair with very large relative momentum. These
pairs are predominantly proton-neutron pairs. They account for all of the high-
momentum nucleons and most of the kinetic energy in the nucleus. Studying the
abundances and properties of these SRC pairs will inform researchers about
nuclear structure, nucleon structure modification in the nucleus, and the NN
interaction at very short distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.