* 2137305
* LEAPS-MPS: Hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods for non-linear integro-differential boundary value problems in magnetic plasma confinement
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tonatiuh Sanchez-Vizuet, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop computational methods for the solution of
a family of non-linear and integro-differential equations that arise from the
study of magnetic equilibrium in axisymmetric fusion reactors. The tools and
techniques developed as part of the project will contribute to the theoretical
understanding of the behavior of magnetic confinement fusion. In addition, it
will provide a tool to the plasma physics community for the efficient simulation
of some of the processes taking place in a reactor. Thus, the project has the
potential to contribute to the development of clean energy sources. As part of
the broader goal of increasing the participation of ethnic minorities in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics, the project will organize a
colloquium addressed to undergraduate and beginning graduate students at the
University of Arizona. The colloquium will feature mathematicians from
underrepresented communities who are successful practitioners of mathematics in
a variety of settings (academia, national laboratories, industrial research and
development, and government agencies). Speakers will present a broad and
accessible view of their research and will interact with the students, share
advice and personal experiences related to the mathematical profession and their
own educational career. This will serve the dual purpose of (1) challenging the
perceived "traditional image" of a professional mathematician by showcasing the
contributions of individuals with diverse cultural and ethnical backgrounds, and
(2) providing students with several non-standard role models and a more diverse
image of the mathematical profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
component of the project has two main goals: (1) devise and analyze hybridizable
discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) discretizations for a broad class of non-linear
elliptic integro-differential equations, and (2) apply the results obtained from
the previous point into a freely available software implementation that can be
used directly by the computational plasma physics community. The mathematical
interest in the problems considered extends well beyond the field of plasma
physics and will motivate the expansion of the theory of the HDG method into
areas where it had not been applied before. From the point of view of
applications, the project will develop a set of freely available computational
tools and software that will directly influence the magnetic fusion community
and can be beneficial to other areas of applied science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.