* 2137023
* Unraveling VTA modulation of hippocampal encoding
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Olalekan Ogundele, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2027
* USD 548,445.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is an organ that stores,
compares, and interprets information about the state of the body, and how
organisms interact with their environment. There is a wealth of information
about objects, time, space, and events available to the organism. However, the
storage capacity of the brain, and the volume of information that can be
processed – at once – is limited. For this reason, there is a need for the brain
to assign priority levels to environmental stimuli and select what is most
applicable at a given time point. This mechanism and connections between the
brain regions of the brain that controls it are still poorly understood. This
research will investigate how two key brain regions concerned with novelty
detection work together to continuously classify and prioritize the information
to be stored in a continuously changing environment. This research will have a
broad impact on society by increasing our knowledge and understanding of
cognition in normal states. This research will further have broader impacts by
elucidating the role of specific cell types in learning, and how their
dysregulation can lead to neurological disorders. Lastly, this research is
designed to increase participation in STEM by facilitating the training of
students in cutting-edge techniques that can be applied broadly in biomedical
science research and industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reciprocal connection
between the VTA and hippocampus (CA1) forms a loop that governs novelty
detection. While the VTA contains dopamine, glutamate, and GABA neurons, the
function of the loop has been primarily attributed to the VTA dopamine
projections. The goal of this research is to dissect the functional significance
of VTA glutamate projections to the hippocampus, and their role in novelty
learning and context discrimination. To achieve this goal, neural recording will
be combined with optogenetic modulation of VTA terminals in the CA1 of freely
behaving mice. This method will create the premise to address two main
objectives; (1) Determine the function of the VTA-CA1 tract in CA1 integration
of working memory and context. (2) Ascertain the role of VTA presynaptic inputs
in CA1 pyramidal cell-interneuron synchrony. This research will fill gaps in the
knowledge and understanding of neural circuits that govern novelty learning and
context discrimination behavior. Cutting-edge genetic and electronic tools will
be deployed to target and modulate VTA terminals in the CA1 of mice during
behavioral tasks. Performing these experiments will significantly increase the
understanding of cell-specific projections within the VTA-hippocampus loop. It
will also elucidate the function of cell-specific neural circuits that have been
overlooked by a traditional focus on VTA dopamine
projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.