* 2137824
* S-STEM Research Hub: Investigating How Low-Income Students Approach Non-Tuition Expenses
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Sara Goldrick-Rab, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,376,591.00

This S-STEM Research Hub will contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need. This hub, housed in the Hope Center at Temple
University, focuses on STEM affordability and will explore non-tuition barriers
for low-income students at community colleges. STEM graduates from all
backgrounds can propel a vibrant economy driven by innovation. There is evidence
that positive outcomes have come from expanding scholarship opportunities and
co-curricular activities. Despite this progress, stark societal inequities
affecting students’ persistence, transfer, and degree completion rates are
impeding successful entry into the STEM workforce. This is especially the case
at the nation’s community colleges, where an estimated 1 in 2 graduates with
degrees in a STEM field get their start. Many community college students face
significant economic challenges, including growing evidence that many have
inadequate and inequitable access to food, housing, and other essentials. Hub
research focus on exploring how low-income students interact with various
support mechanisms. These data will be used to develop and study interventions
intended to connect low-income students with key supports, such as food or
housing support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hub will collaborate with 10 community
colleges in five states to examine the challenges community college STEM
students face in covering non-tuition expenses. Research will focus on STEM
community college students' specific challenges when it comes to addressing non-
tuition expenses. The project will examine practices and programs available to
STEM community college students and explore how they are being used. It will
also investigate how low-cost interventions can help connect STEM community
college students to supports for addressing their non-tuition expenses. Each
participating institution will administer the validated #RealCollege survey to
all students and link the outcomes to student records. The instrument includes
questions about the non-tuition expenses students’ face and how they seek to
cover them. Other data sources include an analysis of state-level programs and
focus groups with administrators, staff, and faculty. These data will be used to
design and deploy approaches intended to connect low-income STEM students with
resources, and to assess whether these supports help students reach greater
levels of success. Specifically, the hub will conduct a randomized control study
to examine the impacts of low-cost, light-touch “nudges” on students’ usage of
non-tuition support programs. Project outcomes will make it easier for millions
of low-income adults seeking STEM credentials to obtain those degrees and
certificates, improving effectiveness and outcomes for the nation’s community
colleges. Results and interventions will be disseminated through seminars,
presentations, journal publications and via the Hope Center website and social
media accounts. This hub is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.