* 2137791
* BPC-AE: An Extended CAHSI Alliance to Broaden Participation in Graduate Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mohsen Beheshti, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,949,542.00

The University of Texas, El Paso will lead and extend the work of the Computing
Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI) Broadening Participation in
Computing Alliance. CAHSI plays a pivotal role in addressing the
underrepresentation of Hispanics in computing and developing future Hispanic
leaders in computing with advanced degrees. This Alliance Extension aims to
increase the number of students who pursue and complete graduate degrees in
computing areas, in particular Hispanics and women. This goal will be realized
by the addition of nine Carnegie-classified R1 (very high research activity)
HSIs to the CAHSI network, increasing the number of doctoral-granting CAHSI
institutions to 13.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal of the CAHSI
BPC-AE project is to advance a research-based framework for attracting,
preparing, and supporting female students and others from underrepresented
groups, in particular Hispanic students who are citizens and permanent
residents, in their trajectory toward completion of graduate degrees in
computing areas. The objectives of the project are: (1) expand students’
research knowledge at participating CAHSI institutions through exposure to
research as a career pathway; (2) involve upper division students in research
experiences that prepare them for graduate-level research; and (3) build
graduate program infrastructure through adoption and study of evidence-based,
multi-institutional graduate support structures that lead to Hispanic students’
success in their graduate studies. The expected outcomes are a model of serving
Hispanics in graduate computing education grounded in organizational contexts of
HSIs that are transferable and adaptable to all institutions invested in
broadening participation in computing; peer-reviewed publications on inclusive
CS models for Hispanic students in graduate programs; an increase in the number
of students from underrepresented groups, particularly Hispanic US citizens and
permanent residents, who enter and are retained in computing graduate studies;
extended partnerships with industry, national research labs, and non-profits
that provide financial support for research preparation and
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.