* 2137168
* SBIR Phase II: A web-application that enables hands-on biotech laboratory education for students regardless of socioeconomic status
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Vicki Meadows, Zenobia Therapeutics
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,018,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is equitable access to a quality science
education regardless of socioeconomic status or geographic location. Across the
nation, science illiteracy is an ongoing issue with only 30% of students testing
as having a basic knowledge of science. As a result, the U.S. does not have
enough trained scientists to commercial or academic laboratories. This situation
has been deemed a national crisis and is considered a risk to U.S. national
security. A quality science education has lasting benefits to students including
more persuasive and clear communication skills, and the ability to design and
develop critical approaches to problem-solving. The long-term goal of this
program is to raise science literacy across the nation and provide career
readiness training for the next generation of scientists. The program meets all
three dimensions of Next Generation Science Standards. A book version of the
program is being rolled-out to independent study charter schools in California.
The online program will be tested in schools which have adopted the books. Both
book and online versions will be expanded to charter schools, private schools,
and eventually public schools. Modules of the program may be adopted in areas
without access to high-speed internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses inequities in science
education by providing an independent study application that includes step-by-
step instruction for a hands-on chemical laboratory. All hands-on laboratories
use reagents commonly found in the home for safety and accessibility reasons.
Experiments are designed to be done without the need for a trained science
teacher in the room. Studies show that hands-on learning is more impactful than
computer simulations. Low-cost scientific equipment is also being developed. A
hand-powered spinning centrifuge is under final design. During Phase II, a drug
discovery module will be developed where students can find a potential cure for
a disease in their own kitchen or classroom. Aims also include modifying the
online application to make it easily expandable, scalable and maintainable for
the long term. The application development includes technical optimization for
reliable deployment nationwide and new interfaces to allow educators to upload
content directly into the application. The project also includes security audits
of the application including user information. Financial information will be
managed through a third-party application. The product will be iteratively
tested in classrooms and homeschools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.