* 2137344
* CAREER: Enabling Sustainable Polymer Synthesis through Design of New Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Bradley Carrow, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 73,096.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Bradley Carrow of the Department of Chemistry at Princeton
University is studying the synthesis of new catalysts to prepare functional
polymers directly from abundant industrial chemicals, such as ethylene, acrylic
acid derivatives, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide. Polymers are long chain
organic molecules that derive many of their properties from the entanglements
and interactions between the chains. Polymers have become ubiquitous materials
in our daily lives, impacting most industries, including agriculture and food,
health and safety, as well as transportation. The modification of polyethylene,
the most common of all polymers (187 billion pounds produced in 2014), to
include atoms other than carbon and hydrogen can give rise to distinct new
material properties, such as enhanced biodegradability, that could extend the
applications of this essential polymer class into new arenas. Catalytic
production methods are poised to accomplish these goals in a sustainable fashion
because they occur with lower energy demand and better molecular structure
control than standard routes that are still practiced commercially. The project
is providing an integrated research and educational experience for graduate and
undergraduate students through research and science communication training.
Professor Carrow is developing a program designed to reach educators from
Trenton and Newark area high schools that also includes plans to train graduate
students to communicate and interact with people who are not "fellow experts."
These schools have a large proportion of students whose ethnicity is
underrepresented in the chemistry field, and therefore the plans have a strong
component of broadening the participation of underrepresented students in STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Carrow is leveraging
the flexible structure of chelating phosphine-phosphonic diamide (PPDA) ligands
as a platform for systematic studies of alkene migratory insertion reactions
involving group 10 metal complexes relevant to catalytic insertion
copolymerizations of ethylene with acrylates, carbon monoxide, or carbon
dioxide. Insertion polymerization catalysts are strongly inhibited by
intramolecular coordination of a functional group within a polymeryl ligand
following polar monomer enchainment, which generally depresses catalyst
efficiencies below practical thresholds. These limitations have persisted over
many years, and fundamental mechanistic insights are still needed for the design
of next generation catalysts, particularly those of base metals, with
significantly improved activity, molecular weight control, and sequence
distribution control. Professor Carrow is developing structure-activity
relationships from reactions of palladium and nickel complexes each with a
characteristic PPDA ligand to disentangle the ensemble effects of ligand charge,
donicity, and steric encumbrance on the rates of stoichiometric reactions
involving model catalyst resting state complexes. Parallel studies within a
catalytic manifold are correlating these electrostatic, inductive, and steric
forces with changes in relative propagation and chain transfer rates involving
ethylene and a comonomer, which ultimately dictate the catalyst control over
polymer sequence distribution, microstructure, and molecular weight.