* 2137410
* Understanding the Gendered Impacts of COVID-19 in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Marya Rozanova-Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 660,422.00

This award supports research on how the COVID-19 pandemic has affected women
across political, economic, social, civic and personal domains in three Arctic
locations. The PI will assess the effects of pandemic conditions on existing
gender inequalities and policy responses. Through collaboration with tribal and
community liaisons, the project will also evaluate pandemic impacts on
Indigenous women in Alaska and Russia. Qualitative and quantitative data from
both rural and urban locations will ensure broad coverage of the study areas. A
series of indicators tracking political, economic, social and civic gendered
policy responses will be developed and deployed online for public use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a case study approach, employing mixed
methods to identify and evaluate pandemic impacts on women. Qualitative data
collection includes interviews and focus groups with women in Alaska, Iceland,
and Russia. The PI will also analyze quantitative socioeconomic data on labor
force participation, earnings, and employment. Study locations were selected to
reflect both rural and urban contexts and to include both Indigenous and non-
Indigenous participants. Broader impacts include training and education of
students, development of university curriculum, promotion of gender equality to
the public and stakeholder organizations, and a multilingual web portal making
the study data and findings available to a global
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.