* 2137098
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and Precipitation at Summit: Measurements along Lagrangian Transects
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 11/30/2024
* USD 219,599.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
proposals and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
continues an 11-year field experiment called the Integrated Characterization of
Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and Precipitation at Summit (ICECAPS) and
adds measurements along Lagrangian transects (ICECAPS-MELT). The project is an
international collaboration that has been operating ground-based instruments at
Summit Station in Greenland since 2010, taking observations of the atmosphere to
advance understanding of cloud properties, radiation and surface energy, and
precipitation processes over the Greenland Ice Sheet. It is an important time to
make these observations because Greenland is undergoing changes due to rapid
shifts in Arctic climate. The current project continues the observations made at
Summit Station and expands measurements along transects to another important
region of Greenland called the percolation zone. In this zone, melt water is
generated at the surface, where it can percolate down into the snow and then
refreeze. This creates ice layers that can cause additional melt water to move
horizontally rather than vertically. It is important to understand these
processes because melting of the Greenland Ice Sheet is a significant
contributor to global sea level, which is predicted to impact humans
significantly over the next century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new ICECAPS-MELT
project complements the ICECAPS Summit observatory by building a new mobile
observatory for measuring parameters of the surface mass and energy budgets of
the Greenland Ice Sheet. This observatory uses a novel approach for unattended,
autonomous operation by supporting instruments that require moderate power and
internet bandwidth yet are quite like those operated at Summit Station. The new
observatory measures surface mass and energy budget parameters, including
precipitation, cloud properties, radiative and turbulent fluxes, near-surface
meteorology, and subsurface temperatures and structure. To do this, the ICECAPS-
MELT team deploys a precipitation radar, a cloud lidar, a microwave radiometer,
a ground-penetrating radar, and an automated surface flux station, which consume
approximately 500 W of power under normal conditions. The project will lead to
new insights into how parameters of the surface mass and energy budgets co-vary
in space and time between this new observatory and the ongoing measurements at
Summit. Trajectory analyses track the changes in air parcels as they ascend the
Greenland Ice Sheet and pass over the two observational sites. The mobile
observatory will be deployed in successive summers at Summit Station in the dry-
snow zone and at the DYE-2 station in the percolation zone. If this project is
successful, a network of these observatories will be proposed for future
deployment in southwestern Greenland, which will provide new insights into how
atmospheric properties and processes are coupled both spatially and temporally
to the ice sheet’s surface and subsurface conditions over
Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.