* 2138447
* Collaborative Research: Research: Development and Validation of Learning through Making Instrument (LMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2026
* USD 57,714.00

Makerspaces are informal learning environments that facilitate multimodal
learning through iterative practice, collaboration, design, building, prototype,
and management. They have proliferated America’s college campuses, with initial
creation costs in the thousands to millions of dollars. While emerging data
demonstrate the tremendous impact makerspaces may create in the engineering
learning experience especially for learning engineering-relevant skills, data
also demonstrate that makerspaces fail to meet aspirations of being egalitarian,
open, inclusive, and welcoming spaces for all. Currently, it is difficult to
determine the learning impact of a makerspace and to compare different
makerspaces structures or makerspaces at different institutions with different
populations of students. Drawing upon qualitative research that identified the
modes and contents of learning in university makerspaces, this project will
create and validate an instrument that measures student learning in makerspaces:
the Learning through Making survey Instrument. The Learning through Making
Instrument will provide a tool for researchers and educators to assess the
educational value of makerspaces, compare across different environments,
experiment with different approaches, document the learning impacts, and
ultimately facilitate understanding how makerspaces can enhance engineering
education. This instrument will assist educators in understanding learning gaps
that may be associated with obstacles for women, students of color,
international students, and first-generation college students providing
educators with data critical for designing more inclusive makerspaces and
associated curriculum that broaden participation and cultivate more inclusive
learning communities. The Learning through Making Instrument will be developed
and validated for collegiate students providing a springboard for quantitative
research on learning in makerspaces and will facilitate future development of
similar instruments applicable for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is to develop a survey for measuring learning in university
makerspaces and similar environments. The proposal team’s prior work, The
Learning through Making Typology will be a partial basis for development of the
Learning through Making Instrument. Data for instrument development and
validations with diverse engineering students will occur at very different
universities, including San Jose State, Texas State, Texas A&amp;M, Purdue
University, Georgia Tech, and James Madison University. The selection includes
two Hispanic-Serving Institutions in two different regions of the country; a
comprehensive, mid-Atlantic, regional, undergraduate-focused university offering
only a general engineering degree; research-focused universities; and a top
school for graduating Black and women engineers that also has dual-degree
programs providing access to students from HBCUs. These universities also
provide a contrasting set of makerspaces. An initial pool of items will be
generated, experts will evaluate the pool of items, and evidence of reliability
along with structural validity will be sought by exploratory factor analysis and
then confirmatory factor analysis. Standards for Educational and Psychological
Testing indicate that fairness of assessments is just as crucial as validity and
reliability, and fairness will be evaluated as a key part of this research. We
seek to answer the following Research Questions: To what extent are measurement
construct specifications and actual assessment questions aligned? To what extent
are there measurement invariances between gender and minority groups? Are there
significant differences in the mean scores between groups that indicate certain
groups are learning differently in makerspaces?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.