* 2138869
* ERI: Sub-diffractive Optical Trapping Enabled by Deep-Learning-Assisted Metasurface Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Nasim Mohammadi Estakhri, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2025
* USD 199,825.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex interactions of light
with different materials and structures enable several everyday applications:
generating electricity with solar cells, magnifying very small objects with
light microscopes, or transmitting large amounts of data through optical fibers.
Beyond these well-known electromagnetic (EM) interactions, light can also exert
pressure (i.e., force) on objects which, if properly controlled, can allow for
movement and positioning of very small particles. For instance, nanoparticles,
cells, and molecules are 10s to 1000s of times smaller than the size of the
human hair and thus require a proportionally accurate control of the force
exerted on them to enable the desired movement or positioning. This directly
depends on how well light can be confined into small areas as well as the
ability to shape the local distribution of the energy around the particles.
Conventional optical trapping devices (called optical tweezers) are a good
candidate for manipulating micron-sized objects (sizes in the order of one
millionth of a meter such as cells) but cannot create nanoscale confinement
(sizes in the order of one billionth of a meter such as proteins), thus are not
suitable for manipulating individual nanoscale objects. To circumvent these
limitations and enable new degrees of freedom in optical nano-trapping, this
project is designed to utilize deep learning algorithms for creating optimal
energy distributions near a finely patterned surface (called metasurfaces) to
trap nanoparticles. These surfaces are made of low-loss dielectric materials
whose profile is designed to create nanoscale light confinement and to
efficiently trap particles with different sizes and shapes. In addition, the PI
engages in educational and outreach activities including undergraduate research
mentoring and workshop organization for K-12 and college students, focusing on
promoting science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and
introducing students to applications of computer science in other scientific
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project aims to
leverage the wave-shaping properties of metasurfaces to design a novel class of
compact nanostructures for sub-diffractive optical trapping, able to generate
desired trapping potentials with giant optical forces that are tailored for the
particles of choice. Conventional approaches for optical trapping do not readily
allow nanoscale focusing of light and face major barriers in achieving effective
optical nano-trapping for particles smaller than 100 nm. These barriers include
requirement for high intensity lasers to generate local force which in return
may cause photothermal damage to the sample as well as failure to distinguish
and trap single nanoparticles due to large focal area. These limitations are
addressed by using artificial neural networks to capture the highly nonlinear
and complex particle-field interactions while leveraging the large design space
offered by metasurfaces. The specific objectives of the project include: (i)
generating highly confined trapping potentials near metasurfaces, (ii) ability
to tailor the trapping potential for various particle shapes/sizes, (iii)
creating local repulsive and attractive forces in different directions and
locations on the surface, and (iv) creating enhanced optical forces suitable for
subwavelength nanoparticles while preventing permanent photothermal damage
resulted from high laser power. In addition, PI engages in research mentoring
and organization of symposia focused on promoting STEM and introducing students
to implications of deep learning in the design of photonic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.