* 2138414
* ERI: Physical Simulation of Terrain-Induced and Large-Scale Turbulence Effects on the Effectiveness of Wind Mitigation Strategies for Low-Rise Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Pedro Fernandez-Caban, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2023
* USD 199,159.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award will focus on the characterization of near-surface wind
fields to investigate the effectiveness of roof load mitigation strategies for
low-rise buildings. Wind-induced damage to roof components of low-rise buildings
is predominantly attributed to extreme suction loads caused by vortices that
develop when the oncoming wind flow impinges on the structure, resulting in flow
detachment near roof corners and edges. Previous research has demonstrated the
effectiveness of several wind mitigation strategies for alleviating uplift roof
pressures under a limited number of idealized wind tunnel flow conditions. This
research will leverage a novel flow-control instrument at the University of
Florida Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Experimental
Facility to physically simulate a wide range of atmospheric flows in a large
boundary layer wind tunnel. The project will integrate machine learning and
computational modeling to predict extreme wind loading for unexplored wind
tunnel configurations and fill critical knowledge gaps associated with the
complex relation between atmospheric turbulence and aerodynamic loading. The
large volumes of velocity and pressure data will be made available in the NHERI
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). The research will address
fundamental fluid-structure interaction questions while enhancing the
performance of roof systems, and ultimately contribute to increasing wind hazard
resilience of low-rise buildings. This award will contribute to the National
Science Foundation role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program
(NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research include: (i)
the physical characterization of natural wind flows with precisely modulated
frequency content, including low-frequency (large-scale) turbulence, which is
traditionally deficient in wind tunnel tests conducted on large low-rise
building models; (ii) experimental assessment of roof uplift load mitigation
strategies for low-rise buildings tested under a wide range of properly
calibrated upwind terrain conditions and large-scale turbulent structures; (iii)
development and refinement of a deep neural network (DNN) to map complex
relationships between incident turbulence and the effectiveness of wind
mitigation strategies for reducing peak suction loads; and (iv) the calibration
of numerical inflow turbulence models using high-fidelity flow velocity and
pressure wind tunnel data. The datasets will offer a reliable calibration tool
to enhance the accuracy of numerical models, and ultimately help advance
computational wind engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.