* 2138273
* S-STEM-Hub: Investigating the Capacity of Historically Black Colleges and Universities to Develop, Accommodate, and Graduate Low-Income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Mercy Mugo, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,151,081.00

This S-STEM Research Hub is coordinated by the Quality Education for Minorities
(QEM) Network in partnership with the American Institutes for Research (AIR) and
seeks to better understand strategies for engaging and graduating low-income
STEM students. The QEM-AIR Research Hub (The Hub) will provide an infrastructure
for a strategic HBCU alliance to collaborate and expand their knowledge base on
effective strategies to support domestic, low-income, talented STEM students.
This knowledge is of utmost strategic importance for the Nation because the
current composition of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) workforce does not reflect the current racial diversity of the U.S., and
the intersection of race and socioeconomic status belies current efforts to
broaden participation by exclusively focusing on race. According to the National
Science Foundation National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, in
2017, Blacks or African Americans represented approximately 12% of the U.S.
adult population between the ages of 18-64 years; however, in 2016, their share
of bachelor’s degrees awarded in science and engineering (S&amp;E) were 9% and
4%, respectively. Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) play a
prominent role in the STEM education of African Americans, a role that is
disproportionate to their representation among the Nation’s institutions of
higher education. Although HBCUs represent only 3% of the nation’s institutions
of higher learning, Fiegener &amp; Proudfoot demonstrated that by 2013 they
remain among the nation’s top baccalaureate-origin institutions for a
significant proportion of African American S&amp;E doctoral recipients. HBCUs
share a common mission to provide and increase educational opportunities for
underserved communities and are uniquely positioned to contribute to the
nation’s efforts to diversify the STEM workforce. Understanding HBCUs strategies
for engaging and graduating low-income STEM students is vital to the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Hub infrastructure will include
curated virtual learning and sharing opportunities, capacity building and
technical assistance webinars, and dissemination activities. Also, The Hub will
use retention theory as a framework and conduct rigorous, primary research on
developing, accommodating, and graduating domestic low-income STEM students who
begin or transition into postsecondary education at HBCUs. The project goals are
to: 1) conduct robust and innovative research to understand the optimal pathways
by which low-income students matriculate at HBCUs and enter successful careers
in STEM; 2) provide capacity building, technical support, and strategic
alliances for HBCU researchers to contribute to our collective understanding of
pathways to success for low-income STEM students; and 3) disseminate research
findings on optimal pathways for low-income students to matriculate at HBCUs and
enter successful careers in STEM within academia, government, nonprofits, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.