* 2138895
* Workshop on CMOS+X Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Sayeef Salahuddin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2022
* USD 41,375.00

The semiconductor industry has played a prominent role in the US and global
economy for more than 50 years and has impacted human experience in an
irreplaceable manner. While the most common practice is to just think about
computers when the term "semiconductor industry" is mentioned, its societal
impact is broader than that. Indeed transportation, healthcare, internet,
energy, defense, AI, sustainable environment etc. are all fueled by the engine
that is called the semiconductor industry. As cloud and 5G/6G are poised to
impart huge impact at the global scale, the importance of the semiconductor
industry is only growing to grow in the coming years. However, the US leadership
in manufacturing chips has consistently eroded and is now facing steep
competition from around the world. The proposed workshop involving leading
researchers in the field is meant to provide recommendations to NSF for new
research directions, both in terms of facilities and future programs in the
domain. In addition to the providing new research directions, the results of the
workshop are to include new ideas to train students and researchers and thus
help develop workforce for US industry of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
revitalize the US semiconductor industry it is imperative to develop
infrastructure where new ideas for future computing hardware can be explored,
fabricated and tested in a relevant scale. These facilities will need to be able
to fabricate both advanced CMOS and new technologies (sometimes referred as the
'CMOS+X') and integrate them in a seamless manner. Indeed, similar facilities
are being developed in other countries. This workshop will develop an outline
for a network of US facilities by listening to domain experts. The workshop
report will aim to provide recommendations to NSF for both facilities and
programs that can make such an effort successful and thus serve a very critical
national need in the most efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.