* 2138956
* ERI: Multi-Layer Dynamic Strategic Decision-Making for Integrated Cyber-Physical Energy Systems Security and Resilience
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Juntao Chen, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,817.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pervasive adoption of
advanced information and communication technologies (ICTs) in electric power
systems has made the grid a complex cyber-physical energy system (CPES). Among
the ICTs, the Internet of Things (IoT) plays a crucial role in filling the gap
between the control and monitoring of electricity services and physical grid
dynamic processes. The widespread implementation of IoT devices significantly
improves the CPES's operational performance, but it also exposes the grid to
vast cyber threats. It has been revealed that the adversary can disrupt the CPES
operations through IoT botnet attacks by compromising a large number of IoT-
operated energy devices in the power distribution system and using them as a
means to launch a coordinated cyber-physical attack. Classical approaches to
trustworthy CPES focus on improving cybersecurity to prevent attacks or
enhancing physical resiliency to restore the system operation after attacks.
However, solely relying on either approach is not a viable solution as achieving
perfect security or resiliency is extremely cost-prohibitive, if not impossible.
To this end, this project aims to devise cost-effective and holistic mechanisms
for enhancing both the security and resiliency of CPES under large-scale IoT
botnet attacks. The design paradigm will jointly mitigate the risks of the cyber
components and equip the physical grid with agile recovery
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a unified theoretical
framework to facilitate grid operators' decentralized, strategic, and
integrative decision-making on security and resiliency strategies in CPES.
Specifically, the project will first establish a quantitative framework for
analyzing the systemic cyber-physical risks imposed by the massive IoT-
controlled energy devices in the microgrid. This systemic risk model will then
be integrated with the microgrid's operation framework to study the attacker's
strategic behavior in destabilizing the grid. The adversarial analysis
facilitates uncovering the most vulnerable locations in the microgrids, which is
leveraged to guide the strategic defense. The second research thrust will
establish a dynamic game to enable the integrated design of proactive cyber
defense and physical resiliency planning strategies for networked microgrids.
The multi-layer multi-stage game-theoretic design provides preventive security
mechanisms to harden the cyber components of CPES and corrective resiliency
measures to improve the preparedness of the physical grid for attacks. The
project will further develop distributed learning-based mechanism for the
microgrid operators to counteract the strategic adversaries adaptively. The
developed techniques and results in this project will be demonstrated using
public power system simulation tools. The PI will integrate the research
outcomes into the engineering, data science, and cybersecurity curriculum,
providing students cross-disciplinary training in cyber-physical smart grids,
security and resilience, and artificial intelligence. The PI is also committed
to public education through outreach activities to further broadening the
participation of women and minorities as undergraduate and graduate students in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.