* 2138740
* ERI: Shear-Flow-Driven Coupled Mechanisms as a Means to Actively Control Particle Dissolution
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Yanxing Wang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2024
* USD 193,274.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissolution of solid
particles in a liquid is ubiquitous in nature and it arises in a wide array of
scientific and industrial applications. Nevertheless, the fundamental mechanisms
of dissolution are still an active area of research. In most cases, particle
dissolution involves three basic mechanisms: fluid and particle dynamics, mass
transfer from a particle to the surrounding fluid, and particle erosion. These
three mechanisms are coupled, and they interact with each other through complex
nonlinear relationships that are not completely understood. In particular, the
effect of hydrodynamics on dissolution arising from fluid-particle interactions
has long been overlooked. There is strong evidence that local shear flow
enhances mass transfer from the particle surface to the surrounding fluid. This
ERI award comprises high-fidelity numerical simulations, high-precision
experimental measurements, and novel machine learning techniques that together
will help identify the critical role of flow in the dissolution of non-spherical
particle systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERI award will focus on 1) the
coupling dynamics of fluid and particle motion, mass transfer of dissolved
species, and surface erosion of prolate and oblate particles and irregularly
shaped particles in simple shear flow; and 2) bridging the gap between
microscale dynamics and macroscale descriptions of dissolution in suspensions of
particles. High-fidelity modeling of detailed microscale dynamics, including
reduced-basis modeling of arbitrarily shaped particles, will be coupled to
population balance modeling of the temporal evolution of particle size and shape
at the macroscale. The results of the research should provide guidance to
actively control particle dissolution by adjusting flow shear rate and the
initial distribution of particle size and geometry. The results could be applied
in a wide array of applications including biological and chemical synthesis,
renewable biomass energy, targeted drug delivery, degradation of biomaterials,
and dissolvable microrobots. The research will provide training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.