* 2138236
* ERI: Hybrid magnonic optics for data processing applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Dmytro Bozhko, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,974.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern communications and data
processing rely on electromagnetic waves such as light or microwaves. Guiding
and manipulation with light can be done by using such well-known elements as
fibers, lenses, prisms, and mirrors. For effective operation, their size cannot
be made smaller than the wavelengths of the used wave, which significantly
limits the miniaturization capabilities of microwave and optical devices. The
situation could be significantly improved if shorter waves will be used for
encoding information. This project is focused on the investigation of magnetic
materials, in which microwave wavelengths can be made significantly shorter. One
of the main goals of this proposal is to build optical elements in magnetic
systems to advance the existing technology towards the creation of energy-
efficient and ultra-compact microwave devices. Another goal is to create
magnonic elements mimicking the functionality of human brain neurons. Such
devices are the core elements of neuromorphic computers, which could be used in
a broad range of pattern recognition tasks. In the frame of this project, the
principal investigator will educate the new generation of students in modern
microwave and optical measurements techniques, materials engineering, and
nanofabrication, which will commit to further development of the U.S. science,
engineering, and technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the
development of spin-wave-based physical data processing devices. Spin waves are
eigen-excitations of magnetization in magnetically ordered materials. Their
properties strongly depend on the magnetization order, which can be controlled
by the applied bias magnetic field. The rationale of the proposal is the control
of spin-wave dispersion in magnetic conduits using local fields produced by
adjacent magnetic layers of other material with different magnetization and high
anisotropy. Based on this principle, various spin-wave optical elements, such as
lenses, prisms, magnonic crystals, frequency multiplexers, and Fourier-optics
devices will be designed, created, and optimized. By using adjacent magnetic
elements with different magnetization patterns, complicated wave-scattering
geometries could be realized, creating broad possibilities for customization of
the device functions. One of the key benefits of such a system is the
possibility to tune these patterns by remagnetizing the whole structure by
external field without a need to change the geometry of the layer. Special
attention will be devoted to downscaling these devices while preserving their
characteristics. Spin-waves intrinsic nonlinearity will be used to build optical
elements with threshold-like behavior, which is required for the creation of an
artificial neuron. In the last stage of the proposal, the developments will be
combined for the realization of the nonlinear spin-wave reservoir computing
device prototype. The described research aims are going to be achieved by
intense experimental study of the proposed prototypes by means of Brillouin
light scattering technique together with microwave characterization as well as
numerical micromagnetic simulations. Overall, the proposed research will advance
understanding of the physics of linear and nonlinear waves in magnetic materials
as well result in the creation of a new class of ultra-compact energy-efficient
microwave data processing devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.