* 2138539
* ERI: Analyzing the Impact of Outdoor Water-Use Restrictions and the COVID-19 Pandemic on Water Consumption in Massachusetts
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Katherine Schlef, Western New England University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 114,276.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project will provide critical understanding of the impacts of
outdoor water-use restrictions on water consumption in Massachusetts. Despite
relatively abundant rainfall and regulations on water withdrawal, Massachusetts’
water supplies are stressed. Consequently, public water suppliers are often
required to implement outdoor water-use restrictions by the regulatory
authority. These restrictions are complex, non-uniform, and contentious, and the
COVID-19 pandemic is yet another confounding factor. This project, the first of
its kind to be implemented at a state-wide scale anywhere in the United States,
will (a) provide new insights to facilitate integrated water resources
management at the scale of major river basins, (b) provide comprehensive
analysis to inform regulatory action, and (c) empower public water suppliers
with improved understanding of the factors influencing restriction
effectiveness. Furthermore, this project will identify the impact of the
pandemic, thus providing knowledge about the resilience of Massachusetts’ water
supply systems and revealing important lessons for ensuring water supply under
future unforeseen conditions. Lastly, this project will provide meaningful
research experiences for undergraduate and master students, including those in
minority/underrepresented groups, resulting in valuable benefits such as
increased independence and intrinsic motivation to
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of developing a panel
regression model, complemented by interviewing public supply water managers. The
panel regression will be based on 11 years of monthly data across all
Massachusetts’ public water suppliers, with water consumption as the dependent
variable and drivers of consumption as the independent variables. The
consumption drivers fall into three main categories: hydrometeorological
conditions (e.g., precipitation, temperature, and drought status), consumer
characteristics (e.g., income, household size, and political affiliation), and
public water supplier management decisions (e.g., restriction severity and
timing, promotion of water conservation, and pricing). Additional independent
variables will be used to represent impervious or green area and to address the
presence and severity of the pandemic. The interviews with water managers will
be used to create storylines that guide the development and interpretation of
the panel regression. The interview questions focus on demand and drought
management and on how the pandemic has affected water consumption. The project
will provide the first state-wide assessment of water-use restrictions to be
performed anywhere in the United States, will generate insight on the
effectiveness of both drought-based and permanent restrictions, and will
identify the impacts of the pandemic on water
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.