* 2138346
* ERI: Direct Photochemistry Effects on Carbonyl/Ammonium-derived Aqueous Secondary Organic Aerosol
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Joseph Woo, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,957.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerosols have a significant impact
on air quality, human health, and Earth’s climate via interactions with sunlight
and in forming clouds. Most atmospheric aerosols are secondary organic
aerosols(SOA), formed via the oxidation of volatile organic compounds followed
by partitioning in the aerosol condensed phase particulate matter. Carbonyl-
containing volatile organic compounds (CVOCs) are significant contributors to
SOA. However, the impact of photochemistry of CVOCs on the size, composition and
physical properties of SOA is not well understood. The overarching goal of this
ERI project is to address this knowledge gap. To achieve this goal, the
Principal Investigator (PI) and his team will measure the surface tension, light
absorbance, and compositions of COVC-derived aqueous SOA solutions under varying
amounts of sunlight. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through the development of new fundamental knowledge on the impact of
aerosols on air quality, cloud formation, and climate change. Further benefits
to society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of two undergraduate students at Lafayette College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonyl-containing volatile organic compounds (CVOCs)
such as glyoxal and methylglyoxal and their reactive products are significant
contributors to the formation of aqueous solutions of secondary organic aerosol
(SOA). The overarching goal of this ERI project is to advance the fundamental
understanding of the bulk and surface aqueous photochemistry of CVOCs and its
impacts on the size, composition, and physical properties of aqueous solutions
of SOA. To advance this goal, the PI and his team propose to carry out an
integrated experimental program structured around three tasks. Task 1 will
modify the Lafayette continuous-flow atmospheric chamber though the addition of
UV lamp arrays to enable the exposure of aqueous SOA solutions to varying
amounts of radiation under controlled relative humidity conditions. Task 2 will
measure changes in the size distribution, composition, and surface tension of
SOA solutions using aerosolized aqueous mixtures of CVOCs as model systems. Task
3 will analyze the collected data and compare the changes in the
physical/chemical properties measured in Task 2 to those from analogous bulk
solution and droplet samples. The successful completion of this research has the
potential to advance our fundamental understanding of the formation and
physical/chemical properties of aqueous SoA solutions and their impact on air
quality, cloud formation, radiative forcing, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.