* 2138089
* From Cool to Ultracool: Investigating Magnetism and Rotation in the Smallest Stars and Ultra Cool Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Alejandro Nunez, Nunez                   Alejandro
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 11/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Alejandro Nunez is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research
and education at Columbia University. Dr. Nunez plans a rotational and magnetic
activity census for 13 open star clusters, using public archives of ground and
space-based observatories, complemented with dedicated observations collected
during the Fellowship. Based on these observations, he plans a study of the
dependence of activity on rotation, paying particular attention to ultra-cool
dwarfs, at the different ages of the open clusters to be studied. Dr. Nunez will
mentor participants in the Columbia University Bridge to the Ph.D. program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Nunez will compare different activity indicators to
test competing theories describing magnetic heating of stellar atmospheres.
Despite several decades of theoretical and observational efforts, an accurate,
quantitative description of the age-rotation-activity relation remains elusive.
He seeks to answer several fundamental theoretical questions. He intends to
quantify the dependence of rotation and magnetic activity on quantities such as
the degree of core-envelope coupling and the magnetic field geometry. For the
Bridge to Ph. D. program, his responsibilities will include tracking the
progress of participants, gathering feedback, and by organizing activities that
foster a sense of community among the participants and that help them in their
professional development. He will provide consistent, high-quality, field-
specific advising and mentoring to participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.