* 2138270
* Participation Support for Students to Attend the 22nd American Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy, Virtual, August 2-4, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 7,000.00

This award provides participant support for attendees of the 22nd American
Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy to be held virtually from August 2-4,
2021. The symposium focuses on new research and development activities in bulk
crystal and epitaxial thin film growth. The students and faculty present through
oral and poster sessions their latest research results to the crystal growth and
epitaxy, advanced manufacturing and broader engineering communities. Priority is
given to student and young faculty participants who are women or who come from
underrepresented minority groups. This approach promotes diverse participation
at the conference, in the short term, and in STEM fields, in the long term. This
award benefits the nation through the education of a skilled and diverse
manufacturing workforce, which is better prepared to provide transformative
solutions the challenges in their chosen fields. The conference plays an
important role in supporting and sustaining the important field of crystal
growth and epitaxy, which is an important component of semiconductor research.
This conference is timely because of renewed interest in the revitalization of
semiconductor manufacturing in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participant
support is expected to benefit the students' professional, scientific and
technical development. Attendance at the conference gives the students and
faculty a broader view of crystal growth and thin film epitaxy, its
fundamentals, advanced manufacturing, advanced characterization, and
applications. Symposium topics include fundamentals of materials synthesis,
crystal structure analysis, deposition and crystal growth techniques and
processes, high throughput manufacturing, process modeling, monitoring and
control, and specialized topics, such as 2D nanomaterials. Attendees will learn
about state-of-the-art research in their technical areas via access to several
technical and professional development talks by leading domestic and
international speakers. Students and young faculty enhance their communication
skills through oral and poster presentations and in-depth discussions of their
work with peers in their technical areas. This interactive experience
significantly broadens student education, increases their enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaints them with expectations for scientific careers, and
exposes them to new approaches for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.