* 2138463
* ERI: Towards Data-Capable Engineers with a Variability-Capable Mindset
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Zachary del Rosario, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2024
* USD 186,861.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineers are responsible for
delivering safe, efficient solutions. For instance, automobile manufacturers
need to design cars that are light enough to be gas-efficient, but still sturdy
enough to protect the passenger. A complication in this design process is
variability: No engineer can predict with 100% confidence what a driver will do
with their car or what conditions it will encounter. Traditionally, engineers
handle variability by "overdesign"---making things heavier than they need to be.
However, scientists from other disciplines (such as statisticians) have more
efficient ways to handle variability. A better understanding of variability---
and how engineers themselves react to it---will lead to safer, more efficient
engineering designs. Achieving these efficiency gains is critical for American
economic competitiveness and for addressing anthropogenic climate change. Funded
by the NSF's Research in the Formation of Engineers initiative, this project
will study how real engineers react to variability and will train them to handle
it more efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variability is a key challenge in data
analysis: In order to realize the NSF’s Big Idea of Harnessing the Data
Revolution, engineers will need to have a variability-capable mindset. However,
present engineering education results in professionals who struggle to recognize
and manage variability in engineering applications. This lack of engineering
workforce capability leads to inefficient designs, and in some cases,
dangerously unreliable systems. The aim of this research is to study and improve
the formation of engineers’ variability-capability. The challenges of
variability are well-documented: People generally have difficulty reasoning
about variability in climate science, election forecasting, and matters of human
judgment. This lack of variability-capability leads to climate inaction,
political disengagement, and an unacceptably capricious application of justice.
Focused on engineering, the primary investigator’s previous work identified
decades-standing safety issues in aircraft design, stemming from a
misidentification of a source of deviation (design-relevant variability) as
noise (induced measurement variability). This project will be a mixed-methods
study of practicing engineers: to investigate their ability to identify and
treat different sources of variability, to develop a quantitative instrument to
characterize present engineering workforce capabilities, and to design and
deploy teaching interventions to improve engineers’ variability-capability. Data
collection will be paired with professional development workshops, which will
synergistically create broader impacts via direct training. The project will
advance our collective understanding and treatment of statistical variation,
grounded in engineering practice. The mixed-methods study will fill gaps in the
literature on how practicing engineers reason about variability. Working closely
with engineers in professional development workshops will surface a library of
real-world examples of noise and deviation, strengthening the novel theoretical
framework with a diversity of practical examples. Sampling practitioners from
across disciplines will also provide novel understanding of the differences
across engineering fields, comparing current statistical practices in
engineering and attributing them to differences in training and paradigm. The
proposed work will develop and deploy teaching interventions to train data- and
variability-capable engineers through professional development workshops. Thus
broader impact will be realized both directly (through the professional
development workshops) and indirectly (through dissemination of the teaching
interventions to other institutions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.