* 2138243
* Collaborative Research: Living on the Edge - Quantitative Systems Physiology of Iron Homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Belinda Akpa, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 664,246.00

This project will delineate how BRUTUS (BTS), an iron-binding protein confined
to the plant vasculature, controls iron (Fe) handling throughout the plant –
dynamically responding to changes in Fe levels by regulating other proteins that
are able to move through the plant root and shoot. As in mammals, Fe is a
critical nutrient and essential for several cellular processes. Unfortunately,
it is also potentially toxic to cells. Thus, cells must tightly regulate Fe
availability. By revealing how BTS acts as a master regulator of Fe status in
plants, this work will provide new molecular targets for generating crops with
increased nutrient content or tolerance to pervasive alkaline soils, in which Fe
is poorly available. Over the course of this project, the investigators will
collaborate with NC and TN 4-H Youth Development programs to create experiential
learning modules for youth in rural and minority communities to gain awareness
of plant biology fundamentals through activities designed to promote systems
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E3 ubiquitin ligases are central to Fe
homeostasis in both mammals and plants. In the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana,
the absence of the iron-binding ubiquitin ligase, BRUTUS (BTS), leads to
systemic Fe excess. Although it causes the degradation of transcription factors
that promote Fe uptake, BTS and its transcription factor targets are both
transcriptionally upregulated in response to Fe deficiency. It is unclear how
the concurrent activation of Fe response activators and their antagonists
resolves systemic deficiency. The long-term goal of this project is to delineate
the molecular rules underlying systemic Fe homeostasis in Arabidopsis. Guided by
iteratively refined, model-derived hypotheses, a combination of molecular
biology, imaging, biochemical, and systems biology approaches will be used to 1)
characterize the molecular and intracellular dynamics of BTS and its targets in
the root in response to Fe availability, 2) determine the role of
oligomerization in regulating mobility and activity of deficiency responsive
transcription factors, and 3) identify a shoot-specific network motif that
allows BTS to act as a sensor that is both responsive to and responsible for the
regulation of systemic Fe deficiency signals. The proposed work will provide new
perspectives on how nutrient sensing in a multicellular organism orchestrates
changes in protein-protein interactions in a tissue- and cell-specific manner
and demonstrate how the details of a complex, multiscale regulatory phenomenon
can be uncovered more efficiently by adopting a model-driven research
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.