* 2138147
* Observational Studies of Fast Radio Bursts and Technosignatures with the Allen Telescope Array
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Sofia Sheikh, Sheikh, Sofia Zara
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Sofia Sheikh is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research
and education at the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Institute,
Mountainview, California. Dr. Sheikh will improve coherent imaging methods for
rejection of radio frequency interference (RFI) and use the improved imaging for
characterization of Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs). She will work to broaden
experience in Diversity and Inclusion for underrepresented minority
undergraduate students in astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sheikh plans three research
activities using the unique qualities of SETI's Allen Telescope Array (ATA). The
first is a hardware and software development project to increase the backend
coherent imaging capabilities of the ATA. She will use these new capabilities to
localize and characterize FRBs, which have previously been detected with other
radio telescopes. Her third goal is searching for signs of Extraterrestrial
intelligent life by radio observations of the anti-solar point, defining a
special space and time on the sky from which a distant observer would see Earth
in transit of the Sun. All three activities rely on implementing novel
strategies and pushing into new regions of parameter space (i.e., higher
frequencies, new regions of the sky). Dr. Sheikh seeks to improve the retention
rate of underrepresented scholars in science and engineering fields. Her
approach is mentoring these students and explicitly teaching the unspoken rules
of academic success, helping them build strong professional networks, and
provide introductory research experiences. She will enhance existing programs at
the SETI Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.