* 2138612
* ERI: Towards Safe Aviation Autonomy: A Risk-bounded Planning Framework for Dynamical Systems under Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Jun Chen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,723.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award supports research to enable safe operations in the
increasingly autonomous environment that comprises the national airspace system
(NAS). Development and adoption of drone delivery systems, urban air mobility,
and commercial space transportation make it critical to integrate these modes
into the current NAS. Unsegregated and efficient operations are very challenging
when congested airspace is shared by high volume drone traffic and reserve
aircraft hazard areas during space launches. Increasing autonomy in the NAS can
help relieve congestion by increasing traffic density in limited airspace but
demands high assurance of safe operations. This project will study risk-bounded
planning and operations for the integration of these multiple air traffic modes
and will provide the autonomous systems community with an underlying theory, set
of models, and solution algorithms for risk-bounded planning in the dynamical
and uncertain environment that comprises the NAS.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop the methodological foundations for risk-bounded planning of
dynamical systems under uncertain environments. Within this framework, the
project will study risk-bounded planning algorithms and a distributed computing
approach to integrate autonomous operations within the NAS. The project will
deliver three innovative techniques to support planning and operations in the
NAS environment: (I) a data-driven method for efficient characterization of
uncertainty with dynamical data; (II) a suite of risk-bounded planning
algorithms based on chance constraints and convex approximation for dynamical
systems under uncertainties; (III) a distributed computing framework with a
multi-scale approach that can efficiently solve the chance-constrained models
accounting for generic uncertainties. These methods will be employed to develop
risk-bounded planning algorithms and a dynamic, probabilistic geofence to
support autonomous air traffic integration in the NAS. The project will support
graduate students and enhance the graduate program at San Diego State
University, a Hispanic Serving Higher Education Institution. The PI will also
use a simulation platform to engage K-12 and undergraduate students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, in the areas of aerospace engineering,
information science, and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.