* 2138801
* OPP-PRF: Using Passive Acoustic Monitoring of Bowhead Whales to Identify Biotic and Abiotic Drivers and Timing of Migration
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Angela Szesciorka, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 285,338.00

Bowhead whales migrate through the Bering Strait every spring to feed on
zooplankton growing in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas; they are vital to the
marine ecosystem and to Alaska Native communities. As the Arctic warms, some
whales may be changing their migration patterns to spend winter on their summer
feeding grounds. Changes to migration could impact breeding and increase
competition, killer whale attacks, and ship-strike risk. Bowhead whale
vocalizations provide an opportunity to use passive acoustic monitoring to study
their movement. This project combines data on bowhead whale calls with
environmental and prey data to track movement and predict ship-strike risk. The
findings will improve management of this ecologically, biologically, and
culturally important species and help researchers understand climate change
impacts on whale behavior. Research results will be presented in Alaska and to
Arctic researchers. Activities planned for undergraduate, public, and K-12
audiences will provide opportunities to engage participants in marine mammal
science and bioacoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
impacts of climate change on bowhead migration, the drivers of migration, and
the potential for ship strikes in Bering Strait and the Beaufort and Chukchi
Seas. Long-term passive acoustic data from three mooring locations combined with
modeled environmental and prey data are used to examine the drivers of bowhead
migration. This research will quantify whale presence during seasonal periods
when whales are historically not expected to be present in the area. Results
will indicate whether bowhead whales are changing their migratory patterns,
which could impact Indigenous communities. Whale presence will be analyzed
relative to vessel traffic, which will provide insight on ship-strike risk and
effects of ship noise on bowheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.