* 2138898
* ERI: An Adaptive Incremental Deep Learning Architecture for Real-Time Inference of RF Signals in Dynamic Spectrum Sharing Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ruolin Zhou, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,902.00

5G and beyond, the next generation of wireless communication technology, will
provide higher capacity, faster speeds, and world-wide connectivity,
transforming the way we live, work, learn and entertain. The development of 5G
alone impacts our economy and workforce by contributing $1.4 to $1.7 trillion to
US gross domestic product over the next decade and create 4.6 million 5G-related
jobs through 2034. The dramatic growth and ever-increasing functionality and
performance of wireless devices has crowed the electromagnetic spectrum. Dynamic
spectrum sharing in 5G and beyond can meet the demands of scarce spectrum,
unprecedented traffic, and better quality of service. For example, unlicensed
and license-aided bands, such as 2.4 - 5 GHz industrial, scientific and medical
bands, 6 GHz radio frequency bands, 60 GHz millimeter wave bands, are being
shared for commercial and scientific use. However, dynamically sharing spectrum
poses additional challenges to share autonomously, reliably, and securely among
civilian, government, and defense. Therefore, learning surrounding wireless
signals is essential to support wireless user coexistence over shared spectrum.
This project focuses on developing an adaptive incremental deep learning
architecture to infer radio frequency signals in dynamic spectrum sharing
environments in real time. The proposed research will provide recommendations to
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard P1900.8 on
criteria for evaluating the performance of machine learned spectrum awareness
models. The integration of research and education activities and outreach
activities will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics fields and benefit local community
collaborations through service learning-based curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an
incremental deep learning architecture for adaptively and efficiently detecting,
classifying, and demodulating radio frequency signals in dynamic spectrum
sharing environments in real time with online learning capabilities. The
proposed incremental deep-learning architecture will (1) adaptively learn a wide
range of wireless communication scenarios, starting from a small dataset with
limited known signals or scenarios and then incrementally learning new signals
or scenarios as well as updating the deep learning network in an online manner
without interruption to re-train the whole network and a man-in-the-middle to
label the signal; (2) advance self-learning the spectrum including spectrum
sensing, signal classification and radio frequency parameter characterization in
real-time; and (3) improve deep learning-based signal demodulation with the
adaptive incremental learning, which can replace conventional block-based
demodulation processes and preserve the same performance with high
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.