* 2138296
* ACO: An Open CI Ecosystem to Advance Scientific Discovery (OpenCI)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Shawn Strande, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 04/30/2027
* USD 5,095,842.00

The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign team provides coordination
services as part of the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem:
Services &amp; Support (ACCESS) program. Science and engineering research and
education depend upon an increasingly complex and distributed ecosystem of
cyberinfrastructure (CI). The ACCESS program is an evolution of the National
Science Foundation’s plans for coordination and operation of this CI and
represents a fundamentally new approach to supporting this
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Open CI Ecosystem to Advance Scientific
Discovery (OpenCI) provides the structures and services to support shared
governance, community input, and communication and outreach for the five ACCESS
service tracks (Allocations; End User Support; Operations and Integration;
Monitoring and Measurement; and Technology Translation). OpenCI provides the
tools and services for shared governance and horizontal leadership of the ACCESS
Service Track awardees to create an inclusive CI ecosystem where Service Track
PIs work with common purpose through well-defined decision-making processes,
transparency in communication, and a focus on enabling
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenCI provides four essential functions: 1)
establishes and facilitates governance through the creation and support of the
ACCESS Executive Council, the formal governing body of the ACCESS program; 2)
cultivates expert guidance through the creation and support of the ACCESS
External Advisory Board; 3) engages the community through coordination and
augmentation of communications, outreach, and community-building activities of
the Service Tracks; and 4) serves as a resource to NSF in its oversight of the
ACCESS program across the areas of reporting, evaluation, and
reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenCI’s communication, outreach, and community-
building efforts will broaden the participation of individuals and communities
that have been underserved by the national CI ecosystem. Innovations in
technology, research, and scholarship will be shared with the broader community
that seeks to understand the role of CI in advancing society. The private sector
will find new opportunities for collaboration, and through these opportunities,
help improve the competitiveness of US companies in areas critical for the
economy and the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenCI is led by the National
Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, in partnership with the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC)
at UC San Diego, and the Center for Education Integrating Science, Mathematics
and Computing (CEISMC) at the Georgia Institute of
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.