* 2138431
* ERI: Learning the Constitutive Equations of Chemo-Mechanics from Atomistic Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Haoran Wang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project, the governing laws to describe the mechanics of
materials in response to applied force is studied. These laws of mechanics are
also known as constitutive relations. Traditionally, the constitutive relations
are measured from experiments or based on conservation relations. With the
development of materials science, new materials are emerging to achieve multiple
functionalities. As a result, the constitutive relations are becoming more
complicated. For example, materials need to work under electrical fields or
chemical potentials. We need to know how materials respond to different external
stimuli. The traditional ways of building constitutive relations would no longer
work. This project is to develop a new way to build constitutive relations by
learning from simulation data. Here, the constitutive relations for silicon
anodes in lithium-ion batteries will be constructed. The study will help us
better understand electrode materials and how they fail. The new approach for
constitutive modeling can potentially uncover new knowledge in materials. It
will be an important step towards the design of high-capacity rechargeable
batteries. Therefore, results from this project will contribute to the
development of the national economy and sustainability. This project will
support undergraduate and graduate students, and particularly encourage
underrepresented students to join. The supported students will gain research
experience across mechanics, computations, data science, and energies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the sparse regression method will be used
to learn the governing differential equations of chemo-mechanics for the silicon
anodes in lithium-ion batteries. Sparse regression can identify the functional
forms of the constitutive equations entirely based on spatiotemporal data which
are obtained from Monte Carlo molecular dynamics simulations. This research
includes three tasks: (i) learning the chemo-mechanics equations for bulk
diffusion to compare with existing experiments and models for validation
purposes; (ii) learning the chemo-mechanics equations for surface diffusion to
gain new understandings of the coupling relations of surface diffusion and
mechanics; (iii) learning the probabilistic chemo-mechanics equations to
demonstrate the capabilities of the data-driven method in quantifying the
uncertainties of material behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.