* 2138697
* ERI: Microscale Implants for Closed-loop Neuromodulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Benjamin Johnson, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Bioelectronic medicine has the potential to transform personalized medicine.
Bioelectronic medicines are implanted devices that read and modulate the
electrical activity of the body’s nervous system to treat diseases and
conditions that are resistant to conventional therapy. Medical care with next
generation bioelectronic medicine of size smaller than a grain of rice will be
able to continuously monitor a patient’s state and autonomously deliver on-
demand therapy to significantly reduce clinician burden, improve patient
compliance, and reduce adverse drug reactions and abuse. However, current
bioelectronic medicine relies on large, bulky devices that are highly invasive
and use electronics that cannot sense weak neural signals and deliver
stimulation therapy at the same time. To overcome these barriers and move toward
this vision for next generation bioelectronic medicine, this project seeks to
make key technological advances in circuit design to miniaturize bioelectronic
medicine and enable simultaneous sensing and stimulation for closed-loop
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop miniaturized peripheral
nerve interfaces that can wirelessly record and stimulate at the same time to
enable closed-loop experimentation. To do so, the proposed work will develop a
new cross-domain simulation framework to enable accurate co-simulation of key
physical parameters, such as wireless power harvesting and electrode properties,
with integrated circuit design to optimize the design of microscale neural
interface systems. Next, small-area, low-power circuit design techniques for
neural stimulation and recording will be developed. The stimulation circuitry
will guarantee chronically safe operation without off-chip components by
adaptively monitoring and controlling the electrode interface. The recording
circuitry will employ precisely-timed memoryless sampling to be resilient to
saturating interference from neural stimulation. Lastly, the prototype nerve
interface will be validated in a rodent model and be used to dynamically control
a peripheral nerve as a proof-of-concept demonstration of closed-loop
bioelectronic medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.