* 2138351
* ERI: High-performance Human-robot Collaborative Manufacturing Enabled by Integrated Multimodal Teaching, Learning, Prediction and Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Weitian Wang, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotics is one of critical
technologies in advancing the manufacturing industry, because of its potential
to heighten the efficiency in the productivity and part quality. Traditional
industrial robots are fenced off from human workers on production lines; on the
contrary, collaborative robots are not, making them capable of democratizing
manufacturing industries with dynamic customer demands and high flexibility.
Currently, however, most collaborative robots are programmed by conventional
off-line coding for specific manufacturing applications, e.g., assembly. Then
the robots collaborate with human partners via predefined workflows to perform
simply repetitive tasks. Such a static human-robot collaborative manufacturing
process may be degraded, if any work environment settings or tasks are ever
changed. To address this challenge and advance human-robot collaborative
manufacturing, this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will develop a
competitive solution to train robots not only to be effectively programed by
learning from human demonstrations, but also to actively assist human partners
to jointly accomplish manufacturing tasks. The research will contribute toward
fundamental engineering research on human-robot collaboration in advanced
manufacturing. This project will offer students at Montclair State University,
which has a diverse student body from underrepresented groups, with the latest
robotics training and research, which will diversify the future workforce and
potentially benefit the US industry. In addition, this project will launch
robotics workshops with cutting-edge hands-on activities for local K-12 schools,
especially from underserved districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a teaching-learning-prediction-collaboration framework for
robots to proactively learn from human demonstrations, predict human intentions,
and collaborate with humans in collaborative manufacturing tasks. The major
questions to be solved include the following: (i) how can a human-robot
collaborative manufacturing process be mathematically described and can robots
learn task knowledge from human demonstrations, (ii) how can robots assist human
partners based on the prediction of human intentions in the collaboration
process, and (iii) how can the framework be validated in human-robot
collaborative manufacturing tasks? To fill the knowledge gaps, the human-robot
collaboration will be parameterized through a Markov Decision Process and
develop a multimodal-information-based approach for robots to learn task
customization and human working preference from human partners’ demonstrations
in collaborative manufacturing environments. Further, computational human
intention prediction and human-robot collaboration models will be developed for
robots to leverage the learned strategies to proactively predict human partners’
upcoming intentions and assist humans in shared tasks. Moreover, user studies
will be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the approaches in
collaboration quality improvement by applying findings to real-world human-robot
collaborative tasks in advanced manufacturing
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.