* 2138620
* ERI: Modeling Bacterial Microcompartment Assembly Using a Data-Driven Multiscale Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Alexander Pak, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,998.00

The scope of industrial usage of microbes is increasing. Production of fuels,
chemicals, and vaccines are just a few of the most recent applications. Some
products cannot be made by microbes because of the toxicity of intermediate
compounds. This project is focused on one solution to the toxicity problem,
confining the toxic reactions to a separate compartment inside the cell. The
focus of this project is on bacterial microcompartments that occur naturally.
The goal is to identify the organizing principles that control their size,
shape, and composition. Research outcomes will be adapted into hands-on learning
modules to expose undergraduates and underrepresented groups at nearby high
schools to integrated aspects of biology, physics, data science, engineering,
and computer modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
Haliangium ochraceum microcompartment. This model system was recently
characterized with high- resolution structural information. Essential protein
interactions that regulate the assembly of the microcompartment shells will be
investigated by deriving computational models using systematic dimensional
reduction techniques. The research plan includes two main objectives: (1) To
quantify free energy landscapes for protein oligomerization and (2) To classify
molecular determinants that control microcompartment morphology using coarse-
grained assembly simulations. The computational framework will leverage
systematic multiscale algorithms as hypothesis testing tools. This should
provide a novel perspective on the relationship between microscopic and
macroscopic protein assembly behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.