* 2138730
* Preparing Leaders and Nurturing Tomorrows Scientists: Botany and Beyond (PLANTS III)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2026
* Anna Monfils, Botanical Society of America
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2026
* USD 986,448.00

The PLANTS III program will establish a series of annual workshops and
activities to foster a mentoring network and community of interactions among
faculty, and students, researchers, and career professionals in botany and
allied disciplines with the goal of broadening participation in those
disciplines. The Botanical Society of America (BSA) will lead this effort in
support of a diverse and inclusive botanical community. By addressing plant
awareness and cultivating a diverse and inclusive community of scientists, these
activities can accelerate discovery, research and applied botanical sciences.
These activites will engage the botanical community and professional botanical
societies (e.g., BSA, the American Society of Plant Taxonomists, the Society of
Herbarium Curators) in a collaborative effort to engage a diverse community of
undergraduates, early career professionals, and faculty to affect a more
inclusive scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide
financial support for underrepresented students to engage with botany at
multiple levels; provide several access points for students and faculty that
have been historically excluded, to engage with the botanical sciences; and
create a program and series of inclusive and accessible experiences that provide
sustained personal and social connections supporting a diverse, inclusive and
equitable botanical community. In addition, professional development workshops
will provide faculty with evidence-based best practices of botanical science
education, training for identifying barriers to equity and inclusion in a
science classroom, and methods for engaging a diversity of students in the study
of botanical science. All of these activities are critical to creating a diverse
and inclusive 21st century workforce that will be charged with finding creative
solutions to global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.