* 2138773
* EAGER: Preserve/Destroy Decisions for Simulation Data in Computational Physics and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Victoria Stodden, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 03/31/2023
* USD 85,456.00

The scientific research community has been increasingly developing ways to share
and re-use research data, thereby allowing more discoveries to be made from
previous research investments. Much of the focus on sharing and reusability has
been on experimental and observational data. This project addresses the equally
vexing challenge of how to make best use and re-use of the massive data produced
in computational simulations. Important research questions guiding this project
include: the degree to which simulation results can be replicated; the
advantages of storing the simulation data itself for others to reuse as compared
to providing the computational software so that others can re-run the
simulations; and understanding which software testing practices can facilitate
the replication/reuse of simulation data and the simulation software that
produces those data. The principal investigators will address these questions by
performing extensive replication and software code testing on a set of
computational physics simulation datasets and software code that they had
gathered through a previous study. The project will produce publicly available,
fully reproducible computational physics works as examples for publishing
results in a way that the data and code are effectively
reusable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators aim to improve
understanding of, and increase, the reusability of the code and data associated
with simulation-based research. This project specifically aims to better inform
data destroy/preservation decisions in the simulation context, toward improving
the reusability and interoperability of simulation data and code. The project
will also consider important questions such as how software engineering testing
practices relate to computational physics practices, and how changes in
computational environments affect code execution and the regeneration of
simulation data. Ultimately, the results of this work are intended to guide the
research community on how to best produce and disseminate research code. It is
anticipated that the results for computational physics can be extended to
develop general guidelines for simulation data and code sharing for other
communities, the appropriate code testing to do so, and best practices for
development of associated cyberinfrastructure and tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the National Science
Foundation's Public Access Initiative which is managed by the NSF Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.