* 2138841
* ERI: Investigating How Tissue Stiffness and Fluid Flow Coordinate to Regulate Lymphatic Capillary Growth and Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Catherine Whittington, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,995.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award will advance fundamental knowledge about lymphatic
vessels. The results will positively impact future strategies for addressing
lymphatic disorders. Lymphatic vessels drain fluid from tissues and transport
immune cells throughout the body. When vessels are compromised, consequences
include fluid buildup in tissues, weakened immune function, and/or disease
progression. There are limited effective treatments. This is in part because the
response of these vessels to changes in the surrounding tissues is incompletely
understood. Plenty of information is known about how fluid flow affects vessel
growth and function. However, less is known about how tissue stiffness plays a
role. This is surprising because changes in stiffness occur in many disorders.
This work will study the combined effects of fluid flow and tissue stiffness on
vessel growth and function. Experimental models will be used to study variable
stiffness and controlled fluid flow, and their combination, to reveal how
lymphatic vessel behavior is regulated. Results from this work will enhance the
ability to make informed decisions about studying lymphatic disorders and
developing treatment strategies. The project approach combines multiple aspects
of engineering and biology. It will provide opportunities for advanced training
and workforce development across disciplines. Research training and mentorship
will also broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
engage an even broader population through community and educational
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive research on lymphatics and
fluid-induced biomechanical forces, lymphatic mechanobiology as it relates to
tissue stiffness is not well understood. There is an overall gap in knowledge
around how extracellular matrix stiffness in tissues factors into lymph vessel
regulation. This gap is significant since matrix remodeling and progressive
tissue stiffening are critical to normal and disease processes, and many
lymphatic disorders lack curative treatments. The objective is to combine a
microfluidic chip with a responsive biomaterial to systematically apply fluid
flow, pressure, and progressive extracellular matrix stiffening to lymphatic
endothelial cells. The project will use progressive matrix stiffening to
establish a role for changing tissue stiffness in regulating mechanosensors in
lymph capillaries. The research team will then apply a combination of mechanical
inputs—fluid flow, pressure, and stiffness—to link their interactions with
specific mechanosensing targets and functional outcomes. Results will identify
mechanosensory complexes that are regulated by coordinated mechanical inputs and
expand perspectives on what drives lymph capillary regulation and dysregulation.
The knowledge gained will advance an understudied area of lymphatic
mechanobiology and enhance the ability to make informed decisions about how
lymphatic disorders are studied and treated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.