* 2138378
* ERI: Epilepsy in Women: Monitoring and Management using Noninvasive Wearable Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Mona Nasseri, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,005.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost 1% of the world's
population lives with epilepsy and half of them are women, whose seizures and
antiseizure medicines affect their menstrual cycle, pregnancy, menopause, and
bone health. Hormonal changes in women can influence seizure risk and are
associated with changes in biological signals measured by wearable devices, such
as temperature and heart rate variability, and can be linked to seizure
patterns. This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award focuses on improving
the quality of life of women with epilepsy by creating forecasting algorithms
that can help manage dosing of antiseizure medication based on predicted seizure
risk. The proposed research will provide training opportunities for a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students and the focus will be to engage
female students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
investigates hormonal changes associated with the menstrual cycle and their
effects on seizure risk in women by analyzing physiological signals recorded
with non-invasive wearable devices. The ability to forecast seizures, minutes to
hours in advance has already been verified using data from invasive EEG
(Electroencephalography) devices; however, it is still a challenge to do this
using noninvasive wearable devices. The performance of the machine learning
algorithms for seizure forecasting could be significantly improved if the
seizure risk associated with hormonal changes be considered in the design to
mitigate false alarms and improve sensitivity. Designing a reliable seizure
forecasting algorithm will allow patients to use lower baseline doses of
medications, with escalated doses given during times of high seizure risk.
Additionally, investigating the gender-specific parameters affecting seizure
risk and implementing them in managing epilepsy will lead to significant
improvements in quality of life for women with
epilepsy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.