* 2138006
* Environmental Organic Chemistry of Indoor Gases and Surface Films
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Michael Alves, Alves, Michael R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Michael Alves is awarded a FY21 Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research (NSF MPS-Ascend) Fellowship to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broadening participation by groups
underrepresented in Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley. The
project being performed by Michael Alves, entitled Environmental Organic
Chemistry of Indoor Gases and Surface Films, is to be conducted under the
guidance of mentoring scientist Allen H. Goldstein. In addition to support from
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, this project is supported by the Atmospheric Chemistry
Program of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surfaces play a significant role in chemical reactions
occurring on indoor air chemistry. Since Americans spend significant amounts of
time indoors, it is important to understand what chemical reactions can occur in
these spaces. Dr. Alves will carry out experiments in a newly built indoor
controlled research facility that mimic a real residence. This will be followed
by laboratory experiments to isolate the role of common indoor surfaces on the
multiphase chemistry of gases and adsorbed species. Dr. Alves will support
students with underrepresented minority backgrounds through mentoring and
identifying paid research opportunities. He will also collaborate on a program
to develop indoor-relevant chemistry demonstrations for K-12 students in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.