* 2138314
* FAIR for US
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Christine Kirkpatrick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop will build on the widespread interest in the Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) data principles for Open Science to
synthesize and develop a consensus about next steps for the FAIR movement in the
U.S. among representative organizations and thought leaders in the country. The
workshop will bring together a diverse group of experts and representative
stakeholders from data and research communities, U.S. funders and mission
agencies, and science societies, to seek input on the most promising concrete
pathways for expanding uptake, integration, and implementation of the FAIR
Principles in research practice and services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
aim of the workshop is to produce a scoping report that can serve as an agenda
for the most promising strategies and approaches for FAIR capacity development
incorporating the voices of academia, government, and industry. This will be an
invitational meeting which will seek diverse participants who are outside the
well-known public voices on Research Data Management systems and services, while
also including leaders who are working at the intersections of data
infrastructure development, domain sciences, and open science. International
partners engaged in related initiatives will also be assembled for perspectives
and experiences that will inform US efforts. The goal for the workshop is to
structure it as a series of highly interactive facilitated sessions with
specific targeted outcomes that will contribute to the project
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.