* 2138432
* Moldable, self-healing, highly conductive organic co-crystalline solid electrolytes for safer lithium ion batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Michael Zdilla, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, the research groups of Profs. Zdilla and Wunder at Temple University
are developing a new class of solid electrolyte separators for lithium-ion
batteries. Current lithium-ion battery technology relies on the use of a
flammable and potentially explosive liquid electrolyte which has led to battery
fires and explosions in mobile devices, electric vehicles, and other
applications. The development of solid, minimally flammable replacements would
enhance the safety of these devices. However, many currently investigated solid
electrolytes exhibit poor performance or incompatibility with existing battery
chemistry. With this award, the principal investigators synthesize and study
soft-solid co-crystalline electrolytes (i.e. electrolytes that combine two or
more molecular components but form a uniform crystalline structure) to
understand the fundamental materials chemistry that could enable higher-power
performance and promise compatibility with existing and next-generation battery
components. The researchers also use computational tools to better understand
these materials that consist of new combinations of organic framework molecules
and lithium-ion sources and characterize their electrochemical properties. The
project serves the national interest by developing a fundamental understanding
that enables technologies to improve the safety and performance of batteries, an
ever-more central component of technology in mobile devices, transportation, and
clean energy. Realization of safe, high-power, high-energy battery technology
provides a path toward solar energy storage and decreased use of fossil fuels
for transportation, both of which provide greater energy independence for the
United States, and a means to decrease carbon footprint for the health of the
climate. Further, this research serves to train the next generation of
scientists at one of the most diverse schools in the country and serves
underrepresented groups with great effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, the research
groups of Profs. Zdilla and Wunder at Temple University develop a new class of
solid electrolyte separators for lithium-ion batteries. Progress in battery
electrolyte research has been incremental and essentially relegated to
modifications of liquid organic systems, solid polymers, and solid ceramics. The
new class of solid electrolytes investigated under this effort has the potential
to enable better conductivity than other solid organic electrolytes, while at
the same time exhibiting better voltage stability and electrode stability
windows than liquids, the current market standard. The researchers investigate
the materialsâ€™ novel mechanophysical properties from a fundamental research
perspective, including a developing a surface liquid layer that facilitates
self-healing. While the concept of a surface liquid-solid equilibrium is known
(as in the classic example of water-ice), this property has never been applied
to electrolyte materials, and thus represents an opportunity for fundamental
insights. The objectives of the research are: 1: Preparation and
characterization of ion-matrix cocrystals with optimized conductivity and
lithium-ion transference numbers (tLi+). This is achieved by maximizing the
mobility of the cation while minimizing the mobility of the anion, which is
achieved by designing matrices that interact strongly with the anion, but not
with the cation. 2: Evaluation of electrochemical performance and
mechanical/thermal properties. This is achieved using characterization using
X-ray diffraction, electrochemical analysis (electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry, linear sweep voltammetry, and cycling
studies), thermal analysis (DSC, TGA), and post-mortem analysis by electron
microscopy. 3: Modelling the physical properties and mechanism of ion conduction
using molecular dynamics and quantum molecular
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.