* 2138435
* Meeting: Predator-Prey Interactions Evolution of Form and Function (GRC January 29-February 4th, 2022 in Lucca Italy)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Michael Sheriff, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award will broaden participation at the 2022 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on Predator-Prey Interactions by directly supporting the attendance of
members of historically excluded groups, those serving in undergraduate or
minority-serving institutions, and early career researchers. At the conference,
attendees will participate in numerous formal and informal mentoring events,
including a two-day Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) open to graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. These events are designed to enhance the exposure of
supported attendeesâ€™ research and promote interaction and collaboration with
more senior established researchers. In addition to requiring all attendees to
present research at the GRS, there are 8 presentation opportunities at the main
GRC that have been set aside for attendees that are supported by this award.
Lastly, attendees will be invited to lead manuscripts in a Special Issue
publication with topics derived from the conference discussion groups,
formalizing the process through which collaborations can continue post-
conference. As such, this award enhances the scientific and professional
development of a more diverse group of early-career researchers who would
otherwise most likely not be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conference on Predator-Prey Interactions has occurred bi-annually since
2014 and the insights and novel research papers produced from these conferences
have advanced the field of predator-prey interactions. Given the pervasive and
critical importance of predation across animal species and ecosystems, the goal
of this conference is to foster cross-pollination of ideas among disciplines
from evolution and ecology to wildlife management to neurobiology and
biomedicine. This interdisciplinary meeting has resulted in a variety of novel
approaches, perspectives, and publications. The 2022 meeting will focus on
understanding the relationship between phenotype and fitness from a functionally
integrative, evolutionary perspective. As such, it will entail path-breaking
advances in our understanding of animal forms, designs, and strategies that
represent optimal solutions in a variety of
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.