* 2138514
* ERI: Prediction-Enabled Safe and Productive Human-Robot Collaboration in Dynamic and Uncertain Construction Workspaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jiannan Cai, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,991.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Construction industry has long
been challenged by low productivity and high rates of injuries and fatalities,
while the persistent workforce aging and labor shortage further exacerbate the
challenges. Robotic construction has been increasingly recognized as a promising
solution to relieve human workers from dangerous and physically demanding tasks
and thus improving productivity and occupational health and safety. However, the
unstructured and dynamic workspaces and the diverse and complex construction
activities make it extremely difficult to apply industrial robots that are
traditionally pre-programmed to conduct a single task in a fixed working
environment. This project will advance the understanding of the bi-directional
influence and interaction between human and robot when collaborating in complex
construction activities in dynamic environments by developing new methods to
predict worker intention from their behavior and adaptively plan robot’s motion
considering both job contexts and human dynamics. The developed human-robot
collaboration mechanism will provide new opportunities for proactive, adaptive,
safe, and productive robotic construction solutions. The new knowledge gained
from this research will provide insights on human-robot collaboration in complex
and dynamic environments, and can be generalized to other domains, such as
search and rescue, agriculture, and manufacturing. This project also involves
education and outreach activities to promote broad participation of students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, through which younger generations
will be motivated to enter the industry and trained with new capabilities to
work with high technologies to increase competitiveness of the industry and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a new paradigm for safe
and productive human-robot collaboration in dynamic and uncertain construction
workspaces by predicting human intention and motion, estimating robot subtasks,
and generating optimal motion trajectory, considering the complex worker-robot-
workpiece-workspace interaction. Using formwork construction as the working
context, this project will 1) develop new deep learning models that integrate
human behavior data and contextual information (e.g., workspace configuration)
to predict worker’s intention and motion and associated uncertainties, and 2)
develop new layered control mechanism to infer robot’s task in multi-process
construction operation and generate optimal motion trajectory considering
semantic construction knowledge, predicted human dynamics and associated
uncertainties to achieve both collaboration safety and productivity. Extensive
experiments will be conducted to collect multimodal human behavior data when
collaborating with robots and to test the performance of developed
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.