* 2138247
* EAGER: Uncovering the Physical Mechanism behind Flow Boiling Critical Heat Flux
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Chirag Kharangate, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 118,655.00

Many industries including those in energy, aerospace, defense, and consumer
electronics sectors are seeing a significant increase in energy utilization.
Current cooling systems that use air or water flows are often incapable of
extracting the heat effectively and maintaining reasonable operating
temperatures. Boiling of liquids is a very effective cooling mechanism, but
there is a limit on how much boiling systems can extract, defined by the
critical heat flux. Exceeding the critical heat flux can cause a failure of the
heat-generating system or device. The overarching goal of this project is the
understand the physics behind the critical heat flux. This understanding can
then be used to to avoid failure in boiling systems. The educational and
outreach goal for the project is to complement the research activity by
developing a module for Case Western Reserve University’s “Introduction to
Innovation” program, the centerpiece of a new campus-wide broader impact
strategy, to give middle school educators experience in applying core scientific
concepts to understanding simple cooling systems. A lab demonstration of the
pool boiling phenomena has been planned to supplement the teaching section of
the module to focus on phase-transformation due to boiling in natural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been shown that flow boiling critical heat
flux can be triggered by hydrodynamic liquid-vapor instabilities occurring in
the flow. However, to date, no thorough validation of the phenomena has been
performed to ascertain the mechanism behind it. In this project, the
investigators plan to develop a fundamental understanding of the mechanism
behind critical heat flux by exploring interfacial flow dynamics during flow
boiling by using a combination of high-speed imaging and particle image
velocimetry measurements. Using the data obtained, a mechanistic model will be
developed to predict critical heat flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.