* 2138534
* ERI: Integrable Nano-Optical Particle Sizer for Measuring Ultrafine Airborne Particles
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Hao Jiang, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,558.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafine particles refer to
airborne particles with diameters smaller than 100 nanometers. They are present
in the ambient air we breathe and can be generated from many different sources
such as combustion of fossil fuels, wildfire smoke, and cigarette smoke.
Ultrafine particles can potentially pose severe health risks to a human body.
Inhalation of ultrafine particles can cause pulmonary inflammation, systemic
inflammation, and cardiovascular diseases. In order to investigate and monitor
the health risks caused by ultrafine particles, wearable sensors that can
measure the sizes of ultrafine particles at points of interest are highly
demanded. Such sensors should be economic, compact, low-power, and integrable
into digital mobile devices and aerosol delivery devices. Out of various
techniques for measuring airborne particles, optical particle sizers hold great
promise for realizing such sensor platforms. An optical particle sizer measures
the sizes of individual airborne particles by detecting the light scattered from
particles when they travel across a focused laser beam. However, in existing
optical particle sizers based on conventional optics and low-cost optoelectronic
components, the smallest detectable particle size is about 300 nanometers while
ultrafine particles, being smaller than 100 nanometers, cannot be measured
because of too weak light scattering from them. Responding to these challenges
and limitations, this research project proposes a novel scheme of optical
particle sizer based on a nano-optical sensor structure which can drastically
boost the optical signals induced by ultrafine particles. The proposed research
is aimed at developing an optical sensor platform capable of measuring ultrafine
particles present in the ambient air and cigarette smoke, which can have great
impacts on the improvement of the public health. The proposed research
activities will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students in the field of optics, nanotechnology, and aerosol sensors, and will
also encourage STEM participations for K-12 students through an outreach
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the
optical response of nano-optical structures when airborne ultrafine particles
are located on the nanoscale hot spots of strongly focused light. Specifically,
it will generate fundamental understanding on how to use subwavelength apertures
in metal films to accurately measure the sizes of ultrafine particles flowing
through the apertures. The project consists of three research objectives: 1)
Model, fabricate, and characterize the subwavelength apertures. 2) Validate and
calibrate the sensor's response to ultrafine particles. 3) Investigate the
transport of ultrafine particles through subwavelength apertures. The project
will evaluate the performance of the proposed sensor scheme including the
smallest detectable particle size and detectable concentration, and study the
effects of crucial factors such as the size of subwavelength apertures. The
proposed research will lead to a breakthrough in optical particle sizers by
extending the sensing capability into the desired ultrafine particle range. The
proposed research will also advance the field of plasmonic sensors by enabling
new applications in sensing airborne particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.