* 2138142
* An Artificial Intelligence Method for Auto-Compressed Sensing and Blind Deconvolution in Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data of Shoulder Muscle Metabolism
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Talon Johnson, Johnson, Talon
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships, MPS-Ascend Program. Talon Johnson
is awarded this fellowship to conduct a program of research and education in the
mathematical sciences, including applications to other disciplines, at
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center under the mentorship of the
sponsoring scientists Jimin Ren and Anke Henning. This is a research project
aimed at development of computational image reconstruction methods for Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). Johnson plans to design compressed sensing methods that
are capable of reconstructing image data from MRI measurements that have been
affected by the subject's motion, such as respiratory-related motion in MRI
imaging of shoulder muscle metabolism. Along with this research, Johnson will be
involved in activities to broaden participation of underrepresented minorities
in mathematical sciences through the recruitment of students from the University
of Texas at Arlington and a collaboration with the Atlanta University Center
Data Science Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at
improving image precision and quality by completing three research objectives:
1) Develop and refine the methodology for reconstruction of compressed sensing
data for blurred MRI imaging using l1-l2 minimization scheme, based on l1-magic
for compressed sensing and l2 minimization for deconvolution of a fixed kernel
function, 2) develop an AI method for auto-recognition of any unknown kernel
functions from blurred compressed MRI data sets to achieve simultaneous
compressed sensing - blind deblurring of any simulated MRI data, 3) refine the
AI method for auto-compressed sensing and blind deblurring of experimental data
in MRI imaging of shoulder muscle metabolism and improve imaging
precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.