* 2138084
* Collaborative Research: Practices and Research on Student Pathways in Education from Community College and Transfer Students in STEM (PROSPECT S-STEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Malcolm Schug, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2027
* USD 551,577.00

This S-STEM Research Hub will contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need. Across the past decade, 40%-50% of college students
in the United States each year started their postsecondary education at a two-
year college. Students enrolled at two-year colleges are more likely to be low-
income and from historically underrepresented groups, compared to students who
start postsecondary education enrolled in four-year colleges. Led by a
collaborative team of universities and community colleges representing 9 current
NSF S-STEM projects, the PROSPECT S-STEM research hub will explore how equitable
partnerships between two-year colleges and four-year institutions can empower
low-income STEM transfer students. Researchers at Clemson University, East
Carolina University, Southeast Community College, the University of Missouri-
Kansas City, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Augsburg University, the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, the University of Texas at
Arlington, and YNOTI Solutions along with 14 two-year college partners are
united by their goal to support domestic, low-income undergraduates as they
navigate the transfer process. Numerous challenges exist that can make it
difficult for students to successfully transfer from two- and four-year
colleges, which in turn can reduce the likelihood that these students earn a
bachelor’s degree. This project will address this issue by collecting and
analyzing national-level data to highlight transfer issues. The hub’s research
will support the development of strategies and resources to build institutional
partnerships designed to increase positive outcomes for low-income transfer
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PROSPECT S-STEM Hub will operate as a
research and dissemination hub to investigate the nature of two- and four-year
colleges’ partnerships and how developing co-equitable partnerships can better
support low-income STEM scholars before and after the transition process. There
is a need to understand how two- and four-year colleges can effectively
establish and maintain partnerships. Equitable partnerships that support
transfer students necessarily involve a range of stakeholders across
institutions. PROSPECT S-STEM will examine the nature of these partnerships
through: a) longitudinal case studies of two- and four-year college partnerships
trying to improve STEM transfer student success; and b) the establishments of
professional learning communities with key stakeholders, including advisors,
faculty, financial aid, student affairs professionals, and other administrators
involved with transfer policies and programs. Our investigation of these
partnerships is framed through the lens of community cultural wealth,
partnership capital, and dimension of equity. The mixed methods research will
include interviews, participant concept mapping, document analysis, and survey
data from S-STEM Scholars. PROSPECT S-STEM will target dissemination to
researchers, advisors, student affairs professionals, administrators and other
stakeholders who support STEM transfer students, thus facilitating the scale up
of this project’s practices and findings to others seeking to support low-income
STEM transfer students. This hub is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.