* 2138020
* Active Textiles based on Supramolecular Shape Memory Polymer Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Vanessa Sanchez, Sanchez, Vanessa
* Fellowship Award
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (MPS-Ascend). Each fellowship
supports a research and training project at a host institution in the
mathematical and physical sciences, including applications to other disciplines,
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. This fellowship to Dr. Vanessa
Sanchez supports her research project entitled "Active Textiles based on
Supramolecular Shape Memory Polymer Fibers." The host institution for the
fellowship is Stanford University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Zhenan
Bao. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sanchez's background spans from fashion design
and materials chemistry to materials science, with experience in fabrication
strategies, imaging, materials selection, mechanical testing of materials,
circuitry, and textile architecture understanding. Her current research is on
materials synthesis and knitting techniques that allow a designer to translate
design requirements for wearable sensors and actuators into knit patterns. The
goal of the proposed fellowship is to develop a novel class of shape-memory
polymers for use in responsive textiles while simultaneously generating interest
in materials research for underrepresented minority (URM) students. The outcomes
of the research will lead broadly to scientific publications. Dr. Sanchez plans
to serve as a role model and mentor for Latino STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.