* 2138188
* Collaborative Research: A Research Hub for Understanding Inter- and intra-institutional partnerships that systematically support low-income engineering students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2026
* USD 962,361.00

This S-STEM Research Hub will contribute to the national need for well-educated
engineers by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. The research hub is a
collaboration between Virginia Tech, Northern Virginia Community College, Weber
State University, and the University of Cincinnati. This project will reframe
the many challenges associated with these students to be “organizational”
challenges as opposed to “student-related” challenges, working on making the
complex web of student supports work better for students. This research hub’s
explicit focus on both first-time-in-college and transfer students ensures that
this research will support ongoing efforts to broaden participation in STEM and
identify more cost-effective ways for students to earn a bachelor’s degree. The
hub will support a series of integrated activities, each designed to engage a
diverse set of programs with a core focus on low-income engineering students.
This hub will support accelerator grants from the Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM)
program community (40 total) focused on understanding the efficacy of their
partnership designs, processes, and structures; four cohorts of grant teams will
receive structured mentoring from hub leadership. Organizational partners
associated with the accelerator grants will be invited to summer institutes to
share ideas and data across projects and build campus-specific action plans.
Illuminating how the complex web of student support can work better will
identify new efficiencies in the STEM education system so that limited resources
can be more wisely spent, and benefits can be extended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this Research Hub is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Although
there are continual calls for partnership-enabled systemic, structural, and
sustainable change within STEM education systems, understanding how such
partnerships are built, designed, and sustained remains an elusive goal. This
project will advance understanding of organizational partnerships that support
academic pathways for domestic low-income engineering students, addressing the
overarching question: How can intra- and inter-institutional partnerships be
designed, built, and sustained to systematically support low-income engineering
student success? The hub has specific mechanisms to engage S-STEM programs
focused on low-income engineering students across diverse institutional contexts
which will ensure that proposed data collection and integration will be
successful, including research accelerator grants and summer institutes. Because
accelerator grant projects will be contextually specific within institutions and
coupled with the development of action plans during summer summits, the hub’s
research activities will result in actual process improvements across
institutions. Informed by literature on collaboration, institutional logics, and
the model of co-curricular supports, the hub will also conduct a multiple case
study of S-STEM program leaders and their organizational partners. This activity
will integrate existing student success data streams across S-STEM programs and
other archival data sets with the newly generated partnerships data stream. By
linking the different organizational partnership models and approaches to
existing student success data streams, the hub will generate new knowledge
regarding the kinds of partnership processes and collaborations that colleges
and universities may want to institutionalize to best support low-income
engineering students. The hub will produce accessible and useful products for
the S-STEM community (e.g., research-to-practice briefs) and develop a vibrant
community of practice from a diverse range of institutions focused on research-
informed organizational partnerships that support low-income engineering
students. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.