* 2138143
* ERI: Upgrading Metabolites in Bacterial Cultures with Nanomicellar Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Dylan Domaille, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some microbes can produce
chemicals. In some instances, the microbes are more efficient than chemical
catalysis, in others they are not. There are efforts to combine chemical and
biological catalysis in a single reactor. The fundamental objectives of this
project are to design catalyst scaffolds that function in the presence of living
microbes, in aqueous conditions, and with low substrate concentrations.
Confining catalysts to nanosized compartments will protect the cell from the
catalytic material and toxic reaction intermediates. Workforce development is
another project objective. Developing lab and lecture modules for undergraduate
and high school students will be a primary focus of those
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocompatible chemistry seeks to combine the high
productivity and broad reactivity afforded by chemical catalysis with the
sustainability of microbial biosynthesis by combining chemocatalytic upgrading
of microbial metabolites in single-flask processes. However, a limited reaction
toolbox (&lt;10 examples), reliance on expensive metal catalysts (Pd, Ru, etc.),
and inefficient exploration of the catalyst toxicity space has hampered the
progress of this nascent field. The role of catalyst confinement in nanomicellar
architectures will be explored in the development of biocompatible nitro-aldol,
thia-Michael, and Diels-Alder reactions. The project will a) explore the effect
of nanomicelle catalyst confinement on biocompatible catalysis; b) establish
catalyst-design principles specific to biocompatible catalysts; and c) expand
the scope of products available from biocompatible
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.