* 2138776
* EAGER: Reproducibility and Cyberinfrastructure for Computational and Data-Enabled Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Victoria Stodden, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 129,750.00

This project seeks to improve understanding of how the scientific community can
adapt to the increasing use of computing and large-scale data resources. One
challenge is ensuring that computational results - such as those from
simulations - are "reproducible," that is, the same results are obtained when
one re-uses the same input data, methods, software and analysis conditions. In
2019, the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM)
issued a report on "Reproducibility and Replication in Science" with a series of
recommendations. The project will assess the implications of these
recommendations on the scientific discovery process for computationally- and
data-enabled research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following research questions
will guide this study: (1) what reproducibility issues are surfaced by the NASEM
recommendations and what constraints and requirements do they imply for
computational infrastructure?; and (2) what are the implications of these issues
and constraints on the computational infrastructure ecosystem as a whole? To
explore and illustrate answers to these questions, we will employ diverse
scientific use cases chosen to cover different ways researchers interact with
computational infrastructure. Formalisms will also be applied to the use cases
to articulate the role of computational infrastructure in enabling transparency
and reproducibility, and to elucidate how computational infrastructure can
conform to the NASEM report recommendations. The overall aim is to articulate
avenues for future research at the intersection of transparency, reproducibility
and computational infrastructure that supports scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.