* 2138025
* Core Support for the Federal Demonstration Partnership
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Tom Wang, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 02/28/2025
* USD 339,999.00

The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is a cooperative initiative
involving 10 federal agencies and 217 recipient institutions (up from 154
institutions in the prior phase) managing federally sponsored research funds.
The goal is to increase research productivity by streamlining the administrative
process for research while maintaining effective stewardship of and full
accountability for federal funds. More specifically, FDP strives to maximize
research performance per federal dollar by minimizing the monetary and time
burdens associated with the administrative aspects of federally-sponsored
research. Since its inception, the FDP has successfully worked to reduce
administrative burden while accommodating continuous changes to the policies and
regulations most significant to research administration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the unique forum provided by the FDP, federal
agency officials work collaboratively with administrative, faculty, and
technical representatives from a broad range of academic research institutions
to identify and assess unnecessary burden resulting from policies and processes
that can be addressed only through cooperation. Targeted projects, pilots,
surveys, and demonstrations are an important and defining component of the FDP.
Once a new approach is successfully beta tested by a few willing institutions
and agencies within the FDP, it is generally accepted by the FDPâ€™s members and
often by most research funding agencies and
recipients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Member agencies can, and routinely do, use the
FDP as a sounding board for potential changes that they are considering and/or
will soon be required to implement. Grants officers from research funding
agencies report out to the FDP membership during the annual meetings held three
times per year focused on impending changes in policies, timelines, and
practices and openly solicit community feedback and reaction, both positive and
negative. The opportunity for an open and free exchange of information and ideas
is invaluable. The entire grants community benefits, as agencies are able to
understand and address the impacts of proposed changes on grantees before
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.