* 2138667
* I-Corps: Physics-Based Binding Affinity Estimator
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Mahmoud Moradi, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a computational tool to make drug design and development more
accurate and less time-consuming. Potential users, ranging from small biotech
companies and research institutes to major pharmaceutical companies, may take
advantage of this technology to filter out a significant number of low-affinity
drugs at an early stage of development. A key factor resulting in the high cost
of drug development is the high rate of failure, which can be significantly
reduced by employing more efficient pre-trial screening methods including using
more accurate affinity estimators. The successful implementation of the proposed
technology may substantially reduce the research and development spending needed
for drug development and eventually make drug development faster and less
costly. Such activities may contribute to the public health in the US and around
the world by providing more efficient and safer drugs to cure or prevent
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a physics-based drug binding affinity estimator that employs state-of-the-art
free energy calculation methods based on all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations. The proposed estimator can estimate the binding affinity of a drug
to its target protein with higher accuracy compared to existing techniques.
While the available docking software packages and webservers provide affinity
estimates, these estimates are generally rough docking scores rather than true
binding affinities because they heavily rely on empirically fitted formulas
rather than solely physics-based methods. Unlike the existing docking software,
the proposed technology explicitly takes into account important factors such as
the effects of the environment and the flexibility of the drug and its target in
estimating the binding affinities. The proposed technology may make it possible
to calculate binding affinities of the drugs using purely physics-based methods
that are much more accurate than their docking software
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.