* 2138459
* ERI: Understanding the Thermomechanical Response of Sandwich Structures with Triply Periodic Minimal Surface
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sabrina Nilufar, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sandwich structures are generally
constructed to offer high strength and stiffness. They are used in myriads of
applications including airplane, military, thermal insulation, vibration
isolation, and automotive industry. However, the core topology becomes a
limiting factor for achieving high-performance sandwich structures. Various
aspects of core geometry can enhance the mechanical and thermal properties of
the sandwich structures. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism of such thermal
and mechanical property enhancements in structural sandwiches remains unknown.
This project seeks to unveil the mechanisms of thermomechanical property
enhancement due to the modulation of the interior core architecture. The
approach integrates numerical and experimental methods to illustrate the
interior core topology and property relationships. Property enhancement of
structural sandwiches that are used in a wide range of applications will benefit
the national economy. This research involves multiple disciplines including
engineering mechanics, materials science, and additive manufacturing. The
project will support graduate and undergraduate students and encourage the
participation of underrepresented minorities in science and engineering. The
outreach component of the project will demonstrate research concepts to high
school and middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to fundamentally understand how structured core lattice architecture
improves the mechanical and thermal properties of sandwich structures. Various
triply periodic minimal surface (TPMS) based core lattice, namely, gyroid,
diamond, and primitive core structures will be extensively studied in this
project. The research team will perform two tasks: (i) developing three-
dimensional finite element method based numerical simulations to predict
thermomechanical properties for various core topologies. The studies will
identify high stress/ critical sections to optimize parameters including unit
cell size and wall thickness for superior performance of different TPMS core
structures; and (ii) to experimentally determine the deformation mechanism of
TPMS core-based sandwich structures due to multi-mode mechanical loadings at
various temperatures. In addition, detailed surface morphology and failure
mechanisms will be studied through high resolution scanning electron microscopy.
This project will help gain new understandings of thermomechanical behavior-
topology relationship in sandwich structures with particular emphasis on various
TPMS core lattice architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.