* 2138052
* Multiscale Modeling of Coronavirus Virions in the Respiratory System
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Alexander Neimark, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 06/30/2026
* USD 260,184.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;One of the ways COVID-19 spreads is by breathing
in small liquid droplets that contain the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. In order to
cause an infection, the virus must first pass from the respiratory tract through
a layer of molecular thickness, the lung surfactant film, into the lung. The
passage through the lung surfactant film is a process that is not well
understood because the coronavirus and lung surfactant film continuously affect
and remodel each other. The lung surfactant film is a complex and fragile
nanoscale biomaterial that consists mostly of surfactant molecules. Certain
types of surfactant molecules are capable of destabilizing and breaking up the
coronavirus. This capability may be utilized by the medical administration of
exogenous surfactants in surfactant therapy, which is currently being tested in
clinical trials as a COVID-19 treatment approach. This award supports
computational research and educational activities to study in detail and on a
molecular level how SARS-CoV-2 and its variants adhere to the lung surfactant
film, how the virus particle is capable of passing through the film, and how
surfactant molecules affect this process. The computational research method,
known as molecular dynamics, is applied with the goal to learn how
pathophysiological behavior can emerge from the material properties of lung
surfactant layer and associated coronavirus particles. The materials-centric
approach places this research at the interface between condensed matter physics
and biology. Among the broader impacts is the potential to inform the search for
novel therapeutic pathways that inhibit coronavirus activity by using exogenous
surfactants. Educational and mentoring aspects of this project include training
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds and developing
teaching modules on the modeling of complex biological nanoscale systems. The
developed simulation codes will be made available for the scientific community
through curated data repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 is transmitted by inhaling airborne coronavirus particles,
SARS-CoV-2, which penetrate the respiratory system and cause severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) that can lead to lung failure. SARS-CoV-2 virions
are spheroidal nanoparticles, with a lipid bilayer envelope of about 85
nanometer diameter decorated by a “crown” of 20 nanometer long spike protein
protrusions. Whereas our knowledge of the biochemical structure and functions of
SARS-CoV-2 is quickly growing, the interfacial properties of the virions, as
nanoparticles interacting with the respiratory system environment, have not been
addressed and are poorly understood. Bridging this knowledge gap is important
for informing clinical studies on surfactant therapies to treat SARS by
administering exogenous surfactants. This project aims at using multiscale
molecular dynamics simulations to explore the fundamental mechanisms of
interactions of SARS-CoV-2 virions with lung surfactant films and their fate in
the respiratory system. Consideration of SARS-CoV-2 virions and the lung
surfactant film as nanoscale multifunctional biomaterials that interact within
the respiratory system environment represents the main methodological novelty of
the project. The PI will (a) develop original coarse-grained computational
models of SARS-CoV-2 virions and lung surfactant films, (b) establish in-silico
the molecular mechanisms of the SARS-CoV-2 virion interfacial interactions with
lung surfactant films and exogenous biosurfactants, and (c) explore the effects
of these interactions on the stability of lung surfactant films and the fate of
SARS-CoV-2 virions in the respiratory system. The project will produce
multiscale computational models of interfacial processes involving SARS-CoV-2
variants to address the currently unresolved questions: (1) how sorption of lung
surfactant lipids and proteins affects the envelope membrane and spike proteins,
(2) how SARS-CoV-2 virions affect the integrity and stability of lung surfactant
films, (3) if detergent activity and sorption of pulmonary and exogenous
surfactants can induce lysis of the viral envelope, and (4) to what extent the
difference in specifics of lung surfactant interactions with mutated SARS-CoV-2
virions may explain why some coronavirus variants cause more infections and
spread faster than others. Special attention will be paid to the differences
between SARS-CoV-2 variants with respect to adhesion of pulmonary and exogenous
surfactants. Answers to these questions will advance fundamental understanding
of SARS-CoV-2 virions and lung surfactant films as interacting nanoscale
biomaterials and may have clinical implications for the selection of exogenous
surfactants for prophylaxis and treatment of COVID-19. The PI expects the
project will have an interdisciplinary transformative impact by advancing
computational studies of pathophysiological behavior and fate of coronavirus
virions in pulmonary environment, surfactant-induced inhibition of the viral
activity, as well as adhesion and translocation of synthetic virion-type drug
carrier nanoparticles through cell membranes and other physiological interfaces.
The proposed research will support diversity, train graduate and undergraduate
students, and produce modules on the modeling of complex biological nanoscale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.