* 2138110
* Persistent Homology, Metrics, and Applications on the Collection of Enriched Metric Measure Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Ranthony Edmonds, Edmonds, Ranthony A C
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships, MPS-Ascend Program. Ranthony
Edmonds is awarded this fellowship to conduct a program of research and
education at the Ohio State University in the mathematical sciences, including
applications to other disciplines, under the mentorship of the sponsoring
scientist Facundo Memoli. This project is devoted to some challenging issues of
topological data analysis (TDA), a new and rapidly growing field that leverages
tools from algebraic topology and many other areas to study the shape of big
data. Along with this research, Edmonds will develop educational activities
related to data science in collaboration with existing partnerships with local
and national networks focused on increasing representation of underrepresented
minorities in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
several objectives. The first is the study of metric measure spaces, and finding
an appropriate notion for the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance. The second goal
is to explore stability of data under small perturbations in the GW distance.
The third goal is applied and concerns electoral redistricting where the basic
idea is to use the GW metric to compare redistricting
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.