* 2138400
* ERI: Engineering a Bi-Functional Heterostructured Photocatalyst for CO2 Photoconversion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Mariam Ismail, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demand for clean energy, combined
with the global need for decreased emissions of greenhouse gases (especially
carbon dioxide from fossil fuel combustion), has generated strong research
impetus for sustainable, low carbon emission technologies. The project utilizes
visible-light solar energy to react waste carbon dioxide (CO2) to value-added
chemicals such as methanol and formic acid. Related research efforts to date
have been hampered by low product selectivity, limitation to the UV light
region, and inefficient photocatalytic mechanisms. To overcome those
limitations, the project will investigate a bifunctional photocatalyst design
known as a heterojunction. The heterojunction consists of a photothermal
semiconductor photocatalyst interfaced with a metal-organic framework (MOF)
material. Integrating the two components in the heterojunction architecture
enhances both the capture and conversion of CO2 to value-added chemicals. Beyond
the technical aspects, the project will include educational and outreach
activities designed to excite students about careers in STEM, with emphasis on
opportunities for women and other underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to engineer a bi-
functional heterostructured photocatalyst for efficient CO2 photoconversion
utilizing visible-light energy. The project is built on the hypothesis that the
MOF component will enhance the CO2 uptake and provide the pore space needed to
promote access to the catalytic sites on the photocatalyst. Under visible light
irradiation, the photoexcited electrons from the photocatalyst will then reduce
CO2 to the desired hydrocarbon products. The project includes four aims: 1)
synthesize and characterize families of MIL-101(Cr)-NH2 MOF and carbon@TiO2
photocatalyst of various particle size and core-shell properties; 2) develop a
strategy to mediate MOF growth on the surface of the photocatalyst; 3) probe the
interfacial structures of the carbon@TiO2@MIL-101(Cr)-NH2 photocatalyst; and 4)
investigate the impact of the interface architecture on both selectivity control
and the mechanism of photothermal catalytic CO2 conversion to C1 hydrocarbons. A
key feature of the carbon@TiO2 photocatalyst design is to promote photothermal
efficiency via the heat capture and transfer associated with the carbon core
combined with the light-harvesting and photoelectron-generating properties of
the TiO2 shell. Various methods will be employed in pursuing the four aims,
including a range of photoelectrochemical techniques, spectroscopic methods,
control and reaction experiments, and product analyses. Properties of the
photocatalyst and MOF will be characterized at each stage of synthesis, up to
and including the bifunctional performance of the component materials in the
integrated heterojunction design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.