* 2138217
* OPP-PRF: The Role of Southern Ocean Iron limited Diatoms in Modulating Copper Speciation
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Angel Ruacho, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 295,699.00

Microscopic organisms called phytoplankton that live in the Southern Ocean have
the potential to lower atmospheric carbon by transferring it into the ocean
through photosynthesis. In order to achieve this, phytoplankton require the
vital micro-nutrient iron, but concentrations of iron in the Southern Ocean are
generally too low and ultimately inhibit phytoplankton growth. A particular type
of phytoplankton called diatoms are disproportionately impacted by low levels of
iron, yet they are important members of the phytoplankton community in terms of
carbon uptake and transport to the deep ocean. When iron levels get too low to
sustain biological processes like photosynthesis, diatoms increase their demand
for other micro-nutrients like copper in order to continue to perform various
biological functions. To meet their increased copper needed, diatoms may produce
organic compounds known as ligands which can bind metals like copper and
facilitate its uptake into the cell. These ligands likely help diatoms acquire
the extra copper needed to fuel various biological systems. Thus far, little is
known about whether diatoms do indeed produce these ligands, what thresholds
trigger the production of ligands, and what the chemical structures of these
ligands are in the marine environments. This project will focus on answering
these questions to increase our understanding of how phytoplankton adapt to low
iron levels to sustain their biological systems which can affect atmospheric
carbon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern Ocean is an important ocean basin for
global carbon uptake. However, phytoplankton and in particular diatom growth is
limited by the micronutrient iron in this region, preventing additional
photosynthesis and carbon draw down. When diatoms are iron-limited they increase
their requirements for copper to fuel their iron transport systems and other
biological functions. Diatoms may produce organic copper-binding ligands to
facilitate the uptake of additional copper and incorporate it into the cell.
Preliminary data from the Western Antarctic Peninsula, a region of the Southern
Ocean highlighted by iron limitation in offshore waters, showed these waters
contained strong copper binding ligands, while in the iron replete coastal
waters there was an absence of strong copper binding ligands. This research will
focus on characterizing and identifying the copper ligands within this region as
well as determining whether diatoms produce copper ligands when they are limited
by iron. The trace metal thresholds that lead to copper ligand production will
also be explored. Utilizing archived samples, the chemical structure of the
ligands found in this region will be determined through liquid chromatography
coupled with an inductively coupled plasma and electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry technique, while the binding strength of the ligands will be
determined through electrochemical techniques utilizing a competing ligand.
Strains of Southern Ocean diatoms will be used in culturing experiments and
treated with varying concentrations of copper and iron to determine what strains
and under what conditions diatoms produce copper binding ligands. The ligands
identified from cultured experiments will be compared to ligands found in the
Southern Ocean from archived samples and data collected in the Western Antarctic
Peninsula. Findings from this project will lead to a greater understanding of
how Southern Ocean diatoms adapt when their copper demands increase, as well as
how this affects the regionâ€™s ability to store carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.