* 2138746
* ERI: Addressing the Challenges in Microstrip Antenna Design using Surface Current Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Mahrukh khan, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,996.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In modern wireless communications
systems, antennas with wide-band and directed gain are in great demand, from
creating a high-resolution image to downloading data with fast speed. Moreover,
such antennas are attractive to automotive applications and defense applications
as well, where high gain and large bandwidth are essential parameters to track
objects or vehicles. Microstrip antennas are potential candidates for such
applications because they are light weight, low cost and easy to integrate.
However, their narrow impedance bandwidth and low gain are the critical issues
that hinder them from replacing conventional bulky antennas such as horns, etc.
Another challenge in microstrip antenna design is that they are computationally
extensive and need many optimizations/runs. This research will not only advance
the research of microstrip antennas but also act as a seed or pilot project for
antenna research at TCNJ (The College of New Jersey) that can excite future
multidisciplinary projects and collaborations. As antenna development under this
project encompasses many industries from biomedical to defense and
communications, it would be a perfect vehicle to excite students’ interest
(particularly minority and women) in STEM education and improve their
understanding of physical science and mathematical concepts. The project will
support PI’s efforts to hire more undergraduate students in the newly developed
lab and give them exposure and hands-on experience in antenna design and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop innovative design
solutions to address the computation cost and optimum design’s tradeoff between
the microstrip antenna’s current technologies and future needs. This proposal
will provide the optimal design solutions for antennas using surface current
optimization. These design solutions will be concise, less computationally
expensive, and straightforward. In this project, certain critical parameters of
the microstrip antenna will be optimized or controlled using surface currents.
The focus of this research will be on the following three critical design
parameters (i) bandwidth (ii) gain/ radiation characteristics (iii) size of
antennas. The analysis and optimization of surface currents make antenna
structure easy to understand and comprehend because it gives physical insight
into the antenna’s structure. As a result, the analysis and optimal design of
the antenna may not need many optimization cycles. Successful completion of the
project will improve and simplify design procedures for antenna designers. In
the long run, the anticipated technology will develop more useful and concise
procedures for designing optimum, low-cost, miniaturized
antennas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.