* 2138723
* ERI: Controlling Non-Specific Peptide Degradation in Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Eugene Pashuck, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

Developing biomaterial systems that mimic human tissues are vital for improving
our understanding of biology and our ability to treat diseases. These materials
are often functionalized with peptides, which are short protein fragments, so
that the scaffolds better mimic the environment found inside the body. However,
cells can degrade these peptides, and a better understanding of how peptide
chemistry influences the degradation rate, and how this then changes how cells
interact with these scaffolds is needed. This ERI project will first design a
series of peptides with different chemical functionalities to understand how
changing the end group chemistry can promote peptide stability, and then show
that reducing degradation changes how cells attach and migrate within hydrogels.
The research plan of this proposal will be paired with outreach efforts in
collaboration with a local museum to develop modules for local middle school
students to “make” their own biomaterials using a variety of fabrication
techniques. These short modules will show how technologies used during the
industrial revolution, such as casting and extrusion, are still used today to
make biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioengineered systems will play a
crucial role in improving our understanding of human physiology and developing
future regenerative therapies. Many of these use biomaterials featuring a
polymer or polymer network that is functionalized with bioactive groups for a
variety of purposes, including cell adhesion and signaling. Peptides are
commonly used in this capacity as they naturally interface with cells, are
chemically stable, and can easily be incorporated into most biomaterial systems.
However, the stability of many of these peptides against enzymatic degradation
has not been quantified. The central hypothesis of this work is that non-
specific cell-secreted protease degradation is present in biomaterial scaffolds,
which decreases biological activity, and this can be prevented using nonnatural
amino acids at the termini. The project will use a library of peptides to
achieve two specific objectives: (1) Quantify the non-specific degradation of a
library peptides with different terminal functionalizations and (2) Determine
the extent to which cell adhesion, spreading, and migration depends upon the
enzymatic stability of the cell adhesion peptide RGD (arginine-glycine-
aspartate). This information will help other labs design peptides for
bioengineering systems with increased stability which will improve the efficacy
of peptide-modified biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.