* 2138068
* QuIC-TAQS: Implementation of a Neutral-Atom-Photonic-Cluster State
* MPS,OMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,933,079.00

Quantum information science and technology (QIST) holds promise to transform
radically our technological landscape by developing new computational,
communications and sensing modalities as identified in the National Quantum
Initiative. The potential long-term impacts on national needs of QIST are
diverse and include enhancing scientific progress as well as economic and
national security. Quantum Interconnects (QuICs), which enable transferring
quantum information between different physical systems, are an essential class
of components needed for the realization of QIST. The team will develop and
demonstrate a novel interface between neutral atoms and photons, or light
‘particles’. Our approach is based on generating a correlated system of atoms
and photons, known as a cluster state, that can be used for quantum computation,
sensing and communications. By utilizing an integrated-optics (on-chip) platform
to manipulate photons at telecommunications wavelengths, the PI and his
collaborators aim to develop a system that can be readily deployed in quantum
network applications. The impacts on basic science and engineering will be
significant. For example, our work enables new ways to create and control large
quantum systems, which could provide new approaches to simulate nature. This
project contributes to a diverse quantum-ready workforce through training of
graduate and undergraduate students and range of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To produce neutral-atom-photonic cluster states
this project combines the deterministic generation of primitive photonic cluster
states via light single-atom emission with an integrated-optics platform. All-
optical operations will be implemented on-chip to combine (‘fuse’) the primitive
cluster states into larger ones that can serve for quantum information
processing and enable overcoming loss in a quantum network. Specifically,the
primitive photonic cluster states are generated by photon emission from single
neutral rubidium atoms that are laser-trapped and strongly coupled to separate
optical cavities defined in a common nanophotonic-crystal waveguide fabricated
in silicon nitride. Laser and microwave controls cause the atom(s) to emit
deterministically a sequence of single-photon wave packets that propagate along
the waveguide axis. The photons carry information about the atomic state in
their emission time. Photons can occupy a superposition of these ‘time bins’,
corresponding to a time-bin quantum bit (‘qubit’). The photons are coupled into
an external integrated-optics chip containing fast switches for combining the
photon packets with appropriate delays designed for photonic ‘fusion gate’
operations, which are implemented by detecting a subset of photon outputs from
the chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.