* 2138581
* ERI: Composing An Efficient and Adaptive Framework for Real-Time Processing on Next-Gen Edge-Computing Platforms: Models, Architectures, Methodologies, and Prototypes
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Darshika Perera, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,923.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Internet of Things (IoT)
era, cloud infrastructure alone will not suffice to process and analyze the
enormous amount of data being generated from various sensors/devices distributed
throughout networks such as smart girds, smart homes, and autonomous vehicles.
Traditional cloud infrastructure faces serious challenges when transmitting,
processing, and analyzing this enormous amount of data, including: insufficient
bandwidth, high latency, unsatisfactory real-time response, high power
consumption, and privacy protection issues. Edge computing is emerging as a
complementary solution to address the aforementioned issues of cloud
infrastructure. However, edge computing is still in its infancy. Also,
applications running at the edges of the networks are becoming more complex
requiring more processing power. Existing algorithms/techniques for edge
applications and conventional computing platforms utilized will not suffice to
process and analyze this ever-increasing data and to handle the associated
computational complexity, efficiently and effectively. Hence, innovative
solutions are needed to propel the edge computing from its infancy, in order to
support compute/data-intensive applications on next-gen edge-computing platforms
that are heterogenous in nature. &lt;br/&gt;To facilitate this endeavor, the
main research objective of this proposal is to create an efficient and highly
adaptive framework (comprising models, architectures, methodologies, and
prototypes) to support and accelerate real-time processing of compute and data
intensive applications (including data analytics/mining) on next-gen edge-
computing platforms. Our unique framework will dramatically reduce the
communication overhead and response latency of the corresponding networks and
cloud infrastructure, and will enhance the performance and scalability of the
systems. Due to adaptive traits, our solutions can be configured and utilized
for broad range of edge applications, and will not be limited to specific
application. Also, as an integral part of this research project, we will develop
a graduate program in embedded and digital systems domains for both the doctoral
and masterâ€™s students, since there is a significant demand for research and
teaching in these domains in Colorado Springs, due to the high-tech companies in
the vicinity. This graduate program will help us to attract and engage many
graduate students in embedded/digital systems research, and will strengthen our
research quality and output, in addition to producing highly qualified personnel
to satisfy the growing demand of industry and academia in these
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our main objective and the associated challenges
will be addressed and achieved through the following specific research
objectives: (1) Perform theoretical and statistical analysis to gain insight
into edge computing algorithms; introduce novel analytical models suitable for
real-time processing of edge applications/algorithms; (2) Introduce novel,
customized, and reconfigurable architectures, techniques, and methodologies for
real-time in situ processing of edge applications; create unique techniques to
perform design space exploration and to dynamically map/remap the corresponding
circuitry and tasks, to enhance speed, area/power-efficiency; create field
programmable gate array (FPGA) based prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;In this research
work, we will introduce unique analytical models that are well suited especially
for real-time in situ processing of applications. We will create innovative
models, architectures, and methodologies that are generic, parameterized, and
scalable; thus, without changing the internal structures, our designs can be
used for any edge-computing platform, and can be used to process varying
datasets. Our architectures and techniques will be created by performing design
space exploration coupled with unique methodologies. We will introduce novel
techniques to dynamically reconfigure the whole platform globally and some
systems locally, to provide the necessary self-adaptive, self-healing, and self-
correcting traits, which in turn will prolong the useful life of the systems
while reducing the overall cost. Due to the reconfigurable nature of our
designs, our solutions can be configured for other tasks and will not be limited
to a specific task. Our adaptive framework can be utilized both on the edge-
nodes and on edge-devices. FPGA-based prototyping (on single-chip and multi-chip
platforms) will be created to evaluate our proposed architectures, techniques,
and methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to several major research
contributions: (1) create novel analytical models and introduce unique
methodologies to characterize software algorithms; (2) introduce decomposition
techniques, and guidelines on how to modify software algorithms to be compatible
with hardware/platforms; (3) introduce unique methodologies for design space
exploration (DSE), perform DSE considering the constraints/requirements of
platforms/applications, and create architectures/accelerators/techniques that
are generic, parameterized, and scalable; (4) introduce unique methodologies and
create central controller to dynamically map/remap circuitry for essential
tasks; (5) introduce customized and reconfigurable architectures and techniques
for compute/data-intensive applications to further enhance speed, area, and
power, and ultimately create FPGA-based prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.