* 2138408
* ERI: Multiphysics cosimulation approach for optimal design of microgrid high frequency transformers
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Pablo Gomez, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,105.00

Microgrids are electrical networks capable of operating disconnected from the
utility grid, and they are key players in the ongoing energy revolution.
Advancement of the current knowledge in the field of microgrids is critical to
transform the present energy landscape by increasing the reliability of the US
electric power grid while reducing its carbon footprint. Microgrids are
characterized by their extensive inclusion of renewable and distributed energy
resources, use of smart technologies, and contribution to the resilience and
energy-efficiency of modern power systems. An important challenge for the
widespread implementation of microgrids is that they endure significant
electromagnetic and thermal stresses during their operation, thus there is an
urgent need for the design of novel, more efficient, and more resilient
microgrid components. This is particularly true for power electronic converters,
which are extensively used for microgrid interconnection to the main grid, and
for interfacing of generation sources, energy storage systems and electric
loads. Solid-state transformers are a novel type of power converter that has
attracted a lot of attention because they are highly efficient and have a
smaller footprint than conventional power transformers given their substantially
reduced size, weight and cost; they also include smart functionalities to
respond better to grid disturbances. Therefore, solid-state transformers have
the potential of replacing traditional transformers for the widespread addition
of renewable resources. From the main components of a solid-state transformer,
the high frequency transformer is recognized as its key element. The efficient
and affordable design of high frequency transformers is critical for achieving
the main requirements of solid-state transformers: high density, minimal losses,
voltage regulation, and electric isolation. Thus far such design has been a
bottleneck for the mainstream adoption of solid-state transformers in
distribution systems and microgrids due to reliability and operating life
concerns. In this project, we propose the use of novel and innovative modeling
and simulation tools for the optimal design of high frequency transformers to
maximize their operating life and minimize the possibility of failure or damage
under the conditions imposed by microgrid application. The outcomes of this
project are expected to have a positive impact on the development of a more
resilient and sustainable electrical power grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this project is to assess the effectiveness of the synergistic
combination of novel multiphysics and microgrid modeling and simulation tools
for the optimal design of high frequency transformers for microgrid application,
considering the stresses produced by the extensive inclusion of power
electronic-interfaced sources, loads, and storage units during steady state and
transient conditions. To reach this goal, this project includes the development,
implementation, and comprehensive testing of a modeling approach for accurate
dynamic simulation of the microgrid system and its online interaction with a
detailed physics-based high frequency transformer model. The proposed
cosimulation approach constitutes a substantial improvement over existing design
tools, considering the particular challenges of microgrid operation. By taking a
multiphysics and multi-objective design approach, this project intends to obtain
an enhanced high frequency transformer design that maximizes efficiency,
operating life and power density of the device. By interfacing finite element
analysis and dynamic system simulation tools, this project aims to combine the
benefits from both tools as an integral part of an enhanced design optimization
process: accurate and realistic microgrid simulation under a variety of normal
and abnormal operating conditions, and detailed geometrical and material
multiphysics modeling of the HF transformer. The successful completion of the
proposed project will constitute an important step forward in the widespread
utilization of SSTs in microgrids and distribution systems, which in turn can
result in a significantly enhanced efficiency in the integration of renewable
generation, as well as in the delivery of electricity to consumers. In addition
to the scientific goals of this project, the PI endeavors to use this project as
a platform for improving engineering education and recruiting individuals from
diverse backgrounds to power engineering. In order to advance these outcomes,
the PI will run a summer undergraduate research program to provide students with
genuine research experiences and training in the interrelated power engineering
and electromagnetic design areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.