* 2138007
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Material Culture in Developing Social Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Oswaldo Chinchilla, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 23,958.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the role of
material objects in supporting social networks. Archaeological ceramics are
uniquely positioned to offer insight on ancient peoples, reflecting both
intentional and unintentional aesthetic, technical, and social choices. Building
on a long-standing anthropological focus on prestige goods and exchange
networks, a distinctive style of ceramic will be investigated. Integrating
archaeological, art historical, and compositional data on this little understood
social valuable, analysis of the production of these vessels and their movement
through the landscape will demonstrate how material objects play a crucial role
in the development of social relationships. In addition to contributing to gaps
in existing compositional databases and assisting in the evaluation of methods
for the chemical characterization of archaeological ceramics, the project will
also provide students with the opportunity to gain laboratory skills related to
archaeological science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasizing the material basis for
social networks, this project evaluates hypotheses of open and restricted access
to a technically complex ceramic decorative style. Was this style available to
the general population or restricted to elite communities? Which potting
communities had access to the technical artistry required to produce these
vessels, and did every community produce them using the same technique? Who
exchanged ceramics with whom? Answering these questions furthers understandings
of how social networks are supported and maintained by economically and
symbolically significant social valuables. This project will use bulk
compositional data acquired using instrumental neutron activation analysis,
surface compositional data acquired using portable x-ray fluorescence,
microscopic analysis of surface treatment, and data on style and form to trace
interaction between archaeological sites. Examining the production of and access
to these socially significant objects will illuminate systems of pottery
production on a regional scale and the ways in which human relationships are
negotiated and constructed through material means on a broader
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.