* 2138937
* OPP-PRF: Freeze-thaw effect on Biogeochemistry and Nutrient Cycling in Arctic Soils
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Erin Rooney, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 346,322.00

Warming air temperatures are thawing frozen ground (permafrost) in the Arctic at
a rapid rate. As frozen ground thaws it undergoes temperature fluctuations above
and below freezing, known as freeze-thaw cycles. Freeze-thaw can impact the
availability of important nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, the
activity of microorganisms, soil moisture and associated changes in oxygenation,
and the release of greenhouse gases from thawing ground. The implications of
freeze-thaw in thawing permafrost are amplified in the Arctic, which stores just
under half of all soil carbon across the globe. This research will determine how
exposure of previously frozen ground to freeze-thaw alters soil function and
nutrient availability. This project supports one postdoctoral scholar and will
fund freeze-thaw research and the development of an educational R/RStudio module
for an Arctic dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freeze-thaw is a disruptive,
temperature driven process with direct impacts to both abiotic and biotic soil
properties and their coupled interactions. Rising air temperatures expose
previously unavailable compounds to plant uptake, microbial activity, and
mineral sorption and precipitation while also altering biogeochemical processes
within thawed soil. Freeze-thaw has been recorded to influence the migration of
soil solutes (such as P, N, and Fe) through cryosuction in non-permafrost soils.
In permafrost-affected soils, freeze-thaw triggered solute migration may
coincide with nutrient pulses to the soil environment following microbial cell
lysis and death or soil aggregate instability and breakage. In alpine and
grassland systems, cryosuction during freeze-thaw can increase anoxic soil
conditions with varying levels of Fe reduction and result in subsequent impacts
to soil aromatics and dissolved organic carbon concentrations. The number of
freeze-thaw cycles, freezing rate, and spatial distribution of freeze-thaw may
vary, altering the degree of transport during cryosuction as well as informing
microbial adaptation and resiliency. The proposed work will combine field data
with freeze-thaw experiments to investigate temporal and spatial variations in
freeze-thaw and the direct impacts to critical processes of soil biogeochemistry
across a hillslope gradient in Alaskan tundra permafrost at the Toolik Field
Station. The investigator will test the hypothesis that permafrost soil
chemistry will be altered during the first freeze-thaw cycle, resulting in
continuous changes in redox and nutrient availability throughout subsequent
freeze-thaw. The study aims to restructure our understanding of permafrost thaw
to include responses of the soil nutrient regime, redox chemistry, and microbial
communities to freezing rate, repeated freeze-thaw, and spatial variation of
freeze-thaw cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.