* 2138556
* OPP-PRF: High-resolution Nested Antarctic Ice Sheet Modeling to Reconcile Marine and Terrestrial Geologic Data
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Anna Ruth Halberstadt, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 254,790.00

Geologic data provide crucial insights into Antarctic Ice Sheet dynamics; for
example, progressive exposure of mountain peaks emerging from the ice sheet
reveal ice elevation changes, and the past ‘footprint’ of marine-based ice
sheets is imprinted on the seafloor. Numerical ice sheet simulations can link
these geologic records in space and time to make larger-scale inferences about
continent-wide ice sheet evolution. This work integrates both marine and
terrestrial geologic datasets with numerical simulations to investigate
Antarctic Ice Sheet behavior (and contribution to global sea level) throughout
the last deglaciation, ~20,000 years ago until present. Specifically, this
research addresses two issues regarding the relationship between simulations and
data and their use in reconstructing past ice-sheet behavior:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Geologic records from the modern seafloor suggest significantly earlier retreat
of marine-based ice compared to terrestrial records of mountain peak exposure
(ice thinning). Computer experiments investigate several hypotheses for this
mismatch in timing.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Exposure age data (terrestrial measurements
recording ice elevation changes) are often interpreted to reflect ice dynamics
hundreds of kilometers away from the study site. This work uses simulations to
explore the linkage between ice elevation changes ‘upstream’ as glaciers flow
through mountainous regions and ice dynamics further ‘downstream’ where ice
contacts the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;This work will produce a publicly available,
customizable, and easily accessible toolkit for comparing simulations and data,
including a database of geologic records to use as constraints. The project is
interdisciplinary, bridging a communication gap between the ice-sheet
simulations and geologic data-collecting communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines numerical simulations and geologic data to explore fundamental
knowledge gaps regarding the interpretation and use of marine and terrestrial
datasets. This work will produce an ensemble of continent-wide coupled ice sheet
and glacial isostatic adjustment simulations, constrained with comprehensive
existing geologic data, to reproduce a history of deglacial Antarctic Ice Sheet
evolution that is compatible with the geologic record as well as glaciologically
and gravitationally self-consistent. Comparison between simulations and data is
improved through high-resolution nested ice sheet modeling techniques, which
provide unprecedented context for exposure age data generally located in regions
of complex topography. Numerical simulations will be performed with
systematically varied parameters and boundary conditions, and can thus support
an investigation of (1) chronological mismatches between terrestrial thinning
and marine ice sheet retreat during the mid-Holocene, and (2) how marine
grounding-line dynamics are propagated upstream to coastal outlet glaciers and
further interior under a variety of different
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.