* 2138064
* Cellular Backpacks: A fundamental investigation of cell-material interactions.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Omokolade Adebowale, Adebowale, Omokolade
* Fellowship Award
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2023
* USD 192,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (MPS-Ascend). Each fellowship
supports a research and training project at a host institution in the
mathematical and physical sciences, including applications to other disciplines,
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. This fellowship to Dr. Omokolade
Adebowale supports his research project entitled " Cellular Backpacks: A
fundamental investigation of cell-material interactions." The host institution
for the fellowship is Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Samir Mitragotri. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Adebowale's research focuses in the
study of how the physicochemical properties of cellular ‘backpacks’, and the
biophysical properties of cell membranes, regulate cell-backpack interactions
that lead to enhanced cellular functions. The ‘backpacks’ consist of two key
structural components: a payload carrying region, and a cell-adhesion region.
The goals are to optimize the mechanical and viscoelastic properties of the
structural components, study how cell-membrane properties impact cell-backpack
interactions, and to investigate how these properties mediate cellular
functions. The outcomes of the research will be broadly disseminated through
websites, social media, conferences, technical papers, and at the annual
Cambridge Science Festival. The plan to broaden participation of
underrepresented minority groups in mathematical and physical sciences includes
partnering with graduate students and postdocs in the Boston-area to provide
mentorship for undergraduates applying to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.