* 2138782
* OPP-PRF: Investigating 2.5k Years of Human History and Atmospheric Transport in Greenland Ice Using High-Resolution Lead Isotopic Records
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sophia Wensman, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2023
* USD 327,921.00

Polar ice sheets and glaciers record changes in climate and the environment
during recent decades, centuries, and millennia. Lead pollution found in cores
extracted from polar ice sheets and glaciers reflects human activities,
including mining and smelting related to early silver production, as well as
coal, oil, and gasoline burning. Isotopic analyses of lead in glacier ice can be
used to identify past changes in emission sources. Lead isotopes will be
measured in five Greenland ice cores to identify and quantify changes in
Northern Hemisphere anthropogenic emission sources during the past 2500 years
and to evaluate linkages between these changes and historical events extending
from antiquity to the present. These records have the potential to transform
understanding of how events such as plague, social upheaval, warfare, and
technological advancements in mining and smelting influenced human history. The
investigator will serve as an instructor for the Interdisciplinary Graduate and
Early Career Researcher Consilience Workshop on Ice Core Science and Natural
Archives in Fall 2022 sharing techniques and preliminary results and will
participate in other outreach activities focused on improving accessibility and
inclusivity in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lead (Pb) isotopes will be
measured in existing discrete meltwater samples collected from four previously
analyzed ice cores (NGRIP2, NASAU, RECAP, and NUUS_2015), as well as a fifth
core (Tunu_2022) to be collected and analyzed in 2022 as part of an ongoing NSF
project (1925417). Recently developed methods allow isotopic measurements of
206Pb, 207Pb, and 208Pb with low uncertainties at concentrations as low as 0.05
ng g-1, making high-resolution analyses in ice cores feasible. Refinement of
these new methods as part of the proposed research may further increase
resolution and improve interpretive power by reducing required concentrations
(down to 0.02 ng g-1) and measurement uncertainties of low abundance 204Pb. If
successful, such 204Pb measurements would be among the first used to interpret
polar ice records. The proposed measurements will improve resolution of
pre-20th-century Pb isotopic records from ice, particularly those from antiquity
and the medieval period, for which only a handful of values have been published.
Evaluation will leverage collaborations between Desert Research Institute and
ancient historians, archaeologists, and atmospheric scientists. The detailed Pb
source apportionment resulting from this research will be used to evaluate the
accuracy of atmospheric transport and deposition models widely used for ice core
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.