* 2138680
* ERI: Toward mmWave Vehicular Communication: A Multisensor Multimodal Deep Data Fusion Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Haijian Sun, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2024
* USD 0.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 35,000 people die each
year on U.S. highways, 1.25 million worldwide. Efforts from all aspects are
needed to reduce such a high fatality rate. Among them, connected and automated
vehicles (CAV) is the only solution that can bring the number to nearly 0. As
the name suggests, CAV involves two interconnected concepts: “connected” and
“automated”. Recent years have witnessed significant advances in “automated”
vehicles, creating self-driving capability up to Level 5 (fully autonomous).
Current autonomous control is implemented in a more isolated way, made possible
by sensors, pre-trained AI algorithms, and on-board computer processing within
individual vehicle. With more tested and deployed CAVs in the near future, there
is a pressing need to provide capability to exchange, transmit, and collect
real-time data via vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications, such as vehicle-
to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), i.e., the need for
“connected”. This research seeks to integrate high frequency signals in
millimeter wave (mmWave) band to CAV, thereby providing reliable vehicular
connectivity solution with high data rate and low latency. Outcomes from this
project will bring following impacts: 1) a transformative signal-less approach
utilizing sensory data from existing CAVs; 2) cutting-edge research experience
to a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI); 3) integration of research and
curriculum development, capstone projects to both undergraduate and graduate
students; 4) an open-source platform with hardware, software, and datasets to
the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;mmWave for CAV faces many
challenges such as high attenuation during mmWave signal propagation and
mobility management. Existing solutions have to initiate pilot signals to
measure channel information, then calculate the best narrow beam towards the
receiver end to guarantee sufficient signal power. This process takes
significant overhead and time, hence not suitable for vehicular applications.
Recent works have investigated the possibility to integrate inputs from
multisensor, such as LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) and camera,
traditionally for enabling autonomous driving capability, to facilitate mmWave
communications. However, prior work is built from the wireless simulator and 3D
modelling software, lacks measurement data from field tests, in addition with
assumption on idealized beam patterns that are not available from existing
devices. Hence feasibility of such an approach on real-world scenario is largely
unknown. To close the gap, our goal for this project is to: 1) develop a low-
cost, real-time, cooperative, and synchronized data collection platform for both
lab (indoor) and field (outdoor) mmWave CAV communication tests; 2) develop a
signal-less codebook/beam selection algorithm with advanced deep data fusion,
such that both base station and vehicle user can choose best beam pairs with
extremely low overhead; 3) validate the effectiveness of both platform and
algorithm with detailed test plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.