* 2138741
* ERI: Novel Dielectric Antennas for Microwave and mmWave Communication and Imaging Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Binbin Yang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 198,461.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless communication has now
evolved into the millimeter wave (mmWave) era, and imaging systems operating at
mmWave frequencies for autonomous driving, security checkpoint and non-
destructive detection are also intensively pursued. For all such systems,
energy-efficient and directive antennas and beamforming devices are critical
components. While metallic antennas have been dominating the applications at the
sub-6 GHz (below 6 GHz) frequency range, dielectric antennas, featuring high
radiation efficiency and large design freedom in material and 3D geometry
options, play an increasingly important role in high microwave and mmWave
applications. The goal of this project is to develop novel dielectric antennas
and compact beamforming devices for mmwave systems through both theoretical
development of design frameworks and practical implementation using advanced
ceramic additive manufacturing technology. The developed novel dielectric
antenna systems will provide compact, low cost and energy-efficient front end
solutions that find application in various wireless communication and mmWave
imaging systems. The proposed research is also complemented by an education
integration plan including course module development, and training of
undergraduate and graduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research
on dielectric resonator antennas (DRAs) has been largely limited to canonical
geometries, due to the lack of generalized design methods and suitable
fabrication techniques for intricate high permittivity structures. Gradient-
index (GRIN) lenses constitutes an alternative low cost beamforming solution,
but reported implementations are primarily limited to bulky low-permittivity
devices using printed plastics while limited ceramic implementations experience
significant performance degradation. In this proposed research, we investigate
the digital light processing (DLP) 3D printing technology for the fabrication of
compact high-permittivity DRAs and GRIN lenses with complex geometries and
material distributions, and develop novel design and synthesis methods for these
devices that take advantage of these degrees of freedom. With successful
execution, the proposed work is expected to bring new understandings to
dielectric resonator antenna's operation principle and performance limits, and
arouse novel design methods and implementation of compact directive beamforming
devices. The application of ceramic-based additive manufacturing to microwave
and electromagnetic devices will produce new experimental and measurement data
for the 3D microwave printing community and fuse new research possibilities and
directions across different disciplines. Lastly, North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University (NCAT), as the largest public HBCU, graduates the
most African American engineers in the US. This puts the PI in a unique position
to promote and impact the engineering research and education among minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.