* 2138040
* Species roles and the impacts of species loss in the formation and maintenance of an iconic mixed-species animal group
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Jonathan Kelley, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2025
* USD 763,791.00

All species are involved in interactions with other species, and these
interactions shape patterns of biodiversity. These interactions are being
disrupted around the globe due to human activities, and such disruptions can
have cascading effects on communities, ecosystems, and human well-being. In
groups of interacting species, as examined in this study, species may vary in
their roles in the community: the loss of some species can have large impacts on
the community, while the loss of others may have little to no effect.
Determining which species to target for conservation requires understanding the
roles that species play, the importance of behavior in maintaining species
interactions, and how loss of particular species alters the community. Yet,
these questions have received little attention. Further, insight into how
interactions may vary in response to changing environments can be gained from
examining if, how, and why the loss of different types of species alters or
disrupts species interactions. This project will include training of
underrepresented early career scientists and an undergraduate field-based course
in Panama, supported by team-wide training in mentoring to increase equity and
inclusivity. The team will also develop open educational research modules for
use at the undergraduate level across multiple
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine species interactions and the links
between behavior and community ecology, researchers will study one type of
mixed-species animal group, army-ant-following birds, using a well-replicated
network analytic and experimental approach in tropical forests. The team will
test a recently proposed theoretical framework for understanding mixed-species
animal group organization, and will greatly expand upon this framework by adding
new behavioral roles, context-dependency in roles, and evaluating linkages
between behaviors, net benefits, and group structure. In particular, this study
will evaluate the behavioral roles of species within these groups, whether roles
vary across contexts, and whether temporary loss of a species with differing
roles alters (1) the structure of the group during the formation stage (when the
group is first forming), and (2) the behaviors, net benefits of interacting, and
structure during the maintenance stage (after they have formed). This will be
done by conducting two experiments - an acoustic species removal experiment
during the formation stage and a physical species removal experiment during the
maintenance stage. In each experiment, species with differing behavioral roles
will be removed. Behavioral observations will be conducted to assess the impacts
of species loss on recruitment, foraging, competition, and group structure. The
project will uniquely bridge the fields of animal behavior and community ecology
by examining the underlying behavioral mechanisms altering group structure and
community resistance, and do so by conducting novel, experimental field tests of
how networks respond to species loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.