* 2138059
* Workshop on Provable Quantum Advantage – Present and Future
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* William Fefferman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 69,000.00

For nearly three decades quantum computation has been the only known model of
feasible computation capable of obtaining exponential speedups over any
efficient classical computer [11,29,30]. Despite this great promise, the
theoretical quantum speedups developed in the early 1990’s are very difficult to
implement as they require large-scale, nearly perfect quantum experiments. While
this goal may still be quite far off, the push to develop quantum computers has
already yielded incredible experimental progress in high-precision control over
individual quantum systems across many different quantum architectures (see
e.g.,[7,10,12,34,35]). Due to these experimental developments, we have now
arrived in the so-called Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (“NISQ”) era, in which
quantum systems of 50-70 qubits are currently being built in experimental
laboratories around the world. For the first time, these experiments are
approaching the complexity boundary after which it is unclear how to simulate
them classically in a reasonable amount of time. This indicates that these
systems may have the potential to achieve quantum speedups. However, these
experiments have important limitations, such as uncorrected noise, which
restrict their capabilities. The first major step for the NISQ era is to
implement an experimental demonstration of a computational speedup relative to
any classical computer, a goal known as “quantum supremacy” [27]. This goal is a
watershed moment in the history of computation and a necessary milestone on the
path toward developing fully scalable quantum computers. Moreover the goal
appears to be rapidly approaching, and we have already seen the first claimed
demonstrations of quantum supremacy [7, 36]. These experiments have attracted
much attention but there are still many aspects of the claims that not well
understood. While there is some rigorous evidence that such near-term quantum
experiments are able to attain exponential speedups over classical computation
(see, e.g., [3,4,14]) these theoretical results do not take into account many
practical facets of these experiments such as uncorrected noise. Indeed, these
gaps between theory and experiment have resulted in partial rebuttals of these
initial quantum supremacy claims (see e.g., [8, 22, 25, 26]). Consequently,
there is a great need to rigorously understand the capabilities of these near-
term quantum experiments. To do this, we propose holding a workshop focusing on
the prospects for achieving large computational speedups on near-term quantum
experiments. Our goal will be not only be to better understand the present
generation of quantum experiments, but also to understand the capabilities of
tomorrow’s quantum experiments, with a view toward the ultimate goal of
implementing a quantum speedup for solving a practically useful problem.
Intellectual Merit:The proposed workshop will lead to a complete understanding
of the computational power of near-term quantum experiments. The focus will be
on three objectives which will together help understand the power of existing
quantum computers, as well as pave the road toward understanding the power of
future quantum devices capable of attaining dramatic speedups for useful
computational problems. In addition to being critical for the current near-term
quantum era, these aims will foster interdisciplinary collaborations and lead to
exciting new insights at the intersection of computer science, engineering, and
experimental physics. Broader Impacts:This workshop will contribute to
sustaining and enhancing the recent worldwide explosion of interest in quantum
computation. The program will feature invited speakers and participants from
academia, government and industry to disseminate the most recent ideas on
quantum computation to a wide variety of scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.