* 2138960
* I-Corps: Chimeric Antigen Receptor mediated immunosynapse assay
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Dongfang Liu, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
facilitate the discovery and development of new chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR)-modified cell therapies as well as improvement of personalized medicine
for cancer patients. This technology may allow scientists across all sectors of
the cellular therapy industry to discover and develop new and more effective
cell therapies. The technology may advance the field of cell therapy by
providing an efficient and reproducible way to analyze and predict the efficacy
of different CAR-modified cells during research and development. The platform
also has the potential to improve patient care by creating a faster and easier
route to personalized medicine. Currently, patients eligible to receive cellular
therapies undergo multiple rounds of cancer treatment and require swift action
to prevent disease progression. This technology may serve as a diagnostic tool
for medical oncologists to rapidly determine the most effective cell therapy
available for cancer patients, thereby speeding the process of enrolling
patients in the right course of treatment. Overall, this technology may impact
both the scientific and healthcare communities by expediting cell therapy
development and improving patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project further develops a diagnostic tool to improve the effectiveness of
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) modified cell therapies. CAR cell therapies use
genetically modified donor immune cells to directly recognize and kill cancer
cells. Current CAR cell therapies and those in clinical trials have been
successful with refractory blood cancers. Many more therapies are in clinical
development for both blood and solid cancers. Key to the recognition and killing
of cancer cells is the strength of the communication between the CAR-modified
cells and the cancer cells, called the immunological/immune synapse. Predicting
the efficacy and potency of CAR-modified cells in patients represents one of the
key unsolved problems in cell immunotherapy. The quality of immunosynapse
correlates well with the efficacy of CAR cell therapies. The technology
developed here is a rapid method of analyzing the quality of immunosynapse
between CAR-modified cells and cancer cells using machine learning algorithms.
This technology may contribute to understanding of the immunosynapse biology and
improve clinical translation of new CAR cell
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.