* 2138456
* PFI (ERI): Screening and Development of Doped Mixed Metal Oxides for Resistance-Heated Thermal Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Stephen Lam, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,922.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(Engineering Research Initiation) (PFI (ERI)) project is the enabling of
versatile, low-cost thermal energy storage technologies that will result from
the materials development work. Direct resistance-heated thermal energy storage
(DRH-ETS) technology stores electricity from the grid, which can either be
directly utilized for high-temperature industrial heat or efficiently converted
back to electricity. This directly addresses the global decarbonization
challenges of (1) balancing supply and demand on an electrical grid with a high
penetration of renewables, and (2) reducing industrial dependence of fossil
fuels for producing high-temperature industrial heat. In 2021, combustion of
fossil fuels for the production of heat in heavy industrial applications such as
cement and steel-making accounted for 10% of all global emissions. Yet, the
options for decarbonizing industrial heat inputs remain very limited, with most
being cost-prohibitive at large scale. Traditional thermal energy storage
technologies utilizing indirect metallic heating elements have been recognized
as among the most cost-effective heating options but cannot achieve high enough
temperatures to suit most carbon-intensive processes. DRH-ETS will overcome
these limitations by using electricity to directly heat conductive thermal
storage materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will screen and
develop materials that optimize the performance of DRH-ETS systems. While
refractory oxide materials have good oxidation resistance and can be doped for
electrical conductivity, most simple binary oxides are unable to satisfy the
combination of required chemical, thermal, and electrical properties. As such,
the number of known bulk-dopant material combinations that would be feasible for
DRH-ETS applications is extremely limited. Here, mixed metal oxides are
promising, but the relevant properties of most higher order mixtures are not
readily known. To address this challenge, this project will perform
computational screening of materials for single-phase stability over a large
temperature range, small resistivity temperature derivative, and dopability. The
screening will employ a combination of thermochemical modeling, electronic band
structure calculations, and ab initio defect analysis to downselect from large
multicomponent compositional spaces. This will result in improved understanding
of composition-structure-property relationships in doped multinary metal oxides,
which will inform system design and operation. This screening will be combined
with fabrication and testing to identify and develop new candidate materials for
achieving low cost and optimal performance in a DRH-ETS
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.