* 2138081
* Advanced Computations with Experimental Validation to Accurately Describe Interface-Related Phenomena in Semiconductor Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Nicholson, Nicholson, Anthony P
* Fellowship Award
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (MPS-Ascend). Each fellowship
supports a research and training project at a host institution in the
mathematical and physical sciences, including applications to other disciplines,
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. This fellowship to Dr. Anthony
Nicholson supports his research project entitled "Advanced Computations with
Experimental Validation to Accurately Describe Interface-Related Phenomena in
Semiconductor Technologies". The host institution for the fellowship is the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Stephan Lany. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Nicholson is utilizing first-principles
computational methodology and Density Functional Theory (DFT) to investigate
atomic-scale structural and electronic properties of thin-film photovoltaic (PV)
device interfaces affected by various electronic defects. Dr. Nicholson’s
research work is relevant to the improvement of efficiency of thin-film cadmium-
telluride photovoltaic modules, a PV technology that accounts for nearly 40% of
all utility-scale PV installations in the US. The proposed fellowship at NREL
consists of integrating state-of-the-art, high-fidelity first-principles-based
computations with experimental validation to accurately describe electronic
structures at semiconductor interfaces, while contributing to inclusion efforts
of underrepresented minorities at NREL and Colorado State University
(CSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.