* 2138912
* ERI: Segmented Braces for Improved Seismic Performance and Repairability of Concentrically Braced Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Andrew Sen, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will develop a new seismic
design approach for steel braced frames using segmented braces configured for
rapid post-earthquake repair. Buildings constructed in regions vulnerable to
seismic hazards in the United States are designed to remain safe during large
earthquakes, but structural components, such as diagonal braces, are designed to
sustain damage as they dissipate seismic energy. This building damage may be
severe and widespread in earthquake-affected communities, inhibiting the speed
or possibility of post-earthquake occupancy, functionality, and repair. Steel
braced frames are prevalent in existing building infrastructure across a broad
range of uses, including hospitals, schools, offices, and industrial facilities,
which are critical for post-earthquake shelter and care of people, distribution
of goods, and economic productivity. The segmented bracing scheme will mitigate
the impact of seismic damage in these common systems and enhance seismic
resiliency by enabling relatively fast, low-cost replacement of the brace
midspan segment such that most other system components can be safely retained.
Experimental testing will investigate the seismic behavior of segmented braces
applied to new construction and repair scenarios. An accompanying computational
study will expand these findings to evaluate additional design parameters toward
the development of design procedures and modeling recommendations suitable for
engineering practice. The research activities will be incorporated into a
laboratory experience course module in structural steel design and engage
underrepresented groups in engineering through undergraduate research
opportunities and outreach programs. This award will contribute to the National
Science Foundation role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP). Project data will be archived and made publicly available in the
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

Concentrically braced frames used in regions with high seismic hazard are
expected to sustain large inelastic deformations through brace buckling in
compression and yielding in tension. These actions concentrate damage to the
midspan of the brace and gusset plate connections, and fracture typically
precipitates at the brace midspan. The longitudinally segmented brace scheme,
therefore, focuses on repair of the brace midspan while retaining other regions
of the brace, the connections, and the framing members. The major research
objectives include: (1) development of segmented brace interface connections
that facilitate replacement and improve seismic performance through the
introduction of additional controlled yielding mechanisms outside the brace
hinge; (2) evaluation of seismic behavior of components retained in repair,
including residual capacity and performance-based engineering considerations;
and (3) generation of practical modeling approaches, performance acceptance
criteria, design guides, and other engineering tools contextualized in existing
steel building design and evaluation provisions. Large-scale subassemblage
testing of frames with segmented braces will be conducted to investigate the new
segmented brace design and the effect of damage accumulation in other frame
components. The inelastic response of a broader range of segmented brace
connection configurations and seismic load histories will be studied using
experimentally validated continuum finite-element analysis to inform design and
modeling guidelines for segmented braces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.