* 2138271
* ERI: Compositionally modulated ferrimagnets for spin-orbitronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Shawn Pollard, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2023
* USD 189,745.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferrimagnetic thin films display
unique properties which may enable the creation of new low power, high speed,
and high-density magnetic devices. However, disorder can significantly influence
device operation by modifying thin film properties. The goal of this project is
to provide an understanding of the role that a specific type of disorder common
to a wide range of ferrimagnetic materials - compositional nonuniformity - plays
in determining the properties that make them ideal for next-generation magnetic
devices. This research will provide the framework for the optimization of these
effects for future technologies through controlled growth processes, and in
turn, simplifying device architectures and improving performance. The research
will also have a wide educational impact, including supporting one graduate from
an underrepresented group in Engineering and Physics as well as exposing
undergraduate and local high school students to advanced research in magnetic
materials. The students participating in this research will have the opportunity
to collaborate with scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory and gain hands
on imaging experience as well as experience in nanofabrication. The educational
impact is amplified by the PIâ€™s ongoing participation in outreach programs at
the University of Memphis.&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
spintronic technologies based on ferromagnetic materials, including memory and
logic devices, often incur limitations related to energy consumption, device
scalability and stability, as well as speed. One promising approach to
overcoming these limits is the development of ferrimagnetic spintronics, which
promises the advantages of high speed and low power operation common to
antiferromagnetic materials while maintaining the straightforward growth methods
and device readout of common transition metal based ferromagnets. This research
will further the understanding of the role of compositional modulation on the
spin-orbit phenomena of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI) and spin-
orbit torques in transition metal-rare earth ferrimagnets, key to developing
high speed, low power devices. The research will address this by (1) improving
our understanding of how compositional modulation allows for the generation of
large spin-orbit effects in ferrimagnetic single layers through controlled
sputter deposition and systematic measurements of DMI and spin-orbit effective
fields, (2) quantitatively linking the variation in magnetic properties through
the film thickness to the large DMI in Co-based ferrimagnets, and (3) providing
a framework to develop single layer, efficient spin-orbit torque devices based
on the aforementioned compositional modulation, thereby simplifying their
fabrication requirements and improving performance. To achieve these goals, the
strength of DMI and spin-orbit torques in compositionally varied ferrimagnetic
films will be examined by Kerr microscopy measurements of static and dynamic
domain configurations and measurements of asymmetric domain wall motion driven
by magnetic fields and electrical currents. Electron microscopy, bulk
magnetometry, and X-ray techniques will be used link these properties directly
to composition non-uniformities. Electrical measurements and direct imaging of
switching processes taken for standard hall cross and nanowire geometries will
allow the compositional modulation to be directly linked to device performance,
including switching efficiencies and the strength of effective magnetic fields,
and pave the way for faster, more efficient magnetic memory, logic, and signal
processing devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.