* 2138647
* ERI: Advancing understanding of data-driven wildfire evacuation planning for communities with transient populations in the wildland-urban interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Dapeng Li, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Due to the significant loss of life and property caused by wildfires in the past
few years, wildfire evacuation planning has become a priority for communities in
the wildland-urban interface (WUI). Part-time residents and transient
populations (e.g., visitors) can differ from full-time residents in terms of
evacuation logistics and behavior, which poses a significant challenge for
community evacuation planning. This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI)
project will leverage big data and computer models to develop a new wildfire
evacuation planning approach that can incorporate part-time residents and
transient populations and take into account different evacuation scenarios.
Research outputs will be shared with community stakeholders to improve local
wildfire evacuation plans. The knowledge generated in this project will help
evacuation researchers and practitioners better use big data and the newest
wildfire evacuation modeling techniques to improve wildfire public safety.
Furthermore, this project will support education and training for the next-
generation of geographic information systems (GIS) professionals, data
scientists/engineers, and evacuation
researchers/practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
understanding the use of big data and coupled wildfire evacuation models in
wildfire evacuation planning for communities with transient populations. The
research team will conduct a household survey to study the difference between
full-time and part-time residents with regard to evacuation logistics and
behavior. Then we will integrate fire spread and microscopic traffic simulation
models to develop a coupled wildfire evacuation model that can incorporate full-
time and part-time residentsâ€™ evacuation logistics and behavior and other
transient populations. A variety of data from different sources will be used to
systematically design a series of evacuation scenarios, and the developed
evacuation model is used to perform evacuation simulations for these evacuation
scenarios. The generated fire perimeter and high-resolution vehicle trajectory
data will be used to derive evacuation time estimates and vehicle exposure count
information. The research team will use GIS to visualize vehicle exposure count
information. Additionally, the evacuation planning approach will be employed to
create data-driven evacuation plans for the study site. The research findings
will be broadly disseminated via an online workshop, publications, conference
presentations, and a Web GIS application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Humans, Disasters, and the Built Environment (HDBE) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.