* 2138505
* Collaborative Research: Role of lithologic variability in controlling downstream channel response to sediment pulses
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Czuba, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2025
* USD 64,160.00

Landslides in mountainous regions produce large volumes of debris that are
eroded by rivers and travel downstream to populated lowland areas. The gravel-
size components of these landslides can accumulate on the streambed and increase
the frequency of flooding in downstream communities. The resultant changes in
the rock sizes in the riverbed can alter habitat for fish and insects that live
there. Alternatively, if the sediment in the landslide is smaller than sand, it
can result in cloudier water that requires costly filtration for drinking water
or irrigation and is often harmful to the fish, insects, and other animals
living in the river. The downstream effects of different river and landslide
sediment characteristics are important as climate change threatens to increase
landslides and the amount of sediment moving within affected rivers. This
project will determine the degree to which the rock type (density and
durability) of the sediment controls the timing and magnitude of sediment
accumulation and size composition on the riverbed, with specific attention to
those rivers in the volcanic terrain of the Pacific Northwest. The project will
introduce new students to the Earth Sciences through short overnight field
excursions to participate in the research and share results with regional flood
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Pacific Northwest, a disproportionate
number of major mass-wasting events occur in volcanic terrain, producing
sediment pulses of variable density and abrasion rate. This project will use
field observations and modeling to characterize river channel sensitivity to
these large sediment pulses. The research focuses on how the lithologic
characteristics of sediment pulses control the timing and magnitude of
downstream channel response. This question will be addressed by: quantifying the
variability in the sedimentary characteristics of mass-wasting deposits in
several basins; modeling the downstream fate of a specific mass-wasting event in
a river for which there are good field constraints on downstream abrasion and
channel response; and determining the sensitivity of the river system to
observed ranges of sediment pulse and channel characteristics using the model,
which is based on Lagrangian tracking of individual sediment “parcels” that have
unique characteristics such as abrasion rate and
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.