* 2138889
* Capacity: Biological Collections: Curatorial upgrade and digital uncovering of the hidden treasure of Delaware to safeguard, and increase access to, centuries of botanical legacy
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Cynthia Hong-Wa, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 227,335.00

Scientific specimens, collected over multiple centuries, and their associated
data represent a body of research and knowledge about biodiversity. However most
of them are still not readily accessible or readily usable; thus, hampering
efforts to address biodiversity questions. It is often the biodiversity data
from regionally focused small institutions that are inaccessible, despite their
importance. Such an institution is the Claude E. Phillips Herbarium in Delaware,
which houses over 200,000 specimens from all major plant groups. These specimens
were collected locally on the Delmarva Peninsula as well as nationally and
globally over the last 200 years, and represent valuable resources for research
and education. This project will digitize about 130,000 plant specimens to help
fill gaps in herbarium specimen digitization. The mobilized data are
particularly significant in their geographic, taxonomic, and temporal coverage
and will provide baseline information to assess patterns and trends in
biodiversity across space and time. At the same time, the project will also
train the next generation of the herbarium workforce to help ensure that
centuries of botanical legacy will be cared for and will continue to provide
long-term benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase accessibility of
biodiversity data, the project will produce about 130,000 high resolution
specimen images and a database of both transcribed specimen metadata and
georeferenced localities, all of which will be released online for public access
through iDigBio (idigbio.org) and the Consortium of Mid-Atlantic Herbaria's
Symbiota portal (midatlanticherbaria.org). In parallel with, and aided by, the
digitization process, a curatorial upgrade will be undertaken to modernize
collections care and management at the Claude E. Phillips Herbarium, with the
ultimate goals of improving curation and customer service as well as promoting
usage and sustainability of the collections. Training of undergraduate students
at Delaware State University is an integral part of the project and will expand
participation of groups still underrepresented in STEM, particularly natural
history. Project personnel will be involved in all aspects of digitization and
curation. Meanwhile, access to the mobilized data will enable further
educational and research opportunities both within and outside the institution.
The project will also contribute to regional capacity building by engaging the
public through workshops, tours, crowdsourcing, and other outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.