* 2138649
* OPP-PRF: Revealing the Genomic Underpinnings of Polar Bear Physiological Adaptations to the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Blair Perry, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 309,112.00

Study of the genomic basis and evolution of physiological adaptations can
provide valuable insight on the impacts of climate change on Arctic species.
This research focuses on the polar bear, an iconic symbol of climate change, and
its adaptation to high-latitude environments. Multiple types of genome data from
closely related bear species will be used to identify regions of the polar bear
genome that underlie specific physiological adaptations. This information will
improve understanding of current and future impacts of climate change on these
animals. To broaden participation and diversity in Arctic science, the fellow
will conduct public outreach, organize workshops, and mentor students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While brown and black bears
undergo annual hibernation in response to seasonal prey scarcity, the ability to
hibernate has been greatly reduced, and nearly lost altogether, in the
adaptation of polar bears to the Arctic. Given the complexity of the hibernation
phenotype and the short divergence time between polar bears and hibernating bear
lineages, evolution of regulatory sequences may have played a particularly
important role in evolution. Through the integration of functional and
population genomics datasets, this project will characterize the landscape of
protein coding and regulatory evolution in three bear lineages and test the
hypothesis that regulatory evolution facilitated the rapid adaptation of the
polar bear lineage to Arctic environments. This work will advance understanding
of the mechanisms and complexity of polar bear adaptations, the processes by
which polar bears adapted to Arctic environments, and the vulnerability of this
apex predator to climate change. The project will also provide insights into
vertebrate genomics and evolution, broadening our understanding of the processes
by which complex physiological traits arise and evolve in
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.