* 2138323
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigating Emergent Gravity in Combinatorial Quantum Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kassahun Betre, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2023
* USD 172,119.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the research
activities of Professor Kassahun Betre at San Jose State University. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Space and time are perhaps the most fundamental aspects of physical
reality. However, a deeper explanation of their nature is still a mystery. Many
possible approaches toward addressing this issue have been pursued in recent
years; these are usually grouped under names such as String Theory, Loop Quantum
Gravity, and Causal Dynamical Triangulation. As part of this project, Professor
Betre will pursue a complementary approach called Emergent Background-
Independent Quantum Gravity (EBIQG). This approach posits that the building
blocks of space and time are certain quantum-mechanical relationships that can
be expressed in the form of graphs. Within such an approach, space and time
emerge only as macroscopic averages. Professor Betre will build numerical tools
that simulate the statistical and thermodynamic properties of the graph-
theoretic quantum systems, and construct a model for the emergence of dimension
and geometry in a two-dimensional quantum gravity. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. San Jose State University is a
minority-serving institution, and undergraduate and masters students
participating in this research project will develop not only analytical research
skills but also practical skills in conducting numerical simulations. This
project will also provide these students the experience and confidence to
succeed in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More technically,
this research will bring two important new directions to the field of EBIQG.
First, it highlights the emergence of the uniform dimension of space itself as a
starting point. A graph-theoretic generalization of the dimension of Euclidean
space called inductive dimension is used as a dynamical quantity of the graph
microstates that course-grains into the emergent dimension of smooth manifolds.
Second, this research project models discretized space using all geometric
graphs --- graph-theoretic analogues of triangulations of surfaces --- rather
than just regular lattices and regular graphs. With this approach, the emergence
of quantum gravity from the graph models appears as a degenerate zero-
temperature ground state. Such research will therefore help to pave the way
towards a concrete model for emergent integer dimension and geometry from a non-
geometric graph-theoretic Hilbert space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.