* 2138923
* Collaborative Research: FRR: Adaptive mechanics, learning and intelligent control improve soft robotic grasping
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Victoria Webster-Wood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2025
* USD 417,416.00

Handling soft, fragile, or slippery objects such as ripe fruit remains a
challenge in robotics. Soft robotic graspers show tremendous promise in safely
handling such objects without damaging them. Furthermore, creating software to
control soft robots poses an additional challenge. In contrast, many animals
with soft bodies solve this problem everyday as they forage and feed. Not only
are they able to grasp and manipulate soft and fragile objects, but animals can
also learn how to safely interact with new objects and vary how much force they
apply during grasping based on their prior experience. This project will take
inspiration from an animal with a body, the sea slug, that feeds successfully on
a range of seaweeds that vary greatly in size, toughness and shape, to create
new type of soft grasping robot. This project will also create a mechanism that
can learn how to safely grasp a wide range of objects, including fragile foods
like tomatoes and mushrooms. The ability for a robot to learn how to safely
handle soft and fragile objects will have future applications in agriculture,
manufacturing, and medicine. This project will also support the training of a
diverse workforce in science and engineering. Students from grade school through
college will be included as research participants to test the robot.
Additionally, this project will support cross-disciplinary training through
graduate student training, outreach activities, summer research experiences for
undergraduates, and internships in scientific
illustration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
soft, morphologically intelligent grasping robots with onboard bioinspired
learning and local control will improve grasping performance and ease of use by
rapidly adjusting controller and actuator properties and learning in real-time.
To test this hypothesis, this project will: (1) implement actuator adaptability
over short timescales, mimicking short-term changes in biological muscle, (2)
implement local control adaptability through short-term learning in a synthetic
nervous system (SNS), mimicking short-term network changes in biological neural
systems, and (3) implement longer-term synaptic weight changes in an SNS,
mimicking learning from experience. In Aims 1 and 2, a bioinspired approach will
be applied to develop a soft grasper inspired by Aplysia californica (sea slug)
feeding. In Aim 3, this approach will be extended to a robot arm and long-term
learning will be incorporated into the controller. To precisely identify
elements of the network subject to learning, this project will study grasping in
a tractable animal model, Aplysia californica. This marine sea slug is adept at
grasping soft, fragile, slippery objects and rapidly learns with experience.
Furthermore, Aplysia’s grasping control circuitry contains only a few hundred
neurons, allowing the measurement of specific changes in key network elements
during learning. To assess the value of biological principles for grasping, this
project will use human subjects to measure the robotic grasper’s performance,
ease of use, and operator training time. Baseline data will be established with
a conventional grasper and performance will be compared as adaptability is
integrated into the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.