* 2138437
* FET: NSF Workshop on Software-Hardware Co-design for Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Yufei Ding, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2023
* USD 33,544.00

In this workshop, experts from both industry and academia will gather together
and discuss the key challenges that need to be addressed for an end-to-end
quantum computing infrastructure. The importance of taking a computer
engineering perspective will be advocated. It is envisioned that classic
computer engineering techniques (at both software and hardware levels) have the
potential to enable transformative scientific and industrial progress for
quantum computing. The key is to figure out the grand challenges in the new
quantum context. This workshop will function as a hub to spur a large,
synergistic, and convergent effort for building a common technological ecosystem
that quantum-enabled technologies and classical technologies can both inhabit
for mutual benefit and progress in the long term. A strong steering committee
has been built with researchers working in quantum computing and related topics.
Four of the steering committee members are from industry and the other four are
from academia. The steering committee has outlined a series of topics of
interest, an agenda, and prospective speakers and panelists for the workshop.
The committee will also prepare a final report that captures the key findings of
the workshop. A set of interesting and emerging research topics and prospective
speakers for the workshop is listed as follows: (1) Quantum computer
architecture design and optimization, (2) Approaches to fault tolerance and
error mitigation on near-term systems and beyond, (3) Design automation and
software for quantum computing, and (4) Enabling early applications with
hardware-software co-design. The workshop will also provide an opportunity for
researchers to work out an educational plan for developing resources for the
full spectrum of workforce pipeline for the national ecosystem construction
around quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.