* 2138055
* The Complex Dynamics of Large Systems with Long-Range Interactions: New Insights from Covariant Lyapunov Vectors
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Mark Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 326,187.00

In many real-world systems of interest, disorder is generated locally, leading
to complex dynamics as a result of short and long-range spatial interactions
with neighboring regions. Examples include the dynamics of the atmosphere and
oceans, the patterns of chemicals in industrial processes, the dynamics of large
distributed networks such as the internet, and the nonlinear interactions of
large numbers of neurons. We quantify the impact of these spatial interactions
on the overall dynamics using two model systems that contain the essential
physics while remaining computationally accessible. We use the powerful idea of
covariant Lyapunov vectors, which quantify the growth or decay of small
disturbances, to build a deeper understanding of the dynamics of large systems
with spatial interactions. These findings will provide insight for the
development of the theoretical ideas needed to describe complex dynamical
systems of societal interest. The project includes the development of a hands-on
numerical workshop for junior high students, provides opportunities for
undergraduate research, and supports the graduate research of a PhD student. The
research findings, and the state-of-the-art computational approaches explored,
will be used as part of an advanced graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a fundamental numerical investigation of the dynamics of large
spatially-extended systems, with a range of spatial interactions, that are
strongly driven out of equilibrium. We focus on two model systems that contain
the essential nonlinearities and spatial interactions, while remaining
computationally accessible, for a fundamental and broad study using powerful
ideas from dynamical systems theory. We will explore large lattices of discrete-
time maps and a canonical pattern forming partial differential equation called
the Generalized Swift-Hohenberg equation. We will use the powerful idea of
covariant Lyapunov vectors (CLV's) to gain fundamental new insights. The CLV's
will yield an unprecedented and quantitative description of the tangent-space
dynamics. We will quantify the degree of hyperbolicity of the dynamics, estimate
the dimension of the inertial manifold, explore the generalization and
robustness of the tangent-space splitting into physical and transient modes, and
quantitatively link the pattern dynamics with the spatiotemporal dynamics of the
CLV's. We will build a physical understanding for how these findings vary as a
function of the strength and length-scale of the spatial interactions that are
included in the model systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.