* 2138449
* ERI: Engineering Behaviors of Slopes Exposed to Wildfires
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Xenia Wirth, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 196,170.00

As the global temperature of the planet increases, shifts in regional climate
have resulted in hotter, drier summers in the state of California, which
increases the risk for droughts and wildfires. In Summer 2020, a record-setting
4.4 million acres were consumed, affecting many lives and causing millions of
dollars of property damage. However, the risks associated with wildfires do not
stop once the fire has been extinguished. The ravaged slopes are still at risk
for potentially catastrophic mudslides. As frequency and severity of wildfires
increases, so does the frequency and severity of mudslides. Unfortunately,
researchers still do not fully understand how burned soils and ash behave after
a wildfire. How strong is wildfire ash? Does a burned slope become stronger or
weaker once ash is deposited after a fire? Once a wildfire is extinguished,
where does the ash go and how does it age? This Engineering Research Initiation
(ERI) award strives to answer these questions by examining the engineering
behaviors of slopes exposed to wildfires. Specific objectives include
characterizing wildfires ashes and burned soils and measuring their strength,
compressibility, and hydraulic properties. This research will assist those who
assess the risks associated with post-fire mudslides. It is important that we
understand the geotechnical engineering behavior of ash and burned soil, so that
we can provide the most accurate and most effective tools to protect communities
from post-wildfire hazards. This research will also be providing educational
benefits to historically underrepresented groups in engineering, as the research
will support the hiring of undergraduate and graduate student researchers from
underrepresented communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
focuses on examining wildfire-exposed areas from a geotechnical perspective, to
determine if the addition of ash and dry ravel to soil slopes and basins weakens
these areas and could potentially cause slope failures. Although there is a
significant quantity of research in the literature concerning the factors that
trigger debris flows, limited data is available on shear strength
characteristics of wildfire ash and ash/soil mixtures. This is a large gap is
our understanding of debris flow behaviors, as the soft, unconsolidated ash
layer plays a crucial role in the stability of the post-wildfire slope. To
supplement the available research in this area, this work will determine the
strength and hydraulic characteristics of wildfire ash and ash/soil mixtures
from central and southern California. Specific objectives include measuring the
shear strength of wildfire ash and ash/soil mixtures using a combination of
shear strength devices, measuring the saturated and unsaturated hydraulic
properties of wildfire ash/soil mixtures, performing standard geotechnical index
property testing of wildfire ash and burned soils, and performing geochemical
testing on wildfire ashes. This work should provide a deeper understanding of
the engineering properties of residual materials post-
wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.