* 2138631
* ERI: A Hybrid Mechanics-Guided Machine Learning-Based Predictive Framework for the Performance of Rocking Foundations During Earthquake Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sivapalan Gajan, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 198,571.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research findings reveal
that rocking foundations during earthquake loading perform as efficient
geotechnical seismic isolation mechanisms and have the potential to eliminate or
reduce the damage to the building and bridge structures they support. The
objective of this project is to develop a novel, hybrid predictive framework for
the performance of rocking foundations by combining the mechanics that governs
the physics of the problem with the knowledge discovered from the use of big
data and machine learning techniques. This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI)
award is the first attempt to combine physics with data science to model the
seismic performance of structures supported by rocking foundations, and hence
the project directly advances the current knowledge and state of the art in
modeling the seismic performance of structural systems. The introduction of
rocking foundations in civil engineering design and practice will improve the
resiliency and sustainability of civil infrastructure and reduce the human and
economic losses resulting from the failures of buildings and bridges, thus
directly benefitting society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core idea of this
project is to combine mechanics-based models with machine learning algorithms to
develop a hybrid mechanics-guided machine learning-based predictive framework
that will ensure better generalizability and accuracy of predictions, as well as
consistency of results. In order to achieve this objective, the following
research tasks will be carried out: (i) development of machine learning models
for performance prediction of rocking structure-foundation-soil systems using
centrifuge and shaking table experimental data available in a rocking
foundations database; (ii) numerical simulations of rocking systems using
mechanics-based models available in the OpenSees finite element framework; (iii)
development of hybrid models for prediction of performance of rocking systems by
effectively combining the models developed in tasks (i) and (ii). The major
outcome of this project will be a hybrid modeling and prediction framework for
rocking systems that is both science-driven and data-driven, and has the
potential to continuously learn, adapt and improve in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.