* 2138914
* I-Corps:  A spatiotemporal simulation system to predict COVID-19 case trajectories in schools
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Chaowei Yang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
safe reopening of college campuses and school systems, as well as companies and
other organizations with a campus setting after the COVID-19 crisis. Due to the
sudden outbreak of COVID-19, college campuses and school systems were shut down
globally to slow down the spread of the disease. Despite being largely
successful in controlling the spread of COVID-19, school closings caused health
problems, including physical and psychological stresses, for students, staff,
and faculty in addition to direct economic impacts. This project develops a
system to better support school re-openings with specific policies based on
scientific data and information. The potential product can simulate the
trajectory of COVID-19 cases and provide potential customers with a reliable
method to scientifically monitor the status of their campuses. This product has
the potential to be used globally and also can be used to manage large events
with a focused gathering site setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on a spatiotemporal simulation/prediction system developed to address
the urgent campus reopening questions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
system integrates investigation on spatiotemporal infrastructure including big
data, cloud computing, analytics, and community outreach. Human behavior
simulation, campus spatiotemporal dynamics, and public health data are combined
to predicate possible viral case trajectories. The novel spatiotemporal
simulation integrates agent-based people movement and public health risks as
well as control policies (such as mask mandates, classroom size restrictions,
test and tracking, and vaccination status) to derive accurate predictions. The
system has been validated using data from several college
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.