* 2138223
* A Workshop on Assessment and Evaluation Tools for Makerspaces
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Peter Wardrip, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 74,935.00

Maker education has increased tremendously in community settings and classrooms
across the country. Maker education is learner-driven and hands-on, often
collaborative, and may focus on solving a problem or designing an object or
device. There is a growing need for assessment and evaluation tools and
approaches to understand and improve the nature of maker learning and provide
evidence for the value of maker pedagogy. This workshop will bring together
approximately 25 researchers from formal and informal settings as well as
practitioners to review current maker assessment and evaluation tools and
examine the role those tools can play for informing research and practice. The
workshop will identify areas where future work is needed, including designing
assessment and evaluation that effectively addresses the interests and needs of
diverse learners. The workshop will disseminate an online collection of these
assessment and evaluation tools, a research brief, and several webinars sharing
the results and recommendations of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-
day, in-person conference will include pre-workshop surveys to determine and
refine issues for consideration at the conference, identify a core set of
readings and resources for conference participants, and to identify key topics
for research briefings presented at the conference. The conference will include
background briefings, hands-on try-outs of assessment tools, synthesis
discussions, and identification of future directions for research and next
steps. Resources developed from the workshop will be widely disseminated through
workshop partner Maker Educationâ€™s website, an annual maker conference held at
the University of Wisconsin, and through other publications reaching researchers
and practitioners in informal and formal educational settings,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.