* 2138010
* The First Second: Decoding the Nature of the Universe with a Culturally Diverse Workforce
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Fernando Flor, Flor, Fernando Antonio
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Fernando A. Flor is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education
at Yale University. Flor will develop models of the formation of composite
particles in the early universe using data from the ALICE experiment at CERN in
Geneva, Switzerland and from the STAR experiment at Brookhaven National
Laboratory on Long Island, New York. Both experiments use collisions of heavy
ions to produce small droplets of Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP) at extremely high
temperatures that mimic the conditions of the early universe, about one second
after the Big Bang. The goal of the research is to understand the mechanism by
which the QGP loses energy and forms the neutrons and protons that become normal
matter, and how that mechanism is affected by different quarks. In addition,
Flor will expand the University of Houston NuSTEAM effort, which connects
University of Houston undergraduates with Brookhaven National Laboratory, to
Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relativistic heavy ion collisions serve as
a looking glass for probing and understanding the mechanisms governing the
strong interaction between quarks and gluons emerging at the early stages of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is threefold:&lt;br/&gt;1.) To
elucidate the reigning mechanisms generating the strong interaction of matter
present one second after the Big Bang.&lt;br/&gt;2.) To produce a sustainable
and inclusive pedagogical outreach platform within the Experimental Heavy ion
Physics community through which underrepresented minorities gain access to the
field early in their academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;3.) To generate a paradigm
focused on the overall ascent of underrepresented minority groups into the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.