* 2138854
* AI-based Assessment in STEM Education Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xiaoming Zhai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2024
* USD 59,941.00

The Framework for K-12 Science Education has set forth an ambitious vision for
science learning by integrating disciplinary science ideas, scientific and
engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts, so that students could develop
competence to meet the STEM challenges of the 21st century. Achieving this
vision requires transformation of assessment practices from relying on multiple-
choice items to performance-based knowledge-in-use tasks. Such novel assessment
tasks serve the purpose of both engaging students in using knowledge to solve
problems and tracking students’ learning progression so that teachers could
adjust instruction to meet students’ needs. However, these performance-based
constructed-response items often prohibit timely feedback, which, in turn, has
hindered science teachers from using these assessments. Artificial Intelligence
(AI) has demonstrated great potential to meet this assessment challenge. To
tackle this challenge, experts in assessment, AI, and science education will
gather for a two-day conference at University of Georgia to generate knowledge
of integrating AI in science assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is
organized around four themes: (a) AI and Domain Specific Learning Theory; (b) AI
and validity theory and assessment design principles; (c) AI and technology
integration theory; and (d) AI and pedagogical theory focusing on assessment
practices. It allows participants to share theoretical perspectives, empirical
findings, as well as research experiences. It can also help identify challenges
and future research directions to increase the broad use of AI-based assessments
in science education. The conference will be open to other researchers,
postdocs, and students via Zoom. It is expected that conference participants
establish a network in this emergent area of science assessment. Another outcome
of the conference, Applying AI in STEM Assessment, will be published as an
edited volume by Harvard Education Press. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.