* 2138484
* Collaborative Research: Tracking nitrogen in mélange matrix from fore-arc to sub-arc depths with implications for deep nitrogen cycling: A combined field and experimental approach
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Emily Cooperdock, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2024
* USD 195,997.00

The nitrogen (N)-cycle as it relates to the bio-, atmo-, and hydro-spheres have
been well studied due to N’s abundance in Earth’s atmosphere and importance for
life. In the less understood solid Earth N cycle, plate tectonics has regulated
N fluxes between surface and deep Earth reservoirs over much of Earth’s history,
affecting the bulk Earth N distribution over millennial timescales. Thus, the
mass balance of nitrogen (N) delivered to the deep Earth during subduction and
then returned to the surface during volcanism and degassing is critically
important, yet efficiency estimates are highly variable. Current estimates
suggest that 45-74% of subducted N does not return to the surface through arc
volcanism. This implies that N is being sequestered in the deep Earth in
variable amounts, which could reflect factors such as subducting plate
composition or subduction conditions. Candidates for deep, poorly characterized
N reservoirs include mid-lower continental crust, subcontinental mantle, fore-
arc to sub-arc mantle, or deeper mantle (i.e., deeper upper mantle, transition
zone or lower mantle). This highlights a need for N measurements on appropriate
samples as well as thorough constraints on N behavior in these reservoirs. New
key constraints on nitrogen (N) distribution and processing within the fore-arc
to sub-arc regions of subduction zones will be provided. First, some of the
first N composition measurements of sediment-rich and serpentinite-rich mélange
matrix rocks and minerals to characterize the distribution of N during fore-arc
processing will be made. Second, phase equilibria experiments to assess the
stability of key N hosting minerals and measure N melt/fluid-mineral partition
coefficients on mélange-matrix materials as a function of several factors
(pressure, temperature, oxygen fugacity, chlorine content, and partial melt
composition) to track N behavior during dehydration and partial melting in the
slab at sub-arc depths will be performed. Data from the proposed study along
with those from previous studies will be used to quantify the amount of N that
is delivered from the fore-arc to the sub-arc processing zone, in which minerals
it is hosted, and how it varies by dominant lithology (sediment or
serpentinite). How much N is released from the slab during sub-arc processing
versus how much is sequestered in the sub-arc mantle in subduction zones of
different thermal states will then be quantified. These will constitute novel
constraints on N behavior that can be applied to subduction regimes throughout
Earth’s history. Hence, it will also be used to address the feedback and
evolution of N across the coupled solid Earth-atmosphere systems. This proposal
supports two early career female PIs, two graduate students, and two+
undergraduates from University of Arizona (UA) and University of Southern
California (USC). To enhance collaboration and broaden participation, the PIs
will offer a joint virtual graduate seminar on deep volatile cycling including
students at UA and USC. The team at UA will develop a museum display at UA’s
Alfie Norville Gem &amp; Mineral Museum on high pressure-high temperature
geoscience research (including laboratory equipment and research
applications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the most abundant constituent of the
Earth’s atmosphere and as an essential ingredient of life, the behavior of
nitrogen (N) in the present-day atmosphere, oceans, crust and biosphere
(collectively known as the surficial reservoirs) have been relatively well-
studied. However, the N composition of the Earth’s surficial reservoirs may not
have remained the same throughout Earth’s history and this may have implications
for early Earth climate and evolution of life. Nitrogen is exchanged between the
Earth’s surficial reservoirs and the deep interior via plate tectonics,
especially subduction zones. In subduction zones, N in the Earth’s crust (along
with components from the atmosphere, ocean and biosphere) is pulled into the
mantle or the interior of the Earth. Some proportion of the N from the mantle
escapes back into the atmosphere and ocean by volcanic degassing. This N
exchange between the surface and interior is not well-constrained and this
proposed study aims to fulfill a key component of this knowledge gap. The N
composition of typical subduction zone rocks will be measured to determine where
N is hosted as pressure and temperature increase. Laboratory experiments at
conditions in the Earth’s mantle will be performed to understand the behavior of
N once the crust enters the mantle and melts. The objective is to eventually use
these results to estimate how the N composition of the Earth’s mantle and
atmosphere have changed through Earth’s history. This proposal supports two
early career female PIs, two graduate students, and two+ undergraduates from
University of Arizona (UA) and University of Southern California (USC). To
enhance collaboration and broaden participation, the PIs will offer a joint
virtual graduate seminar on the proposed theme including students from both
institutions. The team at UA will develop a museum display at UA’s Alfie
Norville Gem &amp; Mineral Museum on plate tectonics connecting the surface and
interior of the Earth, which would be an excellent medium to educate the public
on state-of-the-art research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.