* 2138673
* I-Corps: Mobile Phone Based Vital Sign Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Ryan McGinnis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves the
development of an accessible, evidence-based, biofeedback intervention to allow
individuals suffering with mental health disorders to have immediate access to
effective treatment. A first use case is for the approximately 11% of Americans
who experience reoccurring panic attacks, which has significant societal cost
such that these individuals are more likely to visit emergency rooms, miss work,
and experience subsequent comorbidity. This segment of the population currently
has limited access to evidence-based treatment due to long therapy waitlists and
often ineffective offerings. The proposed digital therapeutic technology aims to
answer this unmet need by providing immediate, inexpensive, evidence-based
intervention available on a smartphone. Advances made with this technology could
be expanded to also inform biofeedback intervention for other mental health
problems including general anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance
abuse disorders, and even chronic pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project develops new approaches for characterizing physiological states from
mobile phone videoes and delivering personalized therapies where and when they
are most needed. The novel computational algorithms leverage machine learning to
enable accurate estimations of physiological signals that are robust to
imperfect data quality inherent in measurements made during daily life. The
technology may also be feasible for use during episodes of high emotional
reactivity. This project builds on innovations in the clinical measurement and
intervention by integrating algorithms into a mobile application, using it to
collect datasets of real-world suffering and to inform personalized
interventions. The feasibility of the tool has been demonstrated as a digital
therapeutic for panic attacks. This project will explore the commercialization
potential of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.