* 2138588
* ERI: Manufacturability of Novel High Temperature Aluminum Alloys Through Additive Manufacturing Cycle
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Le Zhou, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2024
* USD 207,950.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal additive manufacturing, also
known as metal 3D-printing, offers unprecedented capabilities in manufacturing
highly complex or customized components. Metal additive manufacturing finds many
applications in the aerospace, automotive and energy industries and has the
potential to revolutionize future manufacturing. However, most metals after
additive manufacturing show undesired defects, which deteriorate the reliability
and shorten the lifetime of the components. This Engineering Research Initiation
(ERI) grant will support fundamental research that will contribute to new
knowledge in how to reduce defects during the additive manufacturing and post-
processing of a new high temperature aluminum alloy. The outcome of the research
will enable an improved control of defects in additively manufactured metallic
components and provide a new alloy design method for developing aluminum alloys.
The research involves activities combining advanced manufacturing and materials
science, which offers training opportunities to graduate students, promotes
undergraduate research and provides outreach activities to diverse groups of
younger students. This research will broadly impact the manufacturing industry
by facilitating the implementation of metal additive manufacturing and promoting
its consistency, all the while training students as future leaders in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing of lightweight
aluminum alloys has been a major challenge due to their propensity for formation
of defects. Specifically, during the laser powder bed fusion of most traditional
aluminum alloys, pores and/or cracks are observed despite optimization of the
processing parameters. Post-processing is therefore inevitable to reduce or
eliminate the defects in the materials, which can coarsen their microstructure
and reduce their mechanical performance. The goal of this research is therefore
to fundamentally understand the defect generation and elimination mechanisms
during additive manufacturing and its post-processing and develop novel high
temperature lightweight aluminum alloys that are highly manufacturable.
Experiments combining manufacturing, advanced characterization and high
temperature creep testing will be performed on a coarsening-resistant aluminum
alloy specifically designed for the additive and post-processing cycle. The
research will establish the relationship between the defects and processing
parameters, develop a mechanistic model for the pore closure kinetics during the
post-processing, and determine the creep property and deformation mechanisms of
the new aluminum alloy. The research will address the knowledge needed to
develop metallic alloys specifically amenable to additive manufacturing and fill
the knowledge gap in the understanding of creep mechanisms in additively
manufactured metallic alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.