* 2138846
* ERI: IoT-Enabled Smart Learning Environment for Ambient Assessment of Socio-Technical Skills in Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Gina Martinez, Lewis University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2023
* USD 205,932.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today’s engineers need to attain
both technical mastery of their field and socio-technical skills that
significantly impact their professional performance and the solutions they
produce. Examples of these skills include the ability to make ethically informed
judgments, the ability to function effectively in a team, and an ingrained
observance of safety procedures. While technical knowledge and skills can be
easily assessed by instructors through traditional assessment methods such as
exams and project demonstrations, existing assessment methods for socio-
technical learning objectives can be challenging to design, time-consuming to
administer, inconsistent in its subjectivity and slow in returning feedback to
students. This project will design and develop a novel automated Internet of
Things (IoT)-based assessment tool for evaluating student attainment of socio-
technical learning objectives in engineering courses that can potentially
address these issues. The Smart Learning Environment (SLE) Ambient Assessment
Framework (SAAF) proposed in this project will be able to detect student and
instructor actions within a normally conducted class setting such as lab
activity or group discussion, reason the context of those actions, and produce a
quantitative classification of student achievement level with respect to the
learning objectives of the course or activity. This could transform the way
engineers are trained in socio-technical areas as ambient observation could
capture behaviors that more closely resemble how students would behave in the
workplace as professional engineers. This is in line with NSF’s Research in the
Formation of Engineers (RFE) program as this project will develop a tool that
can potentially efficiently and effectively help develop professional
competencies of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAAF’s overall goal is to
perform automated assessment of student performance with respect to a course’s
socio-technical learning objectives. SAAF will apply knowledge-based activity
recognition of classroom occupants (students and instructors) during a regular
class activity to detect actions and reason the context of those actions. A
knowledge-based approach to activity recognition will be employed so as not to
be restrictive and prescriptive in the way instruction and assessments should be
carried out as machine learning-based approaches would. The detected events will
be analyzed against classroom activity and course content ontologies developed
through the project. The project will then design and implement a proof of
concept for the SAAF by employing video, audio and sensor detection of events
within a laboratory classroom and reasoning activities with context, such as
“student A put on antistatic wrist band before instructor prompted,” or “in
student B and C’s team, B did all the work”. With this capability developed, the
project will then investigate the quality and impact of this system through the
investigation of two research questions – (1) How valid, reliable, convenient,
and expedient is the SAAF as an automated tool for assessing socio-technical
skills of engineering students? and (2) What are the major barriers to SAAF
adoption as a primary classroom assessment tool for socio-technical learning
objectives, and how can those barriers be addressed to increase buy-in? To
answer these questions, student and instructor participants will be asked to
conduct regular class laboratory activities in an SAAF-enabled classroom and
compare SAAF assessment results with those of comparable traditional assessment
methods. Participant surveys and interviews will also be conducted to analyze
user experience. Therefore, the project will provide the following major
contributions, each addressing a current gap in engineering education: (1)
shareable and extendable classroom activity and assessment ontologies, (2) a
proof-of-concept for an automated ambient assessment technology, and (3) data
analyzing the reliability, impact, and acceptability of such a
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.