* 2138122
* Infrared-Radio-follow-up Observations for Detection of the Magnetic Radio Emission of Extra Solar Planets: A New Window to Detect Exoplanets and Exomoons
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Fatemeh Bagheri, Bagheri, Fatemeh
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Fatemeh Bagheri is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research
and education at University of Texas at Arlington. Bagheri plans to use a new
technique to detect “exomoons”, moons orbiting around planets near distant
stars. The technique allows the detection of exoplanets and exomoons through the
radio emission produced by magnetospheric processes. Her observational approach
potentially opens a new window to exoplanetary research. Bagheri’s research
efforts will involve undergraduates at a Hispanic-Serving Institution. She will
also work to eliminate the known major barriers toward the inclusion of
underrepresented scholars in science and engineering fields of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond detection of exomoons, Bagheri’s detections would
also inform the extent to which the surfaces and atmospheres of exoplanets are
shielded and potentially habitable. Bagheri’s research plan explores a method of
detecting and measuring the magnetic fields of exoplanets via microlensing
events. She will work to break the psychological barriers to inclusion, by
promoting a vision for excellence among students and training a generation of
workforce with hard and soft skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.