* 2138549
* ERI: An Integrative Risk Quantification and Management Framework to Enhance the Resiliency of Surface Transportation Systems Under Disruptive Precipitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Yeganeh Hayeri, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flood events are one of the most
common natural disasters affecting the US. Recurring nuisance precipitation and
less severe flood events affect urban environments with much higher frequency
when compared to more severe events. More frequent events pose higher safety
risks to public transit users, pedestrians, and drivers and cause challenges to
accessing transportation infrastructure. By focusing on the less severe flood
events and heavy precipitation, this Engineering Research Initiation (ERI)
project provides a scalable framework that will holistically capture the impacts
of a city's characteristics, infrastructures' attributes, human travel
behaviors, and disruptive events' patterns on transportation resilience. The
researched framework will enhance the safety and efficiency of the US surface
transportation system, resulting in strong societal and economic impacts. The
goal of this project is to scientifically understand surface transportation
networkâ€™s risks under disruptive precipitation events and effectively
communicate such risks. Further, the researched framework will provide an
educational tool to teach quantitative decision-making and risk analysis and
assist with computationally efficient transportation operation policy learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the flood-prone area of Hoboken, New Jersey,
this multi-element modeling approach will promote a pragmatic decision-making
platform supporting the interactions between humans and the built environment.
The project harnesses knowledge from resiliency planning, risk analysis and
communication, survey design, transportation engineering, graph theory and
network modeling, and reinforcement learning to transform the simplified
assumptions utilized in the existing transportation resiliency modeling efforts.
The project will estimate and validate the local and system-wide impacts of
flooding on mobility and accessibility. Upon quantifying the effects of
disruptive precipitation on mobility and accessibility, and predicting road
flood susceptibility, driver behavior and disruptive patterns will be evaluated
and simulated during and after disruptions through scenario generation. The
objective is to provide a framework that improves operational decision-making
through prioritization and risk communication. The resulting framework will
encompass all elements leading to disruption by precipitation in flood-prone
areas and consequential travel patterns causing further hindrance and safety
hazards to travel networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.