* 2138574
* ERI: Bonding and Filler Dispersion in One-Step, in-situ Shear Exfoliated Two-Dimensional Material-Polymer Nanocomposites and Their Application as Desalination Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ali Ashraf, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2024
* USD 196,744.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant will support research on the manufacture of two-
dimensional (2D) material-infused polymer nanocomposites. Polymer nanocomposite
is a class of material with applications in a wide range of areas, including
structural materials for aerospace and aeronautical applications, sensing,
energy harvesting, printed electronics, water desalination, and consumables for
the semiconductor industry. An ideal nanocomposite should have uniform
dispersion and strong filler-matrix bonding. Nanomaterials prepared separately
and then added to a polymer matrix can suffer from poor polymer adhesion,
impurities, agglomeration, rely on the use of hazardous chemicals, and lead to
high production costs. This project investigates an emerging method of preparing
and incorporating the nanomaterials within the polymer itself by shear
exfoliation and subsequent micro/nanoscale patterning by feedback-controlled
direct ink writing (DIW)-based manufacturing technique. Through a fundamental
understanding of bonding and nanofiller dispersion within these nanocomposites,
multifunctional devices can be manufactured in a more environmentally friendly
manner. The outcome of this research can lead to innovative polymer
nanocomposite devices utilized in fields like water desalination, and therefore
advancing national prosperity and welfare. The educational and outreach
component of the project will enable underrepresented minority student
engagement in the STEM field through participation in this multidisciplinary
research, relevant curriculum development, and demonstration of research
concepts to K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing of
thermoset or elastomeric nanocomposite devices can suffer from tool clogging and
the lack of dimensional control due to poor filler-to-polymer bonding and
dispersion of nanofillers. In-situ shear exfoliation (ISE) of layered materials
within the polymer matrix itself has shown promise in alleviating this challenge
through the creation of uniformly dispersed abundant reactive edges on the
exfoliated nanomaterial that form strong bonds with monomer or polymer in a
contaminant-free atmosphere. Exfoliation utilizes the weak van der Waals
interaction between planes of bulk layered materials that allow exfoliation to
2D nanomaterials (e.g., from graphite to graphene) by applying shear force. This
project will utilize uncured ISE nanocomposite with optimized viscosity and
curing kinetics for thermography-controlled DIW-based manufacturing process to
generate nanopatterned materials such as desalination membrane. Fabricated
nanocomposites will be analyzed by rheometry, microscopy, spectroscopy, and
thermography to shed light on the relationship between bonding, dispersion,
alignment of 2D nanofillers, and process parameters. Material properties can be
significantly affected by nanoscale interaction between nanofiller and polymer
matrix and this project will help establish a new design rules for the
manufacture of polymer nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.