* 2138274
* ERI: Investigate the Role of Affect in Fostering Trust in Automated Driving
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Feng Zhou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,880.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge
related to the role of affect in trust in automated driving, promoting the
relationships between human drivers and automated vehicles. The human mind has
the affective and cognitive components. So does trust in automation, but affect
is the primary determinant of trusting behavior. However, studies of affect on
trust in automation are scarce. Therefore, it is critical to examine the role of
affect in trust in automated vehicles. The overall objective of the project is
to explore the role of affect in trust-based interaction in automated driving.
In order to attain the overall objective, three integrated aims will be pursued,
i.e., 1) build real-time trust prediction models using psychophysiological
measures, 2) investigate the relations between affect and trust in automated
vehicles, and 3) calibrate trust in automated vehicles using affect heuristics.
Once relevant psychophysiological measures are identified, they can be used to
build real-time trust prediction models and once the relationships between the
latent structure of affect in trust-based interaction and trust in AVs are
identified and the real-time trust prediction model is built, affect can help
build and calibrate driver trust in AVs using affect heuristics. Hence, the
results from this research will promote the progress of science and national
health (e.g., preventing crashes) by advancing our understanding of
bidirectional trust-based interaction in automated driving and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;First, this research will build real-time trust
prediction models using psychophysiological measures, which can overcome the
limitations of previous research that mainly measured trust once at the end of a
session or twice as pre- and post- levels of trust, which did not reflect the
dynamic nature of trust in automation. Second, this research will investigate
the relations between affect and trust in automated vehicles by examining the
latent structure of affective responses related to trust in automated driving
and how affective responses are related to different aspects of trust. Third,
this research will examine the role of affect by making use of affect heuristic
in automated driving measured by both self-reported and psychophysiological
data. Such research endeavors will help understand the role of affect in trust
in automated driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.