* 2138934
* Examining Pedagogy in Cybersecurity at Military Academies
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Peter Peterson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2025
* USD 61,412.00

The Examining Pedagogy in Cybersecurity (EPIC) at Military Academies project
will investigate and assess how cybersecurity is taught and learned in first-
year cybersecurity courses (FYCCs) at the United States Naval Academy (USNA) and
United States Military Academy (USMA). USNA and USMA teach cybersecurity to all
first-year students, approximately 2,100 students per year. These institutions
provide an ideal population of diverse students who otherwise might not be
interested in cybersecurity. As a result this population presents a unique
opportunity to understand better how to teach all students cybersecurity
concepts. The first goal of the project will examine the relative efficacy of
traditional and simulation-based instructional approaches for teaching in FYCCs.
The second goal is to develop a community of cybersecurity instructors from the
military academies centered on improving teaching and learning in FYCCs by
adapting simulation-based teaching practices. The EPIC project will enhance the
cybersecurity preparation of our future military leaders and improve
cybersecurity education for all, including those attending non-military
institutions, thus strengthening national security
overall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a large-scale (6,300+
subjects) quasi-experimental study of a diverse population of students drawn
from three years of cohorts of first-year students. This large, diverse study
population permits a deep examination of how simulation-based pedagogies affect
different student populations. It also permits the exploration of possible
student performance variations or possible bias in the assessment tools based on
demographics. In year one, the project will study how the approximately 30
instructors at USNA and USMA currently teach cybersecurity in their FYCCs. In
year two, the project will introduce simulation-based learning exercises and
pedagogies to the FYCCs and assess their effectiveness. In year three, the
project will use evaluative data to revise the newly introduced exercises and
pedagogies and assess their effectiveness. The project will make all educational
materials freely available, including virtual machines. The project will use,
adapt, modify, and improve existing materials, carried out by instructors at
USNA and USMA, supported by the interdisciplinary research team and UMBC's
championship cyberdefense team members. Research methods will include classroom
observations, interviews, the percentage of students receiving a D, F, or
withdrawing (DFW grade rates), questionnaires, and concept inventories---
especially the Cybersecurity Concept Inventory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program,
which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case
specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.