* 2138187
* ERI: Seamless Integration Between CAD and FEA of Thin-Walled Structures Using Splines With Extraordinary Points
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Hugo Casquero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,914.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the design-through-analysis
cycle of automobiles, aircrafts, and ships, numerous interoperability issues are
caused by having two separate geometric representations of thin-walled
structures. Specifically, a geometric representation based on trimmed NURBS is
used within computer-aided design (CAD) software, and a geometric representation
based on Lagrange polynomials is used within finite-element analysis (FEA)
software. Splines with extraordinary points (EPs) open the door to having the
same geometric representation of thin-walled structures used in both CAD and FEA
software. In contrast with trimmed NURBS, splines with EPs result in watertight
surfaces and conforming parameterizations. Furthermore, the inter-element
continuity of splines with EPs leads to increased accuracy in computing physical
quantities that depend on the derivatives of the solution (e.g., stresses) and
enhanced robustness in handling severe mesh distortion. The objective of this
Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) project is to perform fundamental research
that significantly advances our understanding of which particular EP
construction is more suitable to achieve a seamless integration between CAD and
FEA. This integrated vision of CAD and FEA and the results of this project will
be included in undergraduate and graduate courses serving the metropolitan
Detroit community. Outreach activities at local high schools will feature
spline-based crash simulations based on project results and provide Q&amp;A
sessions focused on attending college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate fundamentally new understanding in three topics of critical importance
to achieving a seamless integration between CAD and FEA of thin-walled
structures using splines with EPs: (i) the accuracy of splines with EPs in
spectrum analysis, i.e., studying the performance of splines with EPs in solving
eigenvalue problems; (ii) the development of a new EP construction based on
imposing G^1 constraints that has optimal approximation properties, which has
not yet been shown either numerically or mathematically in the literature; and
(iii) studying the surface quality when multiple EPs per face are considered.
The lack of understanding of how well different types of splines with EPs
perform in spectrum analysis is limiting our capability to confidently apply
this technology to crashworthiness simulations, noise, vibration, and harshness
(NVH) simulations, and shape optimization, among others. In addition, the
control nets that are currently used in the literature to evaluate surface
quality often have only one isolated EP. However, in automotive and aerospace
applications, multiple EPs per face are ubiquitous, and thus, evaluating the
surface quality for these configurations is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.