* 2138995
* ERI: Workload-Informed Operations for Emergency Medical Services and  other First-Responder Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Laila Cure Vellojin, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 215,901.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award supports research enabling a fair work system for
Emergency Medical Service (EMS) professionals and other first responders. EMS
systems aim at saving the lives of patients needing emergency health care
outside the hospital by responding to 911 calls. These professionals tend to
work long shifts during which they may be exposed to a great variety of
situations, including traumatic events. However, the actual workload experienced
by EMS professionals is not well understood, leading to stress, burnout, and
high levels of attrition. The resulting shortage of paramedics in the United
States endangers the ability to respond to emergency calls and puts lives at
risk. This research will assess the workload experienced by EMS crewmembers in
real time and incorporate that into operational decision-making, such as call
coverage, task and crew switching, within EMS systems. An improved operating
environment is expected to lead to a reduction in work-related attrition among
EMS professionals, thereby ensuring that the community receives high-quality
emergency out-of-hospital health care while promoting the well-being of first
responders. This research will impact the discipline of work systems science by
transforming how work one measures and designs work involving highly variable,
non-repetitive tasks, which constitute many of today’s occupations in the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study EMS operations from the
perspective of frontline personnel by 1) developing new methods to approximate
individual workload using routinely collected process data, and 2) defining and
modeling new real-time operational strategies to balance workload among
crewmembers within a shift. This research will develop and validate a
methodology for real-time workload assessment based on trace-driven simulation
of observed dispatch patterns augmented with task analysis data. The workload-
balancing strategies to be investigated include intra-shift crew swapping to
level crewmembers’ workload using stochastic dynamic programming techniques and
a heterogeneous crew configuration strategy based on demand prediction. The
project will provide a team of graduate and undergraduate students from the
Department of Industrial, Systems and Manufacturing Engineering with the
opportunity to collaborate with EMS professionals and decision-makers through
data collection, analysis and reporting activities. The PI is committed to
recruiting and mentoring students from diverse backgrounds, particularly women
and Hispanic, into the research team. The methods developed in this project will
be integrated into Work Systems and Data Mining courses offered by the PI, and
will be used to create materials for community outreach activities through
collaboration with Wichita State University’s Ulrich Museum of
Art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.