* 2138587
* ERI: Investigating the Fundamental Interactions between Mesenchymal Stem Cells and Hydrogels – Towards a Stem Cell-Biomaterial Therapy for Osteoarthritis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Bethany Almeida, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2024
* USD 75,551.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have the promise
to treat a wide variety of human disease conditions due to the cells’ ability to
transform into many mature cell types. Stem cells also have the potential to
influence immune response and wound healing. However, their promise has not yet
been realized in the clinic. Recent work has explored how biomaterials can
control hMSC behavior. However, how hMSCs change biomaterials over time is
unknown. This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will address how
biomaterials change over time due to stem cells, how stem cells respond to
biomaterials, and the interrelationship between the two. The results of this
project may lead to improved stem cell-based therapies for conditions like
osteoarthritis. The project will introduce local K-12 students to the exciting
possibilities of careers in biomedical engineering through hands-on
demonstrations for the Potsdam North Country Children's Museum. The project will
enhance the Clarkson University curriculum through undergraduate research
opportunities and a new course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the project is to understand how biodegradable hydrogels, mimetic of the
native cartilage microenvironment, direct lineage specificity of encapsulated
human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC). This goal will be achieved by designing an
hMSC-laden hydrogel capable of modulating cellular stiffness and shape and
investigating the interrelationship between hydrogel physicochemical properties
and stem cell culture conditions. A systematic approach will be used to
fabricate a series of hydrogels with varying physicochemical properties. The
specific design criteria include the polymer type, molecular weight, and
concentration, presence of a known chondrogenic small molecule eluting from a
polymeric nanoparticle that is incorporated into the hydrogel backbone, and the
patterning and encapsulation of the hMSCs within the hydrogel. Upon fabrication
of the hydrogel variations, the dynamic hydrogel physicochemical properties will
be investigated in various stem cell culture conditions and the effects of the
hydrogel variations on hMSC chondrogenesis will be explored. Completion of this
project will result in the generation of new knowledge that may be used to guide
biomaterial-stem cell therapies for treatment of osteoarthritis, as well as lay
the foundation for a paradigm shift towards developing a deeper understanding of
the fundamental interrelationship between biomaterial physicochemical properties
and the stem cell microenvironment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.