* 2138163
* Collaborative Research: Wolf RACE (Resource Availability and Competition in Ecosystems) - Insights from The McKittrick and Rancho La Brea Lagerstatte
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sora Kim, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 546,278.00

At the end of the last ice age, most of North America’s large mammals became
extinct, including the iconic dire wolf. However, the smaller but physically
similar grey wolf and coyote flourished. Today, grey wolves are threatened by
human hunting and climate change and face the possibility of extinction
themselves. The researchers will use the fossil record of the McKittrick and
Rancho La Brea “tar pits” in southern California to investigate the biology of
dire wolves and other canids. Comparisons within and among individual animals
will indicate how these animals competed with one another, including members of
their own species. This research will be complemented by studying modern grey
wolf populations. Together, these data can inform and promote species survival
today. This work will support a PhD student, two early career scientists, and
undergraduate research experiences for students from historically minoritized
backgrounds at a Hispanic Serving Institution. The researchers will also develop
curriculum and learning modules to spread awareness of the McKittrick fossils
and environmental challenges facing modern wolves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
knowledge of North American Pleistocene carnivores is from the Rancho La Brea
“tar pits” lagerstätte located in southern California. The McKittrick asphalt
seep is similar in preservation and species richness, but represents an arid,
inland setting with different floral and faunal abundances. Joint analysis of
these systems provides a missing perspective of Pleistocene carnivore ecology,
resource availability, and competition among species in adjacent ecosystems with
different environmental conditions. The researchers will measure dietary
patterns in dire wolves and coyotes to determine food web relationships using a
suite of approaches: ecomorphology, tooth wear and fracture, stable isotope
analysis, and geochronology. They will also probe modern wolf ecology at two
sites: a landlocked population from Wood Buffalo Provincial Park in Alberta,
Canada and a marine proximal population in Sweden. Together, the modern and
fossil data provide models for understanding current and long-term challenges
facing modern predator populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.