* 2138259
* Track 1: ACCESS Resource Allocations Marketplace and Platform Services (RAMPS)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Shawn Brown, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 10/31/2027
* USD 11,061,814.00

The Carnegie-Mellon University team provides allocation services as part of the
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services &amp; Support
(ACCESS) program. The Resource Allocations Marketplace and Platform Services
(RAMPS) project is transforming the process of allocation for the ever-evolving
range of NSF-funded resources in the ACCESS ecosystem. This ecosystem includes
many of the most powerful computing, storage, and related cyberinfrastructure
resources available to the U.S. research community. These resources provide
essential capabilities for advancing science and education across all fields of
science. The RAMPS allocation environment offers a welcoming gateway that
inspires collaboration and participation in the pursuit of scientific discovery
while continuing to provide an essential gatekeeping function when necessary to
balance demand for resources with the available supply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAMPS marketplace is toppling many current allocations
approaches by removing barriers between researchers and their needed resources,
RAMPS creates an open, inviting, and democratized marketplace. Diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) in the allocations environment is a central focus of
the project. RAMPS is working to ensure the full participation of women, persons
with disabilities, and underserved populations in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). RAMPS provides an efficient, scalable and
simplified interface for researchers, educators, and students to request
resources in support of their research, educational, and workforce development
endeavors. The RAMPS model of four allocation tiers, i.e., Explore, Discover,
Ramp-Up, or Maximize, gives researchers with different needs multiple entry
point options which optimize trade-offs between allocation application process
efficiency, review effort, review turnaround times, and availability of
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the resource providers in the ecosystem,
RAMPS streamlines the process of integrating new systems and services. Built
with an emphasis on modularity, extensibility, and decentralization, the RAMPS
software platform is flexible enough to accommodate allocations for current and
future computational and non-computational resources and services. ACCESS
Credits, a universal allocation currency, and standardized allocation tiers
allow RAMPS to accelerate allocation requests and reviews.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, through a suite of Innovative Pilots, RAMPS is
introducing disruptive features to the ecosystem and allocations marketplace to:
inform current and future enhancements; decentralize the entry points for ACCESS
allocations by building a set of campus and regional On-RAMPS; integrate cloud
resources; define computational workflows as allocable resources; and enhance
the allocations infrastructure to serve sensor nets and
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.