* 2138155
* Discovery and Dynamical Classification of Accreting Compact Objects with the Zwicky Transient Facility
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Phillipson, Phillipson, Rebecca A
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Rebecca Phillipson is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research
and education at Washington University. Dr. Phillipson plans to take advantage
of upcoming large scale optical studies, like the NSF’s Vera C. Rubin
Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time. She has demonstrated recurrence
analysis methods from nonlinear dynamics are capable of distinguishing between
deterministic, stochastic, and chaotic signals in X-ray Binary Stars and Active
Galactic Nuclei. Dr. Phillipson plans to broaden participation in the
astrophysics field in several ways. She will mentor students participating in
the Pre-Major in Astronomy program which gives opportunities for students from
underrepresented groups to perform cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phillipson’s preliminary work suggests that an
ensemble study of stellar light curves, with the recurrence methods, paired with
machine learning, will result in novel classifications of variable sources based
on their dynamical variability. The numerical approaches open a new discovery
space for detection of quasi-periodic variable objects. She will partner with
the eScience Institute to develop an accessible website for the dissemination of
the scientific results from her research program. A key feature of her data
access plan is enabling visually impaired scientists to interact with the data
by using sounds to facilitate feature detection and analysis. This approach,
called sonification, uses existing software tools to map scientific data to
acoustic sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.