* 2138403
* ERI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Acoustic Fields for Ultrasound-Based CNS Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Steven Allen, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2024
* USD 198,854.00

Approximately 41 million people within the United States suffer disability.
These disabilities place a large burden on individuals, their families, and
society as a whole. Technologies that can induce neuron restoration and
rehabilitation are a critical national health priority. However, restoration or
rehabilitation in the central nervous system is particularly hard to accomplish
because human neurons regenerate slowly or not at all and it is difficult to
deliver helpful drugs through the blood brain barrier. Meanwhile, recently
developing brain surgical technologies, called focused ultrasound, possess many
characteristics of an ideal neural rehabilitation technology because focused
ultrasound can induce changes in brain tissue at specific places and times
without harming surrounding tissues and are thought to safely open the blood-
brain barrier. Development of these technologies is slowed by the inability to
non-destructively measure the ultrasound pressure field inside a living subject.
This makes it hard to control which ultrasound-brain tissue effect one might
induce during therapy. The goal of this project is to accelerate the development
of ultrasound-based neural rehabilitation technology by building devices that
can non-destructively measure ultrasound pressure fields in living subjects.
When completed, the device will allow doctors and researchers to measure and
control the ultrasound field and, thereby, the specific ultrasound-brain
interaction induced during therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
design, prototype, and validate a novel ultrasound-encoding electromagnet that
can be inserted into a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner and encode
acoustic longitudinal displacement fields into MR images of living subjects. The
displacement data can then be used to estimate acoustic parameters such as
pressure and sound speed inside the subject. If successful, the new information
provided by this electromagnet insert will enhance the scientific rigor of
ongoing and future ultrasound neuromodulation therapy studies. The project will
be conducted in the following three phases: 1) design, 2) prototype, and 3)
validation. The design phase will use simulation software to evaluate two
electromagnet designs against design criteria such as the encoding capability of
the electromagnet at 2 cm distance, Lorentz forces exerted on the device, and
heating during operation. During the prototyping phase, the device will be
constructed and evaluated against the performance criteria predicted during the
design phase. The effects of the device on MRI image quality will also be
assessed. If the device meets established performance criteria, then, during the
validation phase of the project, the electromagnet will be used to estimate
acoustic pressure fields induced in a tissue-mimicking gel object. Upon
completion of these three phases, this project will produce a novel device that
can non-destructively measure acoustic pressure fields in water-based objects
and can be readily applied to ultrasound-based nerve rehabilitation
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.