* 2138435
* Meeting: Predator-Prey Interactions Evolution of Form and Function (GRC January 29-February 4th, 2022 in Lucca Italy)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Michael Sheriff, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award will broaden participation at the 2022 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on Predator-Prey Interactions by directly supporting the attendance of
members of historically excluded groups, those serving in undergraduate or
minority-serving institutions, and early career researchers. At the conference,
attendees will participate in numerous formal and informal mentoring events,
including a two-day Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) open to graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. These events are designed to enhance the exposure of
supported attendees’ research and promote interaction and collaboration with
more senior established researchers. In addition to requiring all attendees to
present research at the GRS, there are 8 presentation opportunities at the main
GRC that have been set aside for attendees that are supported by this award.
Lastly, attendees will be invited to lead manuscripts in a Special Issue
publication with topics derived from the conference discussion groups,
formalizing the process through which collaborations can continue post-
conference. As such, this award enhances the scientific and professional
development of a more diverse group of early-career researchers who would
otherwise most likely not be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conference on Predator-Prey Interactions has occurred bi-annually since
2014 and the insights and novel research papers produced from these conferences
have advanced the field of predator-prey interactions. Given the pervasive and
critical importance of predation across animal species and ecosystems, the goal
of this conference is to foster cross-pollination of ideas among disciplines
from evolution and ecology to wildlife management to neurobiology and
biomedicine. This interdisciplinary meeting has resulted in a variety of novel
approaches, perspectives, and publications. The 2022 meeting will focus on
understanding the relationship between phenotype and fitness from a functionally
integrative, evolutionary perspective. As such, it will entail path-breaking
advances in our understanding of animal forms, designs, and strategies that
represent optimal solutions in a variety of
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.