* 2138301
* I-Corps: Smart Healthcare System Threat Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Mohammad Rahman, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on
assessing the security of smart healthcare systems (SHSs), aiming to persuade
both the manufacturers of medical devices and healthcare organizations to deploy
a more secure architecture. The advent of internet-of-medical-things (IoMT)
technology brings many enhancements and possibilities for SHSs by providing
opportunities to collect health information and enable real-time communication,
increasing the efficiency of medical sensors, and reducing the latency between
disease detection and treatment. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the
prevalence and need for remote and automated patient monitoring. However, with
the rise of cyberattacks, secure and dependable operation of SHSs has greatly
increased in importance and priority. This secure deployment seeks to directly
or indirectly serve various stakeholders ranging from healthcare providers to
patients. The project will explore implementation and commercialization
opportunities with an initial application focus on developing security and
resilient analytics for IoMT-based SHSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project develops a system to reduce the potential vulnerability of smart
healthcare systems (SHSs) based on wireless sensor devices and implantable
medical devices. The proposed formal threat analysis tool is designed to be
applicable to any healthcare systems that use machine learning models to make
real-time control decisions from continuous data feeds. The tool acquires
control logic from machine learning models, supervised and unsupervised, to
perform a formal synthesis of potential threats. Using a state-of-the-art
method, the solution identifies possible threats using system settings and
adversarial knowledge, accessibility, capability, and attack targets as inputs.
Initial results suggest that the proposed technology can improve the robustness
and resiliency of SHSs. The threat vectors identified by the tool can be
utilized to reconfigure the SHS architecture to make it less susceptible
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.