* 2138701
* ERI: Crop-FIT: Technology to Support Integrated Wearable Fitness Trackers for Plants
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Shawana Tabassum, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most promising strategy for
producing enough food for humans and livestock in the future is to make farms
more efficient, profitable, and sustainable in their use of nonrenewable
resources. Studies report that drought stress alone yields up to 21% and 40% of
global reductions in wheat and maize productions, respectively. In addition,
agriculture accounts for 55 to 60% of methane emissions and 21 to 25% of carbon-
di-oxide emissions globally, thus poorly planned and unsustainable agriculture
practices contribute substantially to global warming. Lack of real-time
monitoring capabilities of crop health remains one of the central limiting
factors for simultaneously mitigating productivity losses and adverse
environmental impacts of agriculture practices. There has been a significant
thrust in the development of wearable medical devices. However, their
applications remain heavily unexplored in plants. Toward this end, this project
will develop new crop-wearable technologies that can monitor the levels of plant
hormones (which denote a plant’s first response to its environment), as well as
record plant tissue remodeling under environmental stressors (e.g., drought,
heat, and salinity stresses). This technology could be a pivotal tool in
precision farming enabling real-time tracking of the fitness of plants, with
direct benefit to the agricultural society. The findings from this project will
aid in engineering higher-performing, stress-tolerant crop cultivars and setting
up on-demand irrigation schedules in the long run, thus preventing the over-
application of nonrenewable agrochemicals while simultaneously increasing the
production. This project will also train students from minority backgrounds and
the producer community on the productivity advantages of sensors-driven
precision farming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to design, fabricate,
and validate integrated, in-situ plant sensors for catalyzing the next
generation of crop engineering and precision farming. Real-time monitoring of
crop parameters is crucial for implementing immediate interventions to mitigate
productivity losses and adverse environmental impacts. Sensors for precision
farming applications are limited to indirectly estimating crop needs and health
issues from weather conditions, soil properties, or aerial imagery that do not
provide chemical profiling in plants, thereby lacking information on the onset
and progression of crop health conditions. Hence, there is a significant gap in
knowledge regarding precisely and directly quantifying plant needs and their
responses to environmental conditions. This research proposes a holistic
solution to this problem by developing an integrated, multiplexed stem sensor
for in-situ and quantitative profiling of four key phytohormones/secondary
metabolites, which denote a plant’s first response to its environment. The
device is comprised of an array of electrochemical sensors, integral
microfluidics, and data processing in an embedded platform for in-situ
collection and monitoring of phytohormones in sap. The sensor will be validated
with maize grown under abiotic stress conditions to (1) analyze the sensor’s
sensitivity, selectivity, robustness, and impact on plant growth, (2) elucidate
the dynamic correlations between the phytohormones under environmental stress
conditions through multiplexed sensing, and (3) harness these data streams to
differentiate the impact of heat/drought/salinity stresses on plants. The second
thrust of this research is to design and simulate a photonic crystal-based
fiber-optic bundle for use in real-time root endoscopy and spectroscopy in
living plants. This first-of-its-kind fiber bundle will be pivotal in imaging
root zone and monitoring root exudate metabolites in real-time. The combined
analysis of tissue-specific (shoot versus root) metabolites and deciphering the
dynamic tissue remodeling will enhance our fundamental understanding of
metabolite gradients across the whole plant, real-time adaptation of roots to
stressors (questions that remain unexplored in previous studies) and illuminate
a pathway for new crop breeding strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.