* 2138292
* EAGER: Computational Agroecology: A Systems Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Barath Raghavan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Recent work on network verification has had to deal simultaneously with the
heterogeneity of large networks of hardware and software elements that interact
in complex ways and with scaling verification and synthesis for practical use in
network planning and management. These challenges mirror the challenges in
applying computing coherently to new challenges in agriculture. The last eighty
years have seen a dramatic narrowing to just 7 crops that produce 80% of global
calories, a situation that is insecure given increasing demands and changing
pressures. This project will introduce a new computational framework extending
and expanding recent networking research techniques to unify the disparate
approaches to Digital Agriculture, with an aim to yield both greater
productivity and greater security in the food system while advancing the state
of the art in modeling agroecosystems computationally at large scale. As a
result of this large scale, we will develop new techniques for scaling network
verification, especially in settings where only approximate data is available.
The innovations developed in this research will be applicable back to large-
scale network verification, planning, and
provisioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will introduce a
computational framework for Digital Agriculture that subsumes both precision
agriculture and agroecology. This computational framework will proceed to root
the analysis, simulation, and understanding of agroecosystems using a network-
verification-based space-time state-space representation of the infinite
possible configurations of a piece of land and the biogeochemical elements on
it. This approach enables consideration of agroecological designs and systems of
management, including complex mixtures of crops and cropping systems, that are
seldom considered in conventional approaches; it simultaneously enables rigorous
analysis of formerly inscrutable agroecological methods. This new framework will
provide essential guidance for the critical changes facing vast human-managed
lands. This project will consist of a conceptual state-space framework called
Agroecological Transition Functions and a practical software systems framework
called Computational Agroecology. Beyond simply advancing agroecological
understanding, this project will advance networked systems research by exploring
state-space exploration, such as in network verification, at much larger scale
than before, and by doing so considering the application of new types of
networked systems of sensing and actuation in a complex physical environment.
This framework will be instantiated through new abstractions for programming
cyberinfrastructure to explore new engineered technologies in sensing and
actuation, including human practices and technologies that do not yet have
physical instantiations. The outputs of this research will apply back to core
areas of networked systems research; specifically, this work will enable
improved scaling of network verification and synthesis through improvements in
approximation and aliasing via the state-space framework that will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.