* 2138277
* OPP-PRF Pygoscelis  Penguin Response to Potential Prey Retention along the West Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Katherine Gallagher, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 01/31/2024
* USD 289,335.00

Pygoscelis penguins are central place foragers during the summer while they
raise their chicks. They leave and return to the same colony location after
hunting for food and rely on the availability of Antarctic krill, their primary
food source. This research focuses on whether penguin diets and colony location
reflect the retention of prey around and near colonies on the West Antarctic
Peninsula. Eddies and other oceanographic processes may facilitate prey
retention at certain locations, driving penguin colony establishment and
success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project hypothesizes that Pygoscelis penguin
diets will be composed of more Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) when local
prey retention is high, possibly due to subsurface eddies. This hypothesis will
be tested using satellite-based estimates of Pygoscelis penguin diet composition
using multispectral sensor data to estimate nitrogen values and infer trophic
level. Prey retention will be calculated along the peninsula using the Regional
Ocean Modeling System (ROMS). Simulated particles and diel vertical migration
will be used to mimic krill behavior. These particles can be experimentally
seeded across multiple depths in multiple years to assess residence times in the
system. Using penguin colony data from the Mapping Application for Penguin
Populations and Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD), the PI will correlate diet and
retention metrics to local penguin colony growth and persistence and build a
predictive model of where colonies may form in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.