* 2138905
* Quantum Information Meets Quantum Matter: Long Range Entanglement and Dynamics Across Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Nandini Trivedi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2026
* USD 272,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a program that integrates
theoretical and computational research, education, and outreach at the
intersection of quantum materials and quantum information. One of the major
goals of quantum materials and matter is to understand how new kinds of
organizations of electrons and atoms emerge from simple interactions, such as
magnetism and superconductivity. Quantum information on the face of it is a very
different discipline which deals with information coded in qubits rather than
the classical bits, 0 and 1. This program brings together ideas of entanglement
between qubits, explores their existence in quantum magnets, and elucidates
their unique properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum systems show unusual
properties not exhibited by classical systems, for example a single electron can
behave both as a particle and a wave. An even more mind boggling and “weird”
property, observable for two electrons or two photons (quanta of light), is
quantum entanglement. If two electrons are created in a superposition of quantum
states—say (1up, 2down) + (1down, 2up) where up and down indicate the direction
of the angular momentum of the spinning electron. Now when one qubit is sent to
observer A and the other to B, far apart so they cannot communicate with each
other, something truly unbelievable happens: If A detects a spin up electron, B
necessarily finds an electron with opposite spin. The two spins are entangled.
Their precise spin orientations are revealed only when one of them is observed,
at which point the spin of the other also gets precisely determined, even though
physically very far from the observed electron. Recently, such entanglement was
spectacularly demonstrated between photons separated by over 1200
km.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such entanglement occurs not just between two spins but
between billions of spins that exist in magnetic materials with frustration. The
emergent state of matter is called a quantum spin liquid. Frustration can arise
due to competing interactions and lattice geometry preventing the spins from
ordering and forming a magnet. It may appear that with no ordering all is lost,
but no! the entangled soup is useful for creating a&lt;br/&gt;special kind of
qubit called a topological qubit in which information can be stored in a non-
local manner and remains protected from environmental effects that can scramble
the information they contain. The goal of this project is to put together the
theoretical foundation for quantum entanglement and its signatures in quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will go hand in hand with
an education and outreach program. A holistic course on quantum information
meets quantum matter that integrates the standard material with simulations,
experiments, and current day research will be developed. The PI is a founder of
the Scientific Thinkers program for elementary schools whose motto is “Meet a
scientist, Be a scientist, Think like a scientist”. By developing videos on
experiments using easily available materials, the engagement of volunteers from
Ohio State with the school children and teachers will be greatly enhanced. The
PI will develop the Culture Change in Physics (CHIP) program by creating
recordings of women in physics and by connecting with the National Society of
Black Physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education in quantum
materials, quantum matter, and related phenomena. Quantum systems show unusual
non-classical properties, including quantum coherence, superposition and
interference. But the most mind boggling and “weird” of all is quantum
entanglement. Two-particle entanglement has been verified experimentally
primarily using photons. This project aims toward the next frontier of multi-
particle entanglement in quantum spin liquids (QSLs) consisting of billions of
entangled spins, thereby unifying quantum information and quantum matter. The
excitations in QSLs are fractionalized and are strong candidates for topological
quantum computing. The two main thrusts that will be investigated are: (1) the
physical nature of non-local correlations imprinted by long range entanglement
due to quantum statistics, interactions, and topological order; and (2) the
real-time dynamics of fractionalized quasiparticles and how they create novel
entanglement patterns in QSLs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By now quantum phase
transitions (QPT) between non-topological phases such as the superfluid-Mott
transition in the Bose Hubbard model are well understood. This research activity
will focus on understanding the QPT in the Kitaev model on a honeycomb lattice
between a gapped and gapless QSL driven by a magnetic field and between two
topologically ordered gapped phases that harbor very different excitations as a
function of exchange anisotropy. Topologically ordered phases harbor unusual
fractionalized excitations, whose emergent exchange statistics, abelian and non-
abelian, are richer than the standard bosons and fermions found in nature. The
aim will be to make testable predictions for experimental probes by coupling an
ancilla to the system and by using two-point correlated noise spectroscopy to
probe quantum entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will go hand in
hand with an education and outreach program. A holistic course on quantum
information meets quantum matter that integrates the standard material with
simulations, experiments, and current day research will be developed. The PI is
a founder of the Scientific Thinkers program for elementary schools whose motto
is “Meet a scientist, Be a scientist, Think like a scientist”. By developing
videos on experiments using easily available materials, the engagement of
volunteers from Ohio State with the school children and teachers will be greatly
enhanced. The PI will develop the Culture Change in Physics (CHIP) program by
creating recordings of women in physics and by connecting with the National
Society of Black Physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.