* 2138446
* ERI: Driving Risk-Initiated Vehicle-to-Everything Communications (DRIVEcomm)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Seungmo Kim, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,302.00

Connected and autonomous vehicles are no longer a futuristic dream from science
fiction, but they are already emerging as a reality in our everyday life.
Throughout the short yet rich history of evolution of connected and autonomous
vehicles, a salient paradigm is to accomplish the efficient data exchange among
vehicles, which has made vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications a household
name. Despite the rapid evolution of V2X communications, successful exchange of
safety messages still remains an ambitious task mainly due to the high mobility
and dynamicity of vehicular systems. The bigger problem is that as more vehicles
are connected and autonomously driven, the number of exchanged messages will
explode, which will likely deteriorate the chance of successful message
delivery. As an effort to address this problem, we propose to carefully define
the priority of the transmitted information and prioritize channel access among
vehicles accordingly. Predicated on the significance, this project will form a
significant step towards the overarching vision of persistent and reliable
operations of connected and autonomous vehicles in real-world conditions. The
proposed research activities will go hand-in-hand with educational and outreach
activities to train the next generation of engineers in multidisciplinary
thinking. Specifically, the outcomes of this project (i.e., a testbed and
further academic findings) will act as the research team's main resource in
modernization of the courses, promotion of underrepresented minorities
recruitment, community outreach, undergraduate research, and further
collaboration with local/national stakeholders on resolving practical issues in
deployment of connected and autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
intellectual contributions of this project lie in the following innovative
aspects: 1) Quantification of a "metric" capturing the holistic impacts of
multiple risk-determining features in concert; 2) Formulation of the metric
computation mechanism as a "combinatorial optimization" problem with a time
constraint; 3) Proposition of a practical methodology of "solving" the proposed
combinatorial optimization problem; 4) Development of a "testbed" implementing
the proposed risk-based prioritization among safety message types defined in
current V2X use cases. We will draw from these techniques to prove theoretical
performance bounds for the proposed V2X communications framework and understand
its practical performance limits. Consequently, the mathematical techniques and
empirical observations made by this project will inform and enable future
research in a broad class of problems on connected and autonomous vehicles and
intelligent transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.