* 2138342
* ERI: Reimagining the Use of Animal Models in Musculoskeletal Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Arthur Michalek, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Animal subjects are frequently used as substitutes for humans in biomechanics
research studies. This is typically justified by low variability between animal
subjects, low cost, and high biological similarity across species. While the
biology of animal tissues, such as cartilage and ligaments, has been studied
extensively, little is often known about the forces acting on them during normal
activity. This study will leverage the fact that some animal tissues are
subjected to much narrower ranges of loading than those of humans to draw
connections between load and tissue structure. This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project will examine the loads acting on different discs in the
bovine tail throughout the day through a combination of live-animal motion
tracking and computer modeling. This work will establish animal models as ideal
systems for studying the interplay between mechanics and biology. Results of
this research will reduce the societal burden of low back pain by contributing
to patient-specific models, which will be able to determine whether a change in
load pattern, such as change in occupation. This work will be presented to both
adult citizen scientists through the local community-based science caf√© series
and to young scientists through an annual university-hosted science and
engineering fair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to examine bovine caudal
intervertebral discs to understand the relationship between the tissue structure
and in-vivo loading history. In-vivo loading had been a critical limitation in
the ability to study the process of tissue remodeling in response to load. This
study will focus on the bovine caudal intervertebral disc, which is loaded only
in dorsal extension and lateral bending and is a frequently used model of the
more complexly loaded human lumbar disc. Live-animal motion tracking will be
combined with numerical modeling to estimate multi-axial load magnitudes on all
discs in the tail over the course of a typical day. Microstructural imaging will
be used to quantify the distribution of residual strain development in each
disc. Microscopic analysis will be used to compare tissue structure between
these discs. The results of this work will be used to build patient-specific
computer models of the human spine, which will be able to determine whether a
change in load pattern, such as change in occupation. Together, these studies
will draw a direct link between load and residual strain, which will enable
future patient-specific models of the human lumbar spine with a goal of
predicting injury risk from activities of daily
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.