* 2138698
* Student Support for the 18th International Conference of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, 2021
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Zeynep Saribatur, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students to participate in the
Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the International Conference of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning (KRR) that will be held in Hanoi, Vietnam November
6-12, 2021. This is the growing international conference for researchers in
artificial intelligence (AI) research across a fully international research
community. This activity will bring together a broad community of researchers in
the field of KRR and support junior researchers at this critical early-career
stage. The DMC creates the opportunity to bring in participants who might not
have attended an AI conference due to lack of resources. This is especially true
for those at smaller institutions and those which have less developed AI
programs. Engaging such participants has the potential to draw more talent into
AI research, improve research ideas in their formative stage, and engender
collaborations across the breadth of disciplines. This event provides students
with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical
time in their research and enables them to explore their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.