* 2138357
* Conference: Math for All
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Swati Patel, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 49,951.00

This three-year award provides support for the annual conference "Math For All"
in New Orleans. The first of the three events will be held on February 4-6,
2022. The overall goal of this conference is to increase diversity in
mathematics and expose mathematicians in the Greater New Orleans area to
research and novel teaching practices as well as provide the opportunity for
networking and developing mentor-mentee relationships. The conference strives to
make mathematics more accessible to underrepresented groups, ultimately
increasing diversity in the field. The conference will have participants
representing Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)and smaller
universities in the New Orleans area. One of the goals is to expose the
participants to a broad mathematical research community. This aspect of the
conference aims to help students transition to research-focused environments,
which will increase retention of underrepresented groups in the mathematical
fields. The conference will also stimulate discussions among faculty on
inclusive pedagogy aimed at advancing students from underrepresented groups. The
organizing committee is dedicated to amplifying the voices of underrepresented
minorities in mathematics by highlighting the importance of representation,
connections, and individual actions towards changing systemic forms of
oppression in mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
include four broadly accessible plenary talks, six contributed research
sessions, a diverse career panel, two workshops and a poster session. Through
these avenues, the conference is designed to engage undergraduate and graduate
students into a community of mathematics and prepare them for future careers in
the field. The plenary speakers and panelists come from around the United
States, representing multiple ethnic and mathematical backgrounds, giving
students visible role models in industry and academia with whom they can
identify. Participants will have the opportunity to present research and attend
professional development workshops in a welcoming and inclusive environment. The
conference will also support a few satellite events. At each of the satellite
institutions, the organizers will set up a space for attendees to gather, watch
and discuss the plenary talks. The PIs will provide the foundation of the Math
For All conference to the satellite institutions but also allow them to plan
their own activities. These satellite conferences will help engage a broader
community and amplify the impact of the conference by sharing the resources of
the Math for All conference, in the hopes of reaching mathematicians who would
otherwise not be able to attend the in-person conference. The conference website
is: http://www.math.tulane.edu/mathforallnola&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.