* 2138890
* EAGER: Testing the Galápagos as a long-term monitoring site for nitrous oxide emissions from the Pacific oxygen deficient zones
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Andrew Babbin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2023
* USD 299,978.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrous oxide is a potent
greenhouse gas and agent of ozone destruction. Atmospheric concentrations are
rising, but the role of natural marine sources is poorly understood due to a
lack of data. High rates of oceanic production are localized to remote areas,
impeding direct data acquisition from oxygen minimum zones especially. Correct
attribution of sources is key to interpreting observations, establishing
mitigation policies, and predicting future climate feedbacks. The investigators
aim to quantify marine nitrous oxide fluxes through a continuous monitoring site
in the eastern Pacific that can identify hotspots and mechanisms of production.
Such a station will permit the ocean’s role in this greenhouse gas budget to be
refined and its variability across space and time to be assessed. The data will
be publicly accessible and maintained at a bilingual web portal in English and
Spanish. The work will further educate and train a graduate student in oceanic
and climate sciences and help establish an early career
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish an atmospheric
chemistry monitoring station at the Galapagos Science Center in Ecuador to
continuously measure nitrous oxide and carbon monoxide. The measurements will be
linked specifically to ocean outgassing via atmospheric inversion modeling. This
new methodology complements sea-going research, permitting the assessment of
emissions across the entire eastern tropical Pacific Ocean region from a single
well-sited monitoring station. The investigators will specifically deploy a
cavity ring-down laser spectrometer onsite, maintain the instrument, and analyze
the continuous data. By the end of this initial 2-year study, a multi-year
record of primary atmospheric concentrations of nitrous oxide will be
established and tied to emissions from specific ocean sources. The researchers
will map the data via inversion modeling, paying particular attention to cross-
shelf variability and any roles of sub-mesoscale eddies in modifying the rate of
nitrous oxide loss from the ocean. Carbon monoxide will be utilized as a
diagnostic molecule for terrestrial influence on nitrous oxide. Overall, this
project will elucidate the emissions from a critical yet under-sampled
production region and reduce the level of uncertainty in data products and
modeled syntheses. These measurements will aid in interpreting global
observations, ground-truth current and future sampling campaigns, and improve
forecasting of climate scenarios into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.