* 2138672
* ERI: Multi-Scale Modeling of Cell-Matrix Mechanical Interactions in Endothelial Cell Network Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Kinjal Dasbiswas, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will support research about how
mammalian cells organize into functional multicellular structures. Specifically,
how cells organize through physical cues will be revealed. The focus will be on
self-organized cell networks. These networks are known to occur prior to blood
vessel formation. They require specific properties to successfully transport
nutrients and oxygen. Tissue can be engineered in synthetic environments if the
conditions are right. Those conditions include a combination of cells,
materials, and chemical factors. Engineering these tissues by mechanical
manipulations of the cell network can also have effects. Better understanding
these mechanisms means that damaged tissues can ultimately be restored and
replaced. The results of this research will contribute to both scientific
understanding and national health. The multidisciplinary research approach will
be combined with educational activities. These activities will introduce
students to quantitative approaches in the life sciences. This project will also
contribute to the recruitment, retention, and training of students in science
and engineering fields in the underserved Central Valley region of California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use mathematical modeling and agent-
based computation to identify the multicellular structures that result from
intercellular interactions mediated by the elastic deformations of the
extracellular substrate. A cell can exert contractile traction forces to deform
or restructure its material environment. The modeling will combine individual
cell motility with cell-cell mechanical interactions through their mutual
deformations of the substrate. The substrate will be modeled at multiple scales
as a linear elastic continuum as well as a discrete, fibrous medium. The model
cell networks obtained in simulation will be analyzed quantitatively to obtain
crucial metrics related to transport functions such as the number of junctions,
branches and loops, and their space coverage. These quantitative measures will
predict how the cell network structure and function depend on substrate
mechanical properties. These results will be compared with analysis of available
experimental data on vascular cell networks on soft substrates. The modeling
developed during this project can be extended in the future to describe the
self-assembly of other cell types in other culture geometries including three-
dimensional assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.