* 2138728
* ERI: Theory and Simulation of Photoexcitation Dynamics in 2-Dimensional Materials for Solar Energy Harvesting
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Dhara Trivedi, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the increasing energy demands of the
world’s growing population in environmentally sustainable ways is among the most
important scientific challenges facing society today. One such approach is to
tap into the energy from sunlight; however, current materials used to capture
solar energy are costly to manufacture and relatively inefficient. To contribute
to efficient harvesting of solar light for energy conversion processes, this
project is designed to determine how specific properties of two types of
2-dimensional materials enable absorption of solar energy. State-of-the-art
computational approaches are used to model these energy conversion processes at
the level of atoms and their electrons. The project integrates the knowledge of
material science, engineering, and computational physical chemistry. The results
of this research will improve our understanding of materials currently under
experimental investigation for use of solar energy harvesting devices and
provide insights to improve their efficiency. Dr. Trivedi’s research program is
integrated with an educational component to inspire undergraduate and graduate
students to pursue careers in science, technology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional nanoporous materials displays a rich
array of photophysical properties that govern excitation dynamics within the
material resulting in efficient charge and energy generation and transport.
However, fundamental questions have emerged from recent experiments regarding
the influence of interface, defects, and dopants on the charge and energy
dynamics of planar nanoporous materials and their power conversion efficiencies
used in solar energy harvesting devices. Specifically, how exciton quenching and
undesired charge trapping contribute to these events is uncertain. This project
will investigate nonequilibrium processes involved in exciton generation and
transport, and in charge separation following photoexcitation in two specific
types of nanostructures: (i) Cu3HHTT2 MOF as a representative of a family of 2D
- conjugated MOFs with honeycomb-like sheet structures and (ii) monolayer of
tri-s-triazine-based graphitic carbon nitride. Using a combination of mixed
quantum-classical approaches and nonadiabatic molecular dynamics this
computational research will provide a detailed, atomistic level description of
the photoexcitation dynamics. The investigation of influence of dimensionality,
interfaces, defects, and dopants on the material’s light harvesting performance
will be understood by pursuing two objectives, to (i) elucidate the influence of
interface on charge and energy transfer using electronic structure theory and
(ii) investigate nonequilibrium phenomena involved in exciton generation and
transport followed by charge separation at the interface. Computational
determination of the charge and energy dynamics within and at interfaces of
these planar nanoscale materials will provide essential insights for their
optimal use in devices for solar energy harvesting, sensing, imaging and other
advanced technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.