* 2138174
* QuIC-TAQS: Multifunctional integrated quantum photonic processor for quantum interconnect
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Spyridon Galis, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,897,388.00

Quantum information technology leverages the fundamental laws of quantum
mechanics for information processing, which is expected to significantly advance
the capability of computing, sensing, and communication security. The essential
underlying backbone is quantum interconnect that can transfer quantum
information faithfully between disparate systems. A variety of approaches have
been explored for this purpose. So far, their performances are limited and
significant challenges remain before they could be implemented in a practical
quantum interconnect that requires transferring fragile quantum states
faithfully at a high speed, in a scalable fashion, and across a broad spectral
range. The project aims to address this challenge, by exploring and developing a
multifunctional integrated quantum processing unit for photons that can
significantly enhance the quantum connectivity for a future quantum
interconnect. This research is expected to offer a new paradigm for processing
quantum information carried by photons, opening up a novel path towards the
quantum advantage. The technology developed under this program is expected to
have profound commercial impact on the industrial sector. The project will
contribute to the workforce development for future quantum industry. The
associated educational efforts and outreach activities are expected to offer
extraordinary materials and inspiration and excellent opportunities for training
students from K-12 to graduate students and for broadening the participation
from underrepresented and economically disadvantageous
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore and develop a
multifunctional quantum photonic processor on a newly developed scalable and
integrated lithium niobate platform, to produce, store, manipulate, and
transduce photonic quantum states and scalable quantum bits in a deterministic
fashion that is expected to significantly enhance the quantum connectivity for
next-generation quantum interconnect. The project leverages our leading
expertise in integrated photonics, quantum and nonlinear optics, quantum
material science and engineering, and quantum measurement and characterization,
to carry out a synergetic fundamental research directed towards realizing
efficient photon-photon and photon- ion interactions that would enable a series
of quantum logic, transduction, storage, and processing functionalities expected
to transform the state-of-the-art of quantum connectivity. The direct telecom
compatibility and the platform scalability of the underlying photonic integrated
circuit platform enable seamless transition to practical implementation and
application in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.