* 2138811
* OAC: Piloting the National Science Data Fabric: A Platform Agnostic Testbed for Democratizing Data Delivery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Alexander Szalay, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,609,259.00

Ongoing investments from NSF and other agencies into shared experimental and
computing facilities increase data generation by orders of magnitude and
presents a challenge for universal, easy, and fast access to data by users and
may limit the scientific impact of such facilities. This pilot seeks to
demonstrate a trans-disciplinary National Science Data Fabric (NSDF) integrating
access to and use of shared storage, networking, computing, and educational
resources and, in doing so, will help democratize data-driven sciences through
the development of a cyberinfrastructure (CI) platform designed for equitable
access. This pilot connects an open network of researchers gathered around earth
science, astronomy, biology, chemistry, physics, and materials science, to
deploy a testbed for individual and shared scientific use. Supporting the
IceCube neutrino observatory and the XenonNT dark matter detector will advance
the understanding of the evolution of galaxies and the nature of dark matter and
dark energy. Supporting the Materials Common enables the fast-paced design of
new materials in critical fields such as energy, security, environment, and
healthcare. Active involvement of Historically Black Colleges, the Minority
Serving Cyberinfrastructure Consortium, and of Hispanic Serving Institutions
assures true democratization of data-driven science and unleashes the
intellectual potential of a genuinely diverse scientific community presenting
the best potential for US innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science
Data Fabric (NSDF) pilot builds a testbed experimenting with critical technology
needed to democratize data-driven sciences by constructing a CI platform
designed for equitable access. In particular, NSDF experiments with key
technologies that empower user communities to develop their solutions and
support domain-specific requirements while avoiding duplication of technology. A
programmable Content Delivery Network (CDN) will be a central component that
interoperates with different appliances and storage solutions ranging from
leadership-class computing facilities, campus-wide computing resources,
commercial cloud, and research labs of individual investigators. With this
strategy, NSDF connects storage, compute, and networking components with a
software stack that empowers end-users with scalable tools that are easy to use,
integrate and scale. Community-driven education and outreach will guarantee
equitable access to all resources and engage an open network of universities,
including minority-serving institutions in a federated data fabric configurable
for individual and shared scientific use. By offering a shared, modular,
containerized data delivery environment, operating at the best economies of
scale, the NSDF pilot will demonstrate a key technology to fill the “missing
middle” in the national computational infrastructure and will help address the
“missing millions” challenge of American talent in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.