* 2138619
* ERI: Understanding the Role of Non-steady Wind Gusts in Wildfire Spread
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* James Urban, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Increased extreme fire behavior (both prevalence and severity) has caused
substantial loss of property and human life, generated air pollution over large
areas, and displaced large numbers of people. Accurate prediction of wildfire
growth is vital for fire response (firefighting and evacuations) as well as
preventative measures (prescribed burning and community hardening). This project
seeks to better defend against these negative consequences of wildfires by
better understanding the role of non-steady wind on their growth. Two physical
mechanisms for fire growth are studied: flame-driven fire spread and firebrand
spotting. Flame-driven fire spread is the process by which flames heat and
ignite nearby fuel and firebrand spotting is the process by which burning debris
(firebrands) are transported by the wind and fire gases to fuels which they may
ignite. Nearly all prior fundamental studies of these processes have focused on
fire behavior under steady conditions and have ignored the role of non-steady
wind such as gusts. For firebrand generation from burning vegetation, the role
of wind is known to be important, but it has not been fully characterized. This
project examines whether fire spread and firebrand generation behavior can be
explained with steady-flow results or if non-steady wind produces more extreme
fire behavior. During the project, educational modules on wildfire topics
related to the research will be incorporated into one graduate and one
undergraduate course. Through these modules and student involvement in the
research the PI will help prepare an engineering workforce knowledgeable about
wildland and wildland-urban interface fire and cultivate interest in these areas
of Fire Protection Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine
the physical mechanisms by which non-steady wind interacts with wildfire
behavior, specifically flame-driven wildfire spread and firebrand spotting,
while also making novel measurements of these wildfire behaviors using imaging
methods. The motivation for the project is to facilitate improvement of physical
modelling of wildfire spread. Current models do not accurately predict fire
spread in all situations. Wind strongly influences wildfire spread through
intermittent convective heating of fine fuel particles while also contributing
to firebrand spotting. The role of transient wind (i.e., gusts) has not been
examined in these models. The project addresses research needs identified by the
community for firebrand spotting using new experimental methodologies to
characterize firebrand generation and more comprehensive characterization of
wildfire spread to enable verifiable modelling of wildfire spread to address the
gap between prediction with current models and observed
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.