* 2138457
* ERI: Efficient and Power-Dense Modular Power Electronic Architecture for Utility-Scale DC-AC Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Mahima Gupta, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,296.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a society striving towards a
clean energy future, integration of renewable energy sources is considered
increasingly essential. The U.S. Energy Information Administration projects the
share of renewables in the U.S. electricity generation to increase from 19% in
2019 to 38% in 2050. Most of the growth is attributed to wind and solar, which
will account for nearly 80% of the renewables total in 2050. Due to their
intermittency, energy storage is becoming critical. Battery energy storage
systems are one of the fastest growing energy storage technologies due to their
high energy densities, efficiency, and low self-discharge. To interconnect the
DC batteries with the AC utility grid, power electronic converters are
necessary. Such converters require that their building blocks (semiconductor
switches, inductors, and capacitors) be rated for utility-scale specifications.
Current commercial implementations feature a two/three-level converter with a
transformer for voltage step-up function. Transformers are bulky, lossy, and
costly. In contrast to these solutions, modular electronic converters have
improved scalability, fault-tolerance, and reliability. This project focuses on
a transformative design of a fundamental building block module to build an
innovative, efficient, and power-dense DC-AC modular topology suitable for a
battery energy storage system. The innovative feature of the proposed module is
the three-phase integrated design, which enables high-density and efficient
power conversion. The project also facilitates the involvement of undergraduate
and high-school students through the deployment of learning tools and summer
programs in power conversion to engage students from underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing modular topologies suffer from poor
power density and low efficiencies which stem from their inherent converter
design. They require additional components such as filters and/or DC-DC
converters to overcome the low-quality waveforms imposed by the converter
action. Literature studies indicate that these components can occupy 40%-80% of
the converter volume and contribute to 50%-75% of the converter losses. The use
of filters requires bulky capacitors, which are considered the weakest link and
are detrimental to the systemâ€™s lifetime. The focal point of this project is the
elimination of these components by focusing on an innovative design of the
fundamental building block module. The first thrust of the project will aim to
establish the fundamental and analytical theory of the proposed design including
dynamic and steady-state models. These models will lay the groundwork to develop
robust modulation and control methods for battery energy storage systems. Using
the results from the first thrust, the project will deliver a laboratory-scale
working prototype that demonstrates the highly scalable and modular design
features. Further, the results will deliver detailed comparative studies to
quantify the expected qualitative benefits in terms of efficiency and power
density. The aim of the work is to lay the foundation of future ultra-dense and
efficient class of modular power electronic
converters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.