* 2138083
* Conference Support: Recruiting Students and Early Career Researchers as Participants in the 10th SNO Conference 2021
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Illya Medina Velo, Houston Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2022
* USD 10,000.00

Nanotechnology is increasingly finding uses in agriculture, medicine, energy,
consumer products including electronics, environmental technologies,
transportation products, and packaging. Nanotechnology deals with materials
which are smaller than one-billionth of a meter at least in one dimension, and
these materials are not necessarily benign in nature. There has been an effort
by researchers and manufacturers to make nanomaterials sustainable with no or
minimal impacts on the environment and its components. The 10th SNO Conference
November 3rd to 5th of 2021 will highlight sustainability in nanotechnology
research. The sessions in this year's conference will address multiple relevant
and emerging topics and provide a platform for free exchange of ideas to develop
collaborative research and strategize future research directions. The tenth
conference will host early career investigators in a session entitled "Rising
Stars in Sustainable Nanotechnology." Moreover, the conference will offer a
workshop on Infectious Diseases and Nanotechnology with a series of experts in
the topic. A poster session will also be held virtually, where it is expected a
broad participation of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
postdoctoral scholars and early career investigators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is increasingly finding uses in
agriculture, medicine, energy, consumer products including electronics,
environmental technologies, transportation products, and packaging.
Nanotechnology deals with materials which are smaller than one-billionth of a
meter at least in one dimension, and these materials are not necessarily benign
in nature. There has been an effort by researchers and manufacturers to make
nanomaterials sustainable with no or minimal impacts on the environment and its
components. The 10th SNO Conference November 3rd to 5th of 2021 will highlight
sustainability in nanotechnology research. The sessions in this year's
conference will address multiple relevant and emerging topics and provide a
platform for free exchange of ideas to develop collaborative research and
strategize future research directions. The conference will be organized in
sessions including: (1) Risk governance of nano and advanced materials, (2)
Nanomaterial occupational and environmental exposure assessment, (3) Food and
agriculture applications of nanotechnology, (4) Nano-enabled water, air, soil
treatment, and remediation, (5) Fate and transport of nanomaterials, (6)
Ecotoxicology and human toxicology of nanomaterials, (7) Nanotechnology
approaches in education, (8) Green/Sustainable nanomaterials, (9) Nanosensors,
and (10) Nanomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.