* 2138057
* Acquisition of a pXRF and pLIBS Instrument Suite for Geochemistry Research in the Urban Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Evert Elzinga, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 85,025.00

Portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) and portable laser induced breakdown
spectroscopy (pLIBS) instruments will be used in Geochemistry research to
determine the elemental compositions of soils, sediments, and other
environmental media in natural, urban, and human-impacted environments. Rutgers
University-Newark is a Hispanic Serving Institution, and supported projects and
activities will engage students from diverse backgrounds and foster their
participation in place-based research and education. The instruments will be
accessible to undergraduate researchers and graduate students, including
students participating in NSF-sponsored programs to broaden participation in the
Geosciences. Use of the instruments in the field and laboratory will be included
in course modules and class projects to enrich the educational experience of
students in relevant courses. Ease of use and instrument portability will
facilitate inclusion in community- based projects that involve the public in
STEM research, and outreach initiatives for education and engagement of K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF)
and portable laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (pLIBS) instruments will
enhance Geochemistry research by providing in-field non- destructive analysis of
elemental concentrations in natural, urban and human-impacted environments. The
instrument suite enables quantitative and qualitative analysis of a wide range
of elements, including light elements such as carbon. Instrument capabilities
will be coupled with complementary laboratory-based and advanced analytical
techniques for elemental analysis, speciation, and matrix determination. The
pXRF/pLIBS instrument suite will be used in Geochemistry research for in-situ
and in-field analyses of heavy metals, major elements and nutrient elements in
soils and sediments. Projects to be supported integrate research with education
and community engagement, and include heavy metal spatial distribution and
speciation in Newark, New Jersey soils; the geochemistry of legacy pollutants in
sediments of the New Jersey Meadowlands; and micronutrient and carbon cycling in
agricultural soils. Activities and projects will prioritize training of
undergraduate researchers and graduate students through local and international
research; in courses and as part of a globalized curriculum; and in NSF-
sponsored programs that support participation of groups underrepresented in the
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.