* 2138225
* ERI: A Novel Multiphysics Framework for Fluid Circulation and Oxygen Transport in Vocal Folds
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Rana Zakerzadeh, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,689.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Voice disorders have the
prevalence of almost 30% in the general population and 60% in professions with
high voice usage, such as educators, public speakers, and singers. Most voice
dysfunctions have a one-to-one correspondence with the dynamical flow-structure
interaction feature of phonation, and localized vocal fold lesions are
associated with decreased blood flow and lower oxygen levels within the tissue.
There is thus a profound need for understanding the effect of fluid dynamics
within the vocal fold on oxygen flow since local changes in tissue oxygenation
and perfusion is a critical metric of its functional state. The research results
will provide a deep understanding of the fluid physics of phonation and its
contribution to hydration and oxygen transport in the vocal fold. The project
will also encompass educational plans that involve the operation of a YouTube
channel, summer undergraduate research experience, as well as outreach
activities to local K-12 schools and the public through the Carnegie Science
Center Museum and Women in Science group, through the programs that foster the
participation of low-income high school students, K-6 students, and girls in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a multi-
physics computational framework to investigate the role of interstitial liquid
distribution and systemic hydration of the vocal fold during phonation using a
biphasic description of vocal fold tissue. Systemic hydration plays a key chemo-
mechanical role in the function of vocal folds, which is still not fully
understood. The project will fill this gap by combining a fluid-poroelastic
structure interaction model with an oxygen transport model, in two specific
aims: (1) developing a fluid-structure interaction modeling approach integrating
the fully coupled behavior between turbulent glottal airflow and porous vocal
fold’s structure to provide a spatiotemporal prediction of filtration velocity,
as well as oxygen concentration within the porous vocal fold, and (2)
investigating the relationship between interstitial fluid circulation and oxygen
flow in the vocal fold, in order to identify the extent to which vocal fold
dehydration attenuates oxygen concentration. The Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
equations and Biot’s poroelasticity equations are going to be used to model
airflow through the larynx and fluid-saturated vocal fold tissue respectively,
while for oxygen transport due to the porous flow in the tissue, the convection-
diffusion–reaction equation will be applied. The proposed measurements and
numeric will quantify for the first time the three-dimensional interstitial
convective fluid velocities that drive the mass transport and provide systemic
hydration of the tissue, as well as detailed data on oxygen concentration inside
the vocal fold under different phonation conditions, that acts as an indicator
for tissue hypoxia. Results will highlight the importance of including
poroelasticity in phonation models which promotes new visions for the management
of vocal diseases, such as in the development of voice prostheses for
laryngectomized patients. The findings are also directly applicable to other
problems involving fluid-structure interaction and mass transport, such as
cardiovascular diseases and tumor metastasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.