* 2138471
* ERI: Resource-Aware Single-Photon Image Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Atul Ingle, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,244.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light is composed of discrete
energy packets called photons. A camera captures an image by converting photons
into an electrical signal at each pixel. A conventional camera needs hundreds or
thousands of photons in each pixel to produce a high quality image. Single-
photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are an emerging sensor technology with the
unique ability to detect individual photons with a time resolution down to
picoseconds. SPADs are extremely sensitive light sensors. This enables them to
capture scene information in challenging scenarios (e.g. high speed motion,
extreme illumination, low signal power, and long distances) where conventional
cameras struggle to form an image. Despite these exciting capabilities, SPAD
cameras face a serious practical challenge that limits wider use --- the amount
of raw data generated by high resolution SPAD cameras exceeds the bandwidths of
existing data transfer buses by several orders of magnitude. As a result, most
commercial SPAD cameras today can only support low resolution imaging. This
project will develop bandwidth-efficient photon data capture and processing
techniques that will enable megapixel and even higher resolution SPAD cameras in
the future. This will have implications for myriad applications including
consumer photography, fluorescence microscopy, biomedical imaging, and vision
sensors for robotics and autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will span both the theory and practical implementation of bandwidth-efficient
single-photon computational imaging algorithms towards realizing high spatial
resolution SPAD cameras for both passive intensity imaging and active time-of-
flight depth-sensing. Unfortunately, the data-bottleneck challenge with high
resolution SPAD cameras cannot be solved through incremental improvements in the
bandwidth of standard data transfer buses (such as USB, PCIe, or CameraLink).
This proposal will address the data bandwidth challenge through hardware
reconfigurability and algorithmic reconfigurability of a SPAD pixel array. The
first thrust of hardware reconfiguratiblity will establish a rigorous
theoretical foundation for various trade-offs involved in a SPAD camera image
quality and output data-rate, under varying levels of scene illumination and
pixel design specifications. The second thrust of algorithmic reconfigurability
will design parsimonious, scene-adaptive statistical and data-driven compression
techniques to summarize photon data streams into a minimal form. In the minimal
form, the photon data will still carry all the information needed for high
quality intensity and depth reconstructions, but with several orders of
magnitude lower bandwidth requirements. Experimental prototypes designed with
commercially available SPAD camera hardware will not only provide performance
evaluation in terms of standard image quality metrics but also demonstrate
practical feasibility of implementing these algorithms on-chip, for example, as
a "photon processing unit" in future SPAD camera modules. The findings from this
research will be disseminated via a conference workshop, a graduate level
course, and STEM outreach activities for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.