* 2138789
* Upgrade of LA-ICP-MS for research and education at Western Washington University
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Susan DeBari, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 468,550.00

This award will provide funding to Western Washington University (WWU) to
upgrade an existing but aging inductively-coupled-plasma-mass spectrometer and
associated 213 nm laser (LA-ICP-MS) to a significantly-improved LA-ICP-MS system
with an advanced 193 nm laser. This instrument will add exciting new
opportunities for faculty research, thesis research of undergraduate and
graduate students, and course-based research at a dominantly undergraduate
institution that has an outstanding record of well-cited publications involving
students. Of the 5 co-principal investigators and 2 senior personnel on this
grant, 5 are early career researchers within the first four years of their
appointment at WWU and this instrument will significantly enhance their research
productivity. The new instrument will support grant-funded research with
students that covers topics as broad-ranging as utilization of chemical
signatures in volcanic glasses/crystals to discern eruption processes,
characterization of deep-Earth materials, timescales and rates of ancient
subduction zone processes, transport of plastic nanoparticles in the
environment, geochemical signatures in biogenic carbonates as recorders of past
climate, ore deposit genesis, abundances of particulate matter pollution, and
toxicity of metals in marine and terrestrial systems. The LA-ICP-MS will
continue to be used to promote research and education partnerships via outreach
to pre-college students, nearby community colleges and entering WWU freshman
with an interest in STEM, but this grant specifically develops new
collaborations with nearby Whatcom Community College (WCC) and WWU Geology and
Environmental Sciences departments to develop course-based undergraduate
research experiences and paid summer research experiences for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-MS and associated laser upgrade
will improve and expand the current high quality and broad scope of research,
including NSF-funded projects, conducted within the Geology Department and the
College. Replacing the current unsupported instrument is essential to ensure the
uninterrupted functioning of our facility, and the new Agilent 7900 ICP-MS will
provide significantly improved detection limits, count sensitivity, plasma
stability, and handling of laser particles. A coupled laser, the RESOlution-SE
system, will provide a reliable introductory system for non-aqueous samples,
which historically make up half of the total samples analyzed at WWU.
Specifically, this system will expand the range of materials that can be
analyzed (in terms of both composition and size), minimize fractionation, and
significantly enhance precision, detection limits, and sample navigation and
programming. It will also provide for an additional LIBS detector permitting
periodic table masses at a weight percent to ppm range. These upgrades to the
ICP-MS and laser ablation system are necessary for researchers working with
nanoparticles and toxins, translucent solid materials (e.g., minerals such as
quartz and plagioclase), trace element concentrations below 10 μg/g, small solid
samples (&lt;100 μm diameter), large solid samples that do not fit in the sample
chamber, and more. The intuitive designs and excellent coupling of the Agilent
7900 and RESOlution-SE operational programs will also improve user accessibility
and training (dominantly students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.