* 2138790
* OPP-PRF: Submesoscale Fjord Variability and Its Influence on Glacial Melt
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Ken Zhao, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 12/31/2023
* USD 282,979.00

Understanding the processes at the boundary where ice and ocean meet,
specifically at the faces of melting glaciers, remains a key challenge in our
ability to predict the melting and retreat of these glaciers and their influence
on sea level rise. The meltwater from these glaciers also has far-reaching
implications for the rapidly-changing polar oceans. Recent observations and
numerical simulations find unexpectedly high melting at the faces of submerged
glaciers, and recent theory suggests that one possible explanation is the
existence of relatively small-scale (submesoscale) ocean currents within glacial
fjords (which are narrow, deep, and submerged valleys connecting glaciers to the
open ocean). This research will connect the submesoscale ocean currents with the
physics at the ice-ocean boundary layer to develop improved physical models that
take into account the multiscale effects of ocean circulation near ice-ocean
boundaries. The research is of critical importance to society since it will
improve our understanding of how ocean circulation in fjords contributes to
glacial melt and retreat, which will help improve projections of sea level rise
and changes in marine life in these regions. This project will enable the
training of a postdoctoral researcher (as the primary investigator) and provide
funds to mentor two summer undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there are order-of-magnitude discrepancies
between observed and predicted melt rates at marine-terminating glaciers. Recent
models suggest that the energetic dynamics at the ice-ocean boundary layer and
submesoscale variability within fjords potentially contribute to these elevated
melt rates. These discrepancies are hypothesized to arise from multi-scale ice-
ocean interactions, with important processes and melt-circulation feedbacks
across these scales that together contribute to an amplified melt rate. High-
resolution submesoscale-resolving simulations of fjords and Large Eddy
Simulations (LES) of the glacial ice-ocean boundary will be used to test the
hypothesis that fjord submesoscale variability is a primary source of eddy
kinetic energy within fjords and is potentially excited by a combination of
shear, convective, and centrifugal instabilities driven by melt over the entire
glacial front. These results will be used to test and develop improved
parameterizations for the ice-ocean boundary layer that are consistent with
previous and ongoing observations at the submarine face of LeConte Glacier,
Alaska. These improved parameterizations will reduce uncertainty in glacial melt
rate estimates (and thus, sea level rise projections) and improve our
understanding of fjord circulation and its influence on polar coastal
biogeochemistry. These improvements also likely to benefit our understanding of
other types of ice-ocean boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.