* 2138420
* ERI: Foundations of Machine Learning for Side-channel Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Fatemeh Ganji, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 194,726.00

In light of the attacks against real-world hardware platforms, the research on
their vulnerabilities and corresponding countermeasures has gained further
importance. As a prime example of such attacks, one targeting the usersâ€™ private
keys used in hardware devices for authentication can be mentioned, where
analyzing electromagnetic emanation, power consumption, and timing (often
referred to as side-channel leakages) results in compromising the security of
the device. Due to the effectiveness of such attacks leveraging side-channels, a
great deal of attention has been paid to, particularly AI-assisted security
verification. The involvement of standardization (e.g., National Institute of
Standards and Technology) and certification bodies in the activities related to
the development of tools for side-channel analysis further highlights the
importance of this matter. In spite of the effort made in this respect, due to
difficulties with regard to the constantly growing number of known side-channel
attacks, evaluation of side-channel resiliency could be less practical. To
tackle this and in line with the standardization activities, this project aims
to address some of the fundamental shortcomings of the existing approaches
relying on machine learning, specifically, deep learning, as a powerful tool to
assess the security of devices against side-channel attacks. Hence, the results
obtained through this project are expected to improve the security of millions
of devices used across sensitive applications, including healthcare,
intelligence, finance, transportation, and defense. Moreover, the research
activities performed in this project are closely integrated with education and
outreach efforts as both graduate, and undergraduate students will work on the
project, thus gaining cutting-edge skills and expertise in hardware security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project will answer
these vital questions: 1) Which deep learning model can approximate the leakage
properties of a cryptographic implementation with less complexity and high
interpretability? 2) How can the generalization of the results achieved for one
instance of the implementation to another be explained? 3) Besides deep
learning, which other machine learning frameworks, preferably provable ones, can
be applied to offer a guarantee that a cryptosystem is robust against machine
learning-enhanced side-channel analysis? In doing so, the project creates a
novel set of techniques relying on the theoretical foundations of deep learning
to assess the security of cryptosystems and their respective embedded devices in
practice. Furthermore, experimentation on real-world cryptographic
implementations, namely unprotected and with countermeasures against side-
channel analysis, will be conducted. Side-channel measurements from these
systems will be made publicly available. This is indeed geared to the needs of
the standardization and certification bodies, industry, and researchers focusing
on security evaluation for cryptosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.