* 2138928
* ERI: Development of Non-native Sigma Factors for Metabolic Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jason Boock, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable resources are a key
element of a sustainable economy. Microbes will play an important role if
properly engineered. Product yield increases are needed. Routing material
efficiently through different metabolic pathways is critical for increasing
yield. The objective of this project is to balance material and energy flows
through cell metabolism and product synthesis pathways. A library of sigma
factors, which control pathway flows, will be created, and tested. The research
will be tied to outreach and workforce development activities. To learn
synthetic biology techniques, first year undergraduates and high school teachers
will characterize a sigma factor of their choice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional balancing of enzyme expression and
resource reallocation towards bioproduction are two general strategies that have
resulted in enhanced bioproduction. Alternative sigma factors naturally carry
out these functions by redirecting transcriptional resources towards new genetic
programs in times of stress. Through this work, we will evaluate whether
alternative sigma factors will confer bioproduction benefits in E. coli.
Mutations to promoter spacer region as well as changes in spacer length will
provide transcriptional diversity for a set of non-native sigma factors. A
screening approach followed by deep sequencing will determine the identity of
promoter variants that give rise to specific transcriptional amounts, improving
the prediction of how changes in promoters influence transcription. Libraries of
promoters will be applied to heterologous pathways that have multiple side
reactions to provide a balanced flux throughout the pathway. Additionally, using
a multi-sigma factor-based approach, we will coordinate enzyme expression for
complicated pathways that require intermediate build-up to improve
specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.