* 2138438
* ERI: Underlying Interfacial Phenomena in PFAS- Polymer Sorbent Adsorption
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Amrita Sarkar, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2024
* USD 194,025.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Household and industrial markets
for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have dramatically expanded in
recent years despite the environmental persistence of these 'forever chemicals'.
PFAS are found in ground, surface, and drinking waters and, in high
concentrations, have been associated with serious health effects such as liver
and thyroid disease and cancer. Thus, water decontamination efforts focused on
mitigating the environmental and health impacts of hazardous PFAS must be
considered. Current PFAS removal techniques rely on sorbent materials (e.g.,
activated carbon and ion exchange resins) for their reasonable removal rates and
low costs. Yet, these common sorbents suffer from poor selectivity, low
affinity, and slow adsorption kinetics when faced with PFAS at environmentally-
relevant concentrations, and the sorbent regeneration processes are energy-
intensive. Advanced sorbent materials that exhibit selective and rapid removal
of PFAS with inexpensive regeneration are urgently needed. This project examines
the use of fluorinated macromolecules with tunable functionalities, porosities,
and controllable hydrophilic-hydrophobic interactions for advanced sorbent
design. The design approach prioritizes manufacturing simplicity to eliminate
the need for costly post-synthetic transformations and complex instrumentation.
The investigation will focus on understanding the complex interfacial phenomena
governing the separation of PFAS from drinking water using the polymer sorbent
material. This project also serves as an educational platform for developing
graduate-level course materials and engaging undergraduate and K-12 students in
STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
low-cost, mass-scale sorbent production strategy using a novel fluorinated block
copolymer. The polymer candidate leverages its self-assembly at solid-liquid
interfaces to facilitate the elimination of toxic PFAS from drinking water. The
porous polymer sorbent will be synthesized from inexpensive, commercially-
available monomers and does not require post-synthetic transformation to achieve
its desired functionality. The sorbent design is inspired by the underlying
interfacial phenomena, where small-molecule adsorption and balanced
hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions can be controlled concurrently. To that
end, the project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of the working
principles of the porous polymer sorbent. The approach will examine the
interplay of (i) hydrophilic interactions of sorbent functionality to the short-
chain PFAS and water molecules, (ii) balanced hydrophobic carbon-
fluorine—fluorine-carbon interactions at solid-liquid interfaces, where the
polymer sorbent is “solid” and long-chain PFAS dissolved in water is considered
a “liquid” phase, and (iii) tuning thermodynamically-driven self-assembly
phenomena. PFAS elimination performance will be tested with “control” and
drinking water samples collected from various areas of New Jersey. This project
will also establish a sustainable approach for green solvent-based recycling and
reuse of spent sorbents. To convey the scientific findings to a broader
audience, the investigator will form an Undergraduate &amp; K-12 Research Team
at Montclair State University. This team will participate in (i) fieldwork to
collect drinking water samples from nearby industrial zones for sorbent testing
and (ii) educational outreach by presenting an interactive “Visual Color Code
Sorbent Demonstration” among communities having limited technical knowledge.
Insights gained from this research will also be integrated into a graduate
course to increase students' interests in the fields of polymers and interfacial
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.