* 2138421
* ERI: Making High-Temperature Alloyed Components by Combining Additive Manufacturing and Spark Plasma Sintering: Enabling Shape Complexity and Predicting Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Elisa Torresani, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 197,643.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spark plasma sintering is a well-
known manufacturing technology, in which pressurizing and rapid heating are
simultaneously applied to achieve particle-to-solid consolidation with a low
level of defects even for high-temperature metals, such as tungsten alloys.
Despite significant interest in this technology, it has been, however, limited
to simple-shaped components (i.e., in cylindrical forms). On the other hand,
though additive manufacturing has empowered the design freedom, ideal for making
parts of sophisticated geometry, fabrications of high temperature alloys have
not been reliably successful. In this project, a combination of additive
manufacturing, such as binder jetting, and spark plasma sintering will be
employed to overcome such limitations. The studied technology integration
represents a novel and promising approach to produce complex-shaped components,
made of high-temperature alloys, in an efficient and cost-effective manner, and
yet, ensure the quality in part dimensions as well as microstructures. Moreover,
the project will explore new possibilities for the investigation into the
fundamentals of the field-assisted sintering processes. In addition, the project
will contribute to the education, outreach and retaining of undergraduate and
graduate students from minorities and to engaging high school students with
hands-on experiences with high-end technologies such as additive manufacturing
and spark plasma sintering via the collaboration with industry partners
involved, e.g., California Nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to understand and develop the net-shaping capability of
the spark plasma sintering technology to produce complex-shaped parts, such as
helical bevel gears, made of material systems difficult to be fabricated using
either traditional or additive manufacturing. The project will address this
challenge through the “controllable interface” concept, which combines the
additive manufacturing capability to produce complex shapes with the full
consolidation potential of the spark plasma sintering. The controllable
interface is represented by a three-dimensionally printed deformable volume of a
sacrificial material introduced inside common spark plasma sintering tooling. To
achieve the desired design of the controllable interface, comprehensive modeling
of the spark plasma sintering process will be researched. The intricate nature
of the starting porous assembly involved in this combined technology requires
extending the current powder sintering modeling framework to better understand
thermal and non-thermal nonequilibrium phenomena in spark plasma sintering to
predict the final processing outcomes in terms of the microstructure and
geometry of end products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.