* 2138253
* ERI: GRAPHSEC: Graph-Based Vehicular Communication Security with Adaptive Embedded Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Riadul Islam, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It was more than three decades
ago, at the 1986 Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) conference in Detroit,
that Robert Bosch GmbH (Bosch) officially released the controller area network
(CAN) specification, yet still today, this widely used in-vehicle network
protocol remains as a critical security concern in modern vehicles. While
automotive manufacturers race to introduce new autonomous vehicles, a society
eager to deploy autonomous technologies must, with equal interest, pursue
complementary efforts in securing underlying communication fabrics and gain
insights from exploring existing deployed technologies. Recent studies show that
cyber attacks can compromise CAN communication. This is not surprising given
that vehicular communication lacks well-defined source and destination addresses
within packets on which security policies may have been built and relies on the
good behavior of all devices to enable functionality defined by overlaid
sequences of many brief messages. These characteristics result in an attacker's
single point of entry to monitor messages and broadcast unverifiable
information. This research aims to improve intra-vehicular communication
security and help designers integrate network properties with the sensors'
physical properties to build highly robust, low-cost security systems. The
proposed techniques have the potential to improve vehicular network safety and
reduce cost. The PI will also conduct several educational and outreach efforts
such as: (1) supervise one Ph.D. theses and several undergraduate senior design
projects; (2) introduce a new course on intra-vehicular communication and
security in the computer engineering curriculum at UMBC; (3) support the
underprivileged students, through an REU program, since about 22% of the
population in greater Baltimore area lives below the poverty line; (4) since
UMBC is a Minority-Serving Institutions, the PI will continue recruiting
undergraduate and K-12 researchers through the Center for Women In Technology
program and local schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this proposal,
PI first builds graphs from the CAN messages and proposes two unique approaches
to secure CAN communications. The PI will apply graph-theory-based machine
learning and statistical algorithms to a CAN bus to improve the reliability of
the CAN bus. The intent is to develop security monitors that can be tailored to
any CAN-based control system using an FPGA-based, off-the-shelf deployable
platform. Notably, the PI proposes to investigate (1) Graph-based low-cost naive
Bayes algorithms for vehicular security; (2) A statistical filter (SF) in the
input stage of our novel scaled graph-based neural networks (GNN) for a low-cost
and adaptive CAN communication; (3) Developing a flexible and configurable CAN
protocol Testbed to help researchers develop new physical-property (i.e.,
voltage, skew, sensors &amp; interconnect aging)-based algorithms, collect data
and analyze their CAN systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.