* 2138035
* Development of an Asymmetric Electrochemical-NHK Reaction using Multivariate Linear Regression Analyses
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Arianne Hunter, Hunter, Arianne Chenice
* Fellowship Award
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Arianne Hunter is awarded a FY21 Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research (NSF MPS-Ascend) Fellowship to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broadening participation by groups
underrepresented in Chemistry at Cal Tech. The project being performed by
Arianne Hunter, entitled Development of an Asymmetric Electrochemical-NHK
Reaction using Multivariate Linear Regression Analyses, is to be conducted under
the guidance of mentoring scientist Sarah E. Reisman. This project is supported
by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes multivariate
linear regression (MLR) models to guide the identification of a privileged
ligand class that will transform the electrochemically driven Nozaki-Hiyama-
Kishi reaction (e-NHK) into a highly enantioselective method. The specific aims
include screening ligands to identify privileged scaffolds that produce high
levels of asymmetry, developing tethered ligands to increase the efficiency and
asymmetry of the reaction, and conducting electroanalytical investigations into
the formation of heteronuclear complexes. These in-depth studies into the e-NHK
using data science-driven MLR models and
electroanalytical/spectroelectrochemical mechanistic investigations will
contribute a new fundamental understanding of the Cr and Ni speciation in the
e-NHK. Dr. Hunter will also work to broaden participation through efforts like
starting a NOBCChE chapter, participating in the Diversity in Chemistry
Initiative at Caltech, and working with the Caltech Center for Teaching,
Learning, and Outreach. Dr. Hunter also plans to use her extensive background in
organizing scientific community outreach, gained through her non-profit “We Do
Science Too” and her work with “GirlTech” of Oklahoma City, to organize outreach
activities at Pasadena High School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.