* 2138090
* Dynamical and Computer-Assisted Methods Applied to Hamiltonian Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Wai Ting Lam, Lam, Wai Ting
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships, MPS-Ascend Program. Wai-Ting Lam is
awarded this fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at
Florida Atlantic University (FAU) in the mathematical sciences, including
applications to other disciplines, under the mentorship of the sponsoring
scientist J.D. Mireles-James. This is a research project aimed at the study of
dynamics of some celestial mechanics models. In particular, the principal
investigator (PI) will investigate a restricted four-body problem arising in
modeling dynamics of a spacecraft or moonlet in a vicinity of a Jupiter Trojan
asteroid. The PI will use variational methods to obtain realistic physical
models for the gravitational potential of irregularly-shaped asteroids within
certain families of shapes that are commonly used to model the shapes of
asteroids. Along with this research, the PI will be involved in the activities
to broaden participation of Underrepresented Minorities in mathematical sciences
through the recruitment and retention of students at FAU, a Hispanic Serving
Institution, as well as through collaboration with American Indian Science and
Engineering society (Florida).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will
develop advanced numerical algorithms and computer assisted proofs that will
lead to a more detailed, rigorous descriptions of the dynamics in a variety of
realistic settings. Resonant orbits in the vicinity of an irregularly shaped
body will be investigated, and periodic and quasi-periodic orbits, hyperbolic
invariant manifolds, and transverse intersections between such manifolds will be
obtained via rigorous computations. Such geometric structures will be used to
prove the existence of trajectories whose energy undergoes a significant change
over time, thus constituting a verification of the Arnold diffusion in a
concrete model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.