* 2138584
* OPP-PRF: Organic Matter Export, Processes, and Transformations Drive Carbon Cycling Patterns in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jumanah Hamdi, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 09/30/2023
* USD 302,515.00

Global carbon cycling supports life on Earth and affects marine, terrestrial,
and atmospheric ecosystems. Human activities alter the balance of this natural
cycle by adding fossil carbon to the contemporary atmosphere, thereby changing
our climate. As the climate warms, reduced sea ice cover and increased Arctic
river carbon export dramatically change the microscopic organic molecules in the
oceans. These compounds play essential roles in Earth’s natural elemental
cycles, contribute to the storage of atmospheric greenhouse gasses (e.g., carbon
dioxide, CO2) in the ocean, and support marine organisms. Therefore, with large-
scale ecosystem changes across the Arctic, the time is now to better understand
what microscopic materials in the Arctic Ocean will shape the composition and
function of all other Earth’s oceans. Concerning the prediction that the Arctic
Ocean will be ice-free around 20–50 years from now, this research is designed to
understand Arctic Ocean carbon cycling processes and impacts, such as further
biological and chemical feedback loops as well as CO2 outgassing from
microscopic carbon-based materials, such as dissolved organic matter (DOM),
altered in mineralization processes. Much of the DOM exported from the Arctic is
riverine and is funneled through the Fram Strait, a relatively small body of
water that connects the Arctic Ocean to the global conveyor belts. This is
important because Fram Strait represents a linkage of Arctic terrestrial carbon
to other ocean environments. The researchers will measure the amount and type of
DOM responsible for the largest transformations in the ocean resulting in
increased concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere. Providing essential
molecular-level chemical data is needed to understand DOM signatures within the
context of global change and will provide the scientific community with
definitive DOM data. The researchers also embrace this work as an ideal
opportunity to spearhead a carbon chemistry initiative across diverse Arctic
science researchers to lead to safer and healthier carbon characterization
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global environmental change impacts Arctic ice
sheets, sea ice, ocean, and circulation, affecting ecosystem function and carbon
cycling in marine waters. As the climate warms, sea ice diminishes, ice sheet
loss from Greenland increases, and Arctic river-carbon (C) outputs increase,
making the Arctic Ocean a mixing zone of diverse organic material (OM) that gets
funneled through the Fram Strait before circulating globally. Thus, the Fram
Strait is poised to dramatically impact marine surface and bottom waters
resulting in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions upon OM mineralization through
natural processes. Marine C mineralization processes depend on dissolved OM
(DOM) composition, microbes, nutrient availability, and sunlight exposure, all
of which shape the mechanisms for CO2 outgassing from transformed DOM. The
overarching hypothesis is DOM molecular composition distinctions between
microbial and photochemical mineralization of DOM to CO2 in Fram Strait are
driven by the heterogeneous nature of diverse Arctic Ocean sources. Advanced
analytical chemistry measurements of DOM (ultrahigh resolution mass
spectrometry, C isotopic composition, and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy) will be used to decipher molecular composition and unique C
markers from biotic and abiotic degradation mechanisms occurring in the Fram
Strait. As a result, linkages of DOM composition and CO2 outgassing will be
made. This work will target how DOM can persist and be transformed in the Fram
Strait across rapid and prolonged time scales. Progress in mapping microbe- and
photochemical-DOM interactions in the Fram Strait will address knowledge gaps
across seemingly disparate fields, culminating in better understandings of C
cycling in the Arctic. The data will provide the community with definitive DOM
compositional markers that can be used to better understand Arctic marine waters
and help enforce healthy environmental policy as the climate warms and sea
levels rise. Analytical and green chemistry expertise will be combined to
identify improvements in Arctic C research which will be essential for the next
generation of Arctic researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.