* 2138520
* ERI: Quantifying Inositol Phosphate Dephosphorylation to Understand the Role of Recalcitrant Organic Phosphorus Forms on Harmful Algal Blooms in Freshwater Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Francisco Cubas, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,989.00

Rapid urbanization and agricultural intensification in the United States and
worldwide have led to a widespread nutrient enrichment, a process commonly
referred to as eutrophication, in surface water systems including lakes, rivers,
and estuaries. In phosphorus-limited surface water systems, eutrophication has
been shown to cause a decrease in water quality, oxygen depletion, a loss of
aquatic biota, and the occurrence of harmful algal blooms (HABs). Frequent HABs
have an adverse impact in communities that rely on surface water bodies for
drinking water, fishing, recreational activities, and tourism. The overarching
goal of this ERI project is to investigate the role and impact of recalcitrant
organic phosphorus species on the occurrence of HABs in surface water systems.
To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator of this ERI project proposes to
focus on inositol phosphate (IP) as an important and representative form of
recalcitrant organic phosphorus, and its impact on the occurrence of HABS. Two
key objectives of the proposed research are to 1) quantify the formation of
soluble reactive phosphorus (orthophosphate) from IP in surface water systems
and 2) assess how reactive orthophosphate species generated from the
dephosphorylation of IP initiate and sustain HABs. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge that could guide the control and mitigation of HABs. Further benefits
to society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of two graduate students at Georgia Southern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of inorganic phosphorus on the
occurrence, frequency, and intensity of harmful algal blooms (HABs) in surface
water systems is well understood. The role and impact of organic phosphorus on
HABs have also been established. However, a fundamental understanding and
quantification of the bioavailability of organic phosphorus (Po) and its role in
promoting and sustaining HABs remains elusive. This ERI project will address
these critical knowledge gaps. More specifically, the Principal Investigator
(PI) proposes to focus on the evaluation and quantification of the contribution
of inositol phosphate (IP), an important and representative recalcitrant Po, to
the total pool of orthophosphate (OP) and other soluble reactive phosphorus
(SRP) species that fuels and sustain HABs. The specific objectives of the
research are to: 1) Quantify the amount of Po produced from the microbial
mineralization of IP in surface water systems; 2) Assess the nutritive potential
of IP through evaluations of the relationships between IP biodegradability and
its role in initiating and sustaining HABs via measurements of the rates of
phosphorus acquisition by algae; and 3) Uncover the physical-chemical properties
of the environmental media (i.e., OP and total phosphorus (TP) ratios, pH, redox
potential, and IP mobility) in which IP is preferentially mineralized. The
successful completion of this project has potential for transformative impact
through the generation of new knowledge and data to advance the fundamental
understanding of the role and impact of IP on the occurrence and persistence of
HABs in surface water systems. To implement the education and outreach goals of
this ERI project, the PI will develop an outreach program for stakeholders
involved in nutrient management to discuss the role of organic phosphorous on
eutrophication with the goal of improving P control strategies to prevent HABs.
In addition, the PI plans to integrate the research findings into the
Environmental Engineering undergraduate/graduate courses that he is currently
teaching at Georgia Southern University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.