* 2138734
* Collaborative Research: Resolving Conflicting Models for the Laramide Orogeny and the Flat-Slab Paradigm in the Southern California Batholith
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Keith Klepeis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 288,924.00

Understanding how the Rocky Mountains developed in the western United States is
a problem of vital importance because they host precious mineral resources such
as gold, lead, copper, and silver, which are important for our national economy.
Many of these economic resources were brought to the surface along large faults
which formed in the Late Cretaceous during a mountain building event, termed the
Laramide orogeny. A key problem is that the timing and origin of the driving
force behind this event and the formation of the Rocky Mountains are highly
controversial and there is no consensus on the tectonic setting in which these
mountains formed. The investigators hypothesize that the answer to understanding
the origin of the Rocky Mountains and the Laramide orogeny lies in the San
Gabriel Mountains of southern California. This region contains two important
features which make it the focus of this study: (1) they preserve a complete
temporal history of the Laramide orogeny from the earliest phase until its
termination, which is important in reconstructing the driving force behind the
event, and (2) they contain a unique section of the deep crust including a major
ductile fault system that was active during the beginning of the Laramide
orogeny. Analysis of these features will offer critical insights on the
beginning of the Laramide orogeny, which will be essential in resolving
conflicting hypotheses. The research plan for this project will involve 3
seasons of field work and data collection in the San Gabriel and nearby
mountains. Laboratory analyses of rocks collected from the San Gabriel Mountains
will consist of geochronology, geochemistry and microstructural work at the
California State University Northridge Laser Ablation and LatinXellence in STEM
Laboratories. The project will advance societal outcomes through innovative
summer workshops, and an academic-year mentoring program termed, LA-ROCS, both
of which are aimed at providing research experiences to underrepresented
students at minority-serving institutions in southern California. These
mentorship and research opportunities for undergraduate students will expose
them to cutting-edge analytical research facilities and will aid in developing a
diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to resolve the controversial beginnings of the Laramide orogeny by
testing conflicting hypotheses about the origin and tectonic effects of Laramide
orogenesis on the evolution of the Southern California batholith at ca. 85-70
million years ago. This critical period in the development of the U.S.
Cordillera is commonly associated with shallow-slab subduction beneath Southern
California, which is thought to have driven the transition from thin-skin
(Sevier-style) to thick-skin (Laramide-style) deformation. A key problem with
the flat-slab model is that the team's preliminary geochronology data show that
the initiation of the Laramide orogeny in Southern California is spatially and
temporally linked to a magmatic flare-up event in the same region where flat-
slab subduction is postulated to have occurred. This contradiction makes the
Laramide orogeny distinct from other areas of flat-slab subduction, including
the modern-day Sierras Pampeanas in Argentina, which is characterized by a
magmatic gap. To resolve this problem, the investigators propose a multiscale
approach that focuses on the roots of the Southern California batholith and
combines field work with a variety of state-of-the art analytical techniques
(Uranium-Lead geochronology, Hafnium- and Osmium-isotope geochemistry, electron
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and microstructural analysis, structural analyses
along continuous transects). These data will allow the investigators to link
magmatism in the Southern California batholith with deformation and plate-
kinematic information at mid-lower crustal depths to resolve conflicting models
associated with the flat-slab paradigm and the initiation of the Laramide
orogeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.