* 2138139
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Defending against Emerging Stateless Web Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Zubair Shafiq, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The web is continuously evolving to support new features and accommodate the
constantly-changing demands of users and web applications. At the same time, the
online behavioral advertising ecosystem exploits these emerging features for
privacy-invasive tracking of web users. Traditionally, tracking on the web has
been abusing browser features such as cookies, but new advanced web tracking
techniques (browser fingerprinting) are emerging. Browser fingerprinting
techniques capitalize on users having subtle differences in their browser
configurations that make them identifiable. The projectâ€™s novelties are to
advance the current state of knowledge of web tracking and how we can defend
against it. The project's broader significance and importance are to enhance the
privacy of millions of users by improving countermeasures against web tracking
that can be deployed in mainstream and privacy-focused web browsers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to fundamentally change
the detection and defense against stateless web tracking. Unlike prior work that
relies on manual or ad-hoc approaches, this project takes a principled approach
that leverages browser instrumentation to build signatures of usage of web APIs,
the building blocks of browser fingerprinting. The project builds machine
learning techniques to improve stateless tracking detection and to quantify the
privacy risks of different web APIs. Furthermore, the state-of-the-art
approaches to counter stateless tracking are ineffective and brittle in the face
of adversarial tactics and also degrade user experience due to their coarse-
grained and opaque nature. This project mitigates fingerprinting behavior with
fine-grained techniques and infers the intent behind the usage of web APIs, thus
enforcing the right mitigation at the right time to minimize the breakage of
legitimate functionality. The project also makes the machine learning decisions
explainable to better inform users and browser vendors of the progress of
stateless tracking on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.