* 2138702
* ERI: Variational Quantum Algorithm for Power System Simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Junpeng Zhan, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,986.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing has been proven
to have an exponential advantage over classical computers in solving many
problems. Realizing the exponential advantage using only a quantum computer will
potentially take decades of research as it needs a universal fault-tolerant
quantum computer with thousands of qubits and long coherence time. Variational
quantum algorithms (VQAs), as hybrid quantum and classical algorithms, have
shown an exponential advantage over classical algorithms for various problems.
Enhancing the security and reliability of bulk power systems can save billions
of economic losses. To ensure power system reliability and security, transient
stability simulation and contingency analysis are essential tasks that are
executed very frequently (even in real time, i.e., a solution needs to be
produced in less than one minute) at utilities and independent system operators.
Transient stability simulation and contingency analysis for a large power system
with many generators, transformers, and transmission lines are extremely
challenging problems due to the very-high dimensionality. Existing tools based
on classical computers have great difficulty in performing such contingency
analysis for a large power system, especially when considering the simultaneous
failure of multiple components. The difficulty is further complicated by the
significant increase in dimensionality caused by the interdependency between
power, gas, and communication systems and by the fact that a significant number
of renewable generators are being integrated into power systems. Transient
stability simulation and contingency analysis are essentially modeled as
differential algebraic equations (DAEs) which also can represent many other
engineering problems. In general, classical algorithms have an intractable
computational burden for solving very-high-dimensional DAEs. This project
proposes new VQAs to solve DAEs as a new paradigm. Broader impact activities
include (a) disseminating research results to inspire the power and energy
community to accelerate research and development in quantum computing for
challenging engineering problems, (b) curriculum enhancement on quantum
computing and power systems at Alfred University, (c) involving students from
underrepresented groups and undergraduates in research, and (d) educating the
public and K-12 through outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed work is to develop new VQAs that can efficiently solve time-
dependent nonlinear differential equations for very-high-dimensional simulation
problems (e.g., transient stability and N-k contingency analysis) of large-scale
power systems with renewables, which will be the first of its kind. The approach
is to: 1) develop VQAs for general time-dependent nonlinear differential
equations, where two core components (variational ansatz and optimization
algorithm) of a VQA will be comprehensively investigated, 2) develop Hamiltonian
and quantum nonlinear processing unit (QNPU) for power system transient
stability simulation, where QNPU is the third core component of the VQA, 3)
develop VQAs for N-k contingency analysis of power systems with high-penetration
renewables. When noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers with a few hundred
qubits are available in several years, the VQAs developed from this project are
expected to realize exponential advantage over pure classical algorithms to
solve transient stability simulation and N-k contingency analysis problems of
remarkable significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.