* 2138930
* I-Corps: Optical device for the measurement of shale swelling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Mehdi Mokhtari, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop an
apparatus to measure the swelling of clay-rich geologic formations, such as
mudstones or shales. Accurate knowledge of shale swelling is required for the
design of wellbores drilled for hydrocarbon or geothermal exploration and for
the long-term seal integrity monitoring for carbon dioxide storage in subsurface
formations. Inaccurate measurement of shale sensitivity to water can cause
problems such as wellbore collapse, pipe sticking, bit balling, unintended
fracture growth to neighboring formations, or carbon dioxide leakage with
economic and environmental consequences. The proposed optical swell-meter may
help drilling engineers, production engineers, and mud loggers in operating and
service companies, oil field laboratories, and government regulatory agencies to
obtain an accurate measurement of shale swelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project investigates the commercial feasibility of a new optical swell-
meter apparatus for the measurement of shale swelling. This apparatus applies
the principles of digital image correlation (DIC) techniques on the pictures
taken from a rock sample painted with a speckled pattern and submerged in water.
Comparing the pictures taken at different time intervals with the original
picture using DIC techniques, the deformation of the rock sample can be
measured. The proposed device provides full-field maps of swelling instead of a
single average value of swelling as is the current industry practice. This
feature is important because shale formations have complex mineralogy and their
properties change at or below millimeter scales. The proposed device can also
provide anisotropic values of shale swelling. This feature is important since
shale behavior is usually different in the direction of lamination compared to
perpendicular to lamination. The anisotropic and heterogenetic nature of shales
are important considerations in the representation of complex shale behavior in
contact with water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.