* 2138113
* Neural Network Quantum Error Mitigation for Algorithms on Near-Term Intermediate Scale Quantum Devices
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Justin Reyes, Reyes, Justin
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Justin Reyes is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education
at the University of Central Florida. Reyes will utilize machine learning
algorithms for the detection, categorization, and mitigation of errors from
various noise channels in quantum circuits. The goal will be to develop and
optimize algorithms which mitigate errors in quantum variational algorithms that
are implementable on Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices. Along with
the research, Reyes intends to act as a mentor to underrepresented minority
students through the American Physical Society Bridge Program in
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of this proposal onto
the scientific community are numerous. In quantum computation, the success of
this proposed research would advance the progress of current implementations of
quantum computation on NISQ devices, providing a novel and improved means of
characterizing and mitigating noise in quantum circuits. Within the field of
quantum many-body systems and quantum chemistry, more accurate approximations to
the ground states of molecular energies would be obtained. In computer science,
the results of this proposal would advance the study of combinatorial
optimization by providing more accurate approximate solutions, while potentially
paving a path forward for continued improvement. Within mathematics, a deeper
understanding of the correlations between noise and the spread of error would be
provided, leading to potentially new models of noise
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.