* 2138896
* ERI: Tool Grasping Compliance and Stability of Underactuated Hands in Model-Mediated Telemanipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Long Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,995.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant supports research that will contribute new knowledge
related to a manufacturing process, promoting the progress of science, and
advancing national prosperity. Robot manipulators are known for high precision
and repeatability. They have been widely used in well-defined and fully
automated industrial settings. However, ad-hoc, highly uncertain, and complex
manipulation tasks still require on-site presence and assistance from human
crew. Many such tasks present hazardous and challenging environments, such as in
the case of factory operations during a pandemic. This project aims to empower
the workforce by enabling their versatile and dexterous capabilities for
remotely operated manipulation tasks. A novel model-mediated telemanipulation
framework will be developed for the workforce, to extend their physical reach,
their hands-on manipulation dexterity, and their situational awareness
intelligence, from local to a remote site. These advanced telemanipulation
technologies will have substantial impact on society and the economy, helping
facilitate safe manufacturing working environments for the workforce. From an
educational perspective, this project promotes diversity in engineering
education by inspiring and preparing students in under-served communities for
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers at the high
school and college levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
enhanced teleoperation methods to bridge the current gaps of using grasped tools
in remotely operated manipulation tasks, such as, fastening a screw with a
grasped screwdriver. The key research objective of this project is to
investigate tool grasping compliance and stability in force-controlled
manufacturing tasks and explore its usage in model-mediated telemanipulation.
First, a framework is developed for estimating tool grasping compliance matrices
of underactuated robotic hands using combined feedback from hand sensors (joint
angles and proprioception) and wrist-mounted force and torque sensors. Then, the
estimated compliance is used to infer grasping status and stability and to
develop novel force control strategies. Finally, the tool grasping information
is incorporated in model-mediated telemanipulation to design and implement a
novel grasping-informed virtual fixture haptic assistance. Thereby, a complete
solution for user-driven remotely operated manipulation tasks can be
delivered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.