* 2138106
* Collaborative Research: Research: Understanding and Improving Design Activity Engagement in the Engineering Capstone Experience
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Huff, Harding University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 111,448.00

This project will focus on improving the ways that engineering students and
professionals learn to design solutions that benefit a wide range of people who
use these solutions. Engineering students come to learn engineering design
through an intensive project-based course known as their capstone course, a
process critical to their formation as engineers. In these courses, students
often emulate industry practices by designing projects within a team, in a
process intended to be similar to what they might experience in the workplace.
However, research in engineering education and practice continues to show that
much design learning happens after students graduate with their engineering
degrees. Might engineering students be better equipped to practice high-quality
design in the workplace if they were more engaged in their capstone course? And
how might capstone courses be designed in a way that motivates students to learn
design with a deeper connection to the process? This project will address these
critical questions through an in-depth study of engineering students and
professionals and a sustained plan to equip engineering design instructors in
preparing students for the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is little
knowledge of the specifics of how engineering students engage in capstone
courses and how their engagement is driven by identity and motivation needs. The
objective of this project will be to investigate how and why civil and
mechanical engineering students and practicing engineers engage with engineering
design activity. In particular, this project will be characterized by the
following objectives: 1) Develop a model of design activity engagement and
identity motives of students and professionals, 2) Expand our model to account
for resistance and synergies, alignment and tension between academic and
workplace settings and across disciplines, and 3) Advance holistic and authentic
engagement of students in multiple academic settings through extensive
collaboration with and training of engineering faculty. The capstone design
experience is particularly unique because explicit and implicit goals focus on
simulating the engineering design experience to the extent possible. How and why
students engage in engineering design in capstone courses is therefore
foundational to understanding and improving the efficacy of capstone courses. We
will use constructivist grounded theory (CGT) to examine the how and why of this
phenomenon in four important settings. The rationale for this research is that
understanding differentially how students and engineers in different disciplines
engage in design is a critical step in enhancing our understanding of engagement
in academic and workplace settings and results can broadly inform efforts to
enhance student engagement. This project is further characterized by the
formation Engaged Design Learning Institute (EDLI), where we will enroll a
cross-institutional cohort of 8-10 capstone instructors to support them in their
design instruction and to develop contextually relevant insight on how the
research findings may be applied by educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.