* 2138625
* ERI: Enhancing Statistical Energy Analysis for Nonlinear Vibrating Structures Using Statistical Entropy
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Zahra Sotoudeh, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,801.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables the use of statistical
techniques for structural optimization, damage detection, and noise control of
large and complex engineering structures, including aircraft, launch vehicles,
ships, and cars, thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing
prosperity and welfare. For structures with very large numbers of vibrational
degrees of freedom that resonate at closely spaced frequencies, standard
analytical and computational techniques are expensive and prone to inaccuracies
due to high sensitivity to uncertainties, making them ineffective in an
iterative design process. A technique known as statistical energy analysis
overcomes these limitations in the case of vibrations that respond linearly with
input power, and ensures accurate predictions of the energy exchange between
different parts of the structure, as well as of the power dissipated in the
structure. This project will remove the restriction to the linear regime by
accounting for nonlinearities that become dominant for large-amplitude
vibrations or are due to material properties and affect all scales of motion.
The new theoretical framework for understanding statistical energy analysis
elevates the technique from a heuristic engineering tool to a rigorous theory
with practical implications for reliability, verifiability, and extensibility to
modern engineering structures. Through this project, housed at a Hispanic-
Serving Institution with a significant population of low-income students,
multiple groups of undergraduates from diverse backgrounds will be engaged in
year-long multidisciplinary research activities, preparing them for research or
industrial careers beyond traditional engineering jobs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental contributions to a
novel and mathematically rigorous thermodynamic interpretation of statistical
energy analysis that is unrestricted by assumptions of linearity and therefore
potentially extensible also to nonlinear systems. It will achieve this outcome
by developing a corresponding theory based on statistical entropy, classical
entropy, and Clausiusâ€™s law, rather than the traditional analogy based on
conservation of energy. The project will use physical experiments and numerical
simulations, including high-fidelity finite-element analysis combined with Monte
Carlo techniques, to characterize the degree to which the statistical energy
analysis captures both linear and nonlinear effects of energy transfer in
discrete structures, as well as coupled rod-rod and plate-plate systems, thereby
also providing a series of benchmark examples and verification metrics that may
be used to test related theories. Parameter studies will be used to determine an
upper limit of validity of the theory in terms of the strength of
nonlinearity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.