* 2138719
* ERI: Toward Unfolding the Effect of Brain Sex Variations in Biomechanics of Traumatic Brain Injury
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Marzieh Hajiaghamemar, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award will support research on sex-based differences in brain
structure. Specifically, this project will quantify how these brain structural
variations affect traumatic brain injury risk and outcomes. Traumatic brain
injury is a common cause of cognitive and behavioral deficits. Traumatic brain
injury is caused by impact to the head that deforms and tears the brain tissue.
Like other brain diseases and injuries, there are sex differences in prevalence,
onset, and outcomes. However, the factors that contribute to these differences
are not fully understood. The work will identify the factors that contribute to
these differences in the vulnerability and severity of injury. Some of these sex
differences can be caused by the anatomical and structural differences that
exist between male and female brains. This work will characterize and
computationally model brain anatomical and structural details. This work will
also determine how the brain tissue deforms during the head impact. This work
will also predict whether, where, and how severe the brain tissue and cells get
injured following head impact. This research has the potential to contribute to
long-term brain health, and thus affect social and economic health-related costs
and quality of life for millions of people. Finally, this research will provide
opportunities for involvement of first-generation female and minority students
in research projects and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All brain computational models, tissue
thresholds, and safety standards for traumatic brain injury are based on a
single or the average adult male brain, thus their outcomes, findings, and
effectiveness are biased towards males. The lack of sex-specific knowledge has
held back success in reducing the number of traumatic brain injuries and
mitigating the post-injury outcomes in both sexes but especially in females.
This study will address this knowledge gap and can contribute in reducing the
number of injuries and mitigating its outcomes. The research team will identify
and characterize the brain structural features that vary between females and
males and investigate the effect of these brain structural sex variations on the
brain biomechanical responses in head trauma exposures and the susceptibility
and post-injury outcomes by developing sex-specific brain
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.