* 2138260
* ERI: A New Spatial Image Analysis of the Tumor Microenvironment for Cancer Immunotherapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Sanghoon Lee, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,198.00

Cancer immunotherapy uses the power of the body’s immune system against cancer
cells. Recent progress has shed light on cancer initiation and response, with
key therapies showing significant effectiveness in cancer patients. However,
response to cancer immunotherapy is highly dependent on interaction between
cancer cells and their microenvironment. This Engineering Research Initiation
(ERI) award will tackle an important challenge — exploring, analyzing, and
interpreting the complex interactions in the tumor microenvironment with AI-
based approaches. As part of this project, K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students will be introduced to biomedical engineering concepts through
synergistic research and educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term research goal of this project is to discover statistically significant
cancer biomarkers that will aid researchers in determining the prognosis of
cancer patients. Towards this goal, this project aims to uncover the
quantitative spatial relationship between heterogeneous cancer-associated
populations using a two-pass pipeline design to achieve two objectives: (i) to
characterize different cell types such as tumor, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes,
and stroma with deep-learned features extracted from whole slide images and (ii)
to investigate spatial correlations between heterogeneous cancer-associated
populations with statistically significant immune cells. Unlike conventional
histopathological spatial image analysis methods that classify image regions
into two or more categories, the proposed method overlays the results of the
classification from heterogeneous cancer-associated populations to proactively
determine the spatial correlations of different cancer-associated populations
cells in both the high level of infiltrating immune cells and the low level of
infiltrating immune cells. The proposed research will broadly benefit AI-based
biomarker development, investigation of multiple types of cancer, and
interpretation of spatial variation in other research fields. The outcomes of
this project are expected to yield new knowledge to help predict response to
cancer immunotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.