* 2138186
* ERI: Decision Models for Designing and Managing the Curb Spaces in Urban Mobility Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Armagan Bayram, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,750.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) award will focus on the management of
the curb spaces in cities as part of the smart city initiative. Curb spaces have
evolved very rapidly with the arrival of new mobility services and increased
needs for goods delivery. Currently, curb spaces are not only used for parking
but also used for the pick-up/drop-off zone of ridesharing services, bike-share
or scooter parking racks, delivery zones for online shopping companies, etc.
Motivated by the need for effective use of curbs, this research aims to maximize
three core metrics: access (ensuring that vehicles can find a curb space),
timeliness (the ability to secure access to curb space as soon as possible), and
economic opportunity for all residents (the ability of the city to have earnings
not only from the parking but also from the other uses of the curb space). More
broadly, this research has the potential to result in reduced carbon dioxide
emissions, less time spent in traffic, decreased traffic hazards, increased
business satisfaction due to more on-time deliveries, and less congestion. This
research will also actively engage female and minority graduate and
undergraduate students and promote engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of collaborating
with the City of Grand Rapids in Michigan to acquire meaningful real-world data
for validating the models and deriving solutions. It aims to create rigorous
analytical approaches to promote a broader understanding of the vehicle dynamics
in urban mobility and inform the operational design of curb spaces in the city.
The specific tasks of this research include: (1) development of stochastic
dynamic capacity allocation and pricing models for curb space management; (2)
expanding the purview of capacity and demand to include all possible uses of
curb space other than parking (e.g., pickup/drop-off, loading/ unloading); and
(3) testing the operational and financial viability of new dynamic pricing
models that consider all different curb uses with varying demands. This research
will lead to advances in mobility systems modeling and solution
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.