* 2138945
* Developing surfmer structure-property relationships for high internal phase emulsion foams
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Matthew VanDyke, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2025
* USD 405,371.00

As the demand for clean water grows along with demand for products that improve
quality of life, industries that support the development and production of
chemical products continue to release pollutants and contaminants into the
environment. Technology is needed to remove these chemicals from water to render
it safe for daily use in an efficient and cost-effective manner. High internal
phase emulsion polymer foams (pHIPE) are materials that pull chemicals from the
water and trap them in pores, resulting in cleaner, safer water. However,
current methods for manufacturing pHIPE use chemicals that must be removed prior
to use, resulting in an increase in material cost and a concern that residual
contaminants in these materials may further pollute the water. This project
addresses the national need for creating effective and safe pHIPE that pose no
environmental risk while retaining a low manufacturing cost. In addition, the
research team members will work directly with community stakeholders to
understand knowledge and perception of water treatment and available treatment
technologies to increase community adoption and ownership of the pHIPE
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High internal phase emulsion polymer foams
(pHIPEs) are a form of water treatment technology needed to address urgent
issues with community water treatment infrastructure. pHIPEs are adsorbents with
a high internal surface area that originates from the initial solvent/monomer
emulsion and the surfactant that stabilizes the solvent/monomer interface.
Despite the reliance of pHIPE function on surfactants, little work has been done
to understand the impact of surfactant structure on pHIPE performance or reduce
the need to remove it post-polymerization. To meet this need, this project will
determine structure-property relationships for reactive surfactants (surfmers)
that demonstrate the impact of surfactant structure on the porous performance
and bulk properties of pHIPEs. Surfmers will be synthesized and designed to
stabilize the monomer/solvent interface and to participate in bulk
polymerization, resulting in pHIPEs with tunable interfacial activity and porous
morphology that do not leach and that conform to the principles of green
chemistry. After synthesis, surfmer structure will be correlated to interfacial
dynamics (e.g., interfacial tension, diffusion, and adsorption), foam
performance (e.g., specific surface area and pore morphology), and
polymerization (e.g, surfmer incorporation, conversion, and modulus). This work
will also incorporate research to develop effective strategies for communicating
with non-scientists about water quality issues, available technologies, and
existing infrastructure in their community, with the goal of increasing
scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.