* 2138198
* ERI: Thermal Assisted Plasmon-Plasmon interaction for active control of Electron Density Waves at Metal Semiconductor Interfaces - A Roadmap to Novel All-Optical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Raj Vinnakota, Troy University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 01/31/2024
* USD 161,597.00

The present ‘information age’ demands for the capability to transfer and process
huge amount of data relatively in short span of time. In applications from
health care, cyber security, banking, communications, defense and space
exploration, ultra-fast data transfer is accomplished by encoding the data on
photons. Whereas the need for faster data processing in fueled the innovations
and advancements in microprocessor technology with progression towards smaller,
ultrafast, and low-power electronics. Despite continuous progression aiming at
developing efficient electronic devices; saturation in the microprocessor clock
speed at about 5GHz has been observed over the past few years. This can be
attributed to the losses associated with electronic interconnects and heat
dissipation. All-optical analogues are increasingly becoming an attractive
alternative to overcome the limitations associated with electronics. However,
implementation of photonic processing device needs efficient mechanism to
achieve photon-to-photon interactions at micro and nanoscale scale sizes. Here
we propose a new data processing element, an all-optical switch, with potential
to serve as an optical analogue of electronic devices with high data rates,
while concurrently enabling device sizes that are considerably smaller than
traditional photonic elements. A significant impact of this work will be to open
avenues for the undergraduate students, including underrepresented groups,
disabled veterans and low-income populous in the Alabama black belt region to
participate in the cutting-edge research activities in the field of
semiconductor photonics and computational optics, implementing a new teaching
methodology and pursuing a broader outreach by engaging high school children and
local community with fascinating topics in optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to develop a new all-optical plasmonic switch, referred to as
Thermal Assisted All Plasmonic Switch with operation based on thermo-opto-
electronic control of propagating surface plasmon modes at metal-doped
semiconductor interfaces by the localized surface plasmon modes excited at the
plasmonic structures (or particles). Furthermore, a synergy between the
analytical and computational approaches will be pursued to uncover the extreme
light matter interactions, kinetic and thermal mechanisms facilitating the
localized surface plasmon resonances and surface plasmon polaritons interactions
with largely inhomogeneous and rapidly changing local dielectric environments of
the Metal-Semiconductor interfaces. The gained understanding will be applied to
design and test numerical prototypes of high-performance photonic elements such
as all-optical switches, that can potentially provide high data rates at the
nanoscopic and microscopic length scales. Numerical measurements, in conjunction
with the theory, will establish the limitations and scaling laws governing the
device 3dB bandwidth, determine device architectures for thermo-electro-optical
signal modulation rates down to the picosecond time scale for signal modulation
surpassing -10dB and mode sizes that are substantially smaller compared to
present-day all-optical elements. Notably, the proposed research presents a new
approach and creates new pathway toward fast and efficient optical devices,
circuitry, logic elements and additional may lead to innovative technologies
related to integrated optics and all-optical electronics, a multibillion-dollar
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.