* 2138295
* ERI: ECCS:  Concealing Side-Channels in Real-Time Schedulers
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sergio Salinas Monroy, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Systems with real-time (i.e., stringent temporal and safety) requirements are
often heavily engineered to be predictable for their correct operation. Such
determinism allows attackers to launch side-channel attacks, infer sensitive
information, or even destabilize the system by denying access to critical
resources. Hence, this project explores systematic methods to close side-
channels in current and future real-time systems. The development of analysis
techniques and system-level frameworks proposed in this work will inherently
make critical real-time systems of modern society (such as aircraft,
automobiles, power grid, unmanned ground and aerial vehicles, satellites,
manufacturing plants, industrial control systems, medical devices, and critical
infrastructures, to name a few) more secure, and hence, safer. The outcomes of
this work will bring researchers and system engineers one step closer to
understanding how to integrate two seemingly diverse yet essential fields --
real-time systems and cyber-security -- while gaining a better understanding of
both areas. This award supports the training of Ph.D. students, research
exposure to undergraduates, and the integration of research findings into
educational materials, and hence, enhances the knowledge of the next-generation
technological workforce in cyber-physical systems and cyber-security sectors.
Further, the project serves as a foundation for cyber-security education,
training, and outreach programs for the K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates the problem of schedule-based
side-channel information leakage in real-time systems and aims to mitigate such
leakage by introducing the concept of "schedule randomization". The proposed
research advances the design of secure real-time systems in three directions:
(a) by devising novel analytical models and a new class of schedulers to
obfuscate task execution orders, (b) constituting "metrics" to evaluate the
system's security, and (c) integrating randomization techniques into existing
real-time operating systems. The scheduler plugins and frameworks developed as a
part of this project will be publicly available. The curriculum materials and
pedagogical contents will also be made available to the
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.