* 2138307
* Track 3: COre National Ecosystem for CyberinfrasTructure (CONECT)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Amy Schuele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 04/30/2027
* USD 20,059,355.00

The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign team provides operations and
integration services as part of the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination
Ecosystem: Services &amp; Support (ACCESS) program. Science and engineering
research and education increasingly relies on a seamlessly integrated, secure,
and robust ecosystem of advanced computing and data technologies and human
expertise. The COre National Ecosystem for CyberinfrasTructure (CONECT) project
delivers innovative integrations across the NSF-funded cyberinfrastructure
ecosystem in the areas of operations, data and networking, and cybersecurity.
CONECT uses agile mechanisms to integrate the rapidly diversifying set of non-
traditional resources that previously have been left on the fringes of the
national cyberinfrastructure. CONECT builds upon the successes of its
predecessors and moves toward a more agile, dynamic, and inclusive
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CONECT introduces and coordinates a framework-
based approach to ecosystem-wide integration using step-by-step integration
roadmaps and modular concepts that enable entirely new kinds of
cyberinfrastructure resources to fully participate in the coordinated national
cyberinfrastructure. Integral to this new approach is the Information Sharing
Platform for sharing cyberinfrastructure integration and operations information
between people, while also enabling cyberinfrastructure components to discover
and securely access integrated resources and other components; increased network
reliability enabled by expanded metrics insights and availability; opportunities
for more control over data transfer such as transfer scheduling and network
programmability; new Cybersecurity Governance Council and coordination groups;
modern authentication strategies and technologies; and focus on broad protection
of ACCESS resources through the sharing of cybersecurity threat
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further community engagement, education,
and training efforts, CONECT hosts the Student Training and Engagement Program
(STEP) that provides students with training on marketable skills in the areas of
operations, data and networking, and cybersecurity. CONECT STEP will promote the
development of a diverse, competitive STEM workforce by providing opportunities
to students, with a focus on recruiting and enrolling students from
underrepresented groups. Through these shared efforts, CONECT will democratize
participation in the cyberinfrastructure ecosystem, deliver more value at all
layers of the service and support stack, and enable the entire ACCESS program to
achieve success in advancing cyberinfrastructure that adopts new thinking and
transformative discoveries in all areas of science and engineering research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.