* 2138361
* Collaborative Research: Studies of light-responsive novel metal and lanthanide-based nanocomposites: X-ray radiation enhancing and radioluminescence properties
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Jessika Rojas, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 201,045.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials at the nanoscale have
evidenced a wide and remarkable set of properties that make them suitable for
many applications. The behavior of nanomaterials under various external stimuli,
such as temperature, mechanical forces, pH, etc., has been widely investigated.
However, the interaction of nanomaterials with ionizing radiation, such as
X-rays, remains largely unexplored. Investigating potential phenomena and
understanding the interaction mechanisms of ionizing radiation with matter at
the nanoscale is an unknown question in materials chemistry and will generate
valuable information to allow the use of such structures in nuclear science and
technology for applications in medicine, power transducers, energy storage,
radiation sensors, and actuators. This collaborative research proposal will
investigate a novel class of multicomponent nanomaterials responsive to both low
and high energy X-rays. This research will have a tremendous educational impact
on the Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering program at Virginia Commonwealth
University (VCU). The new knowledge in materials and radiation chemistry,
advanced nanomaterials synthesis, and manufacturing will be disseminated in the
undergraduate and graduate courses. The research proposed here will also be a
significant boon for the nuclear science at James Madison University (JMU) and
will include undergraduates in the interdisciplinary-research projects. The
diverse experience the students will gain while working on this
interdisciplinary project will create a multitude of opportunities for those
seeking careers in nuclear engineering, applied photon science, nanoscience,
accelerator physics, or medical physics, as well as for those directly entering
the workforce in nuclear industry or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will advance both the
fundamental understanding of the underlying mechanism of radiation dose
enhancement and the radioluminescence response upon the nanocomposites
interacting with high-energy photons. The work will build upon the theory of
radiation interaction with matter and expand on the surface and interfacial
effects in aqueous media that lead to the radiation enhancement phenomenon. This
project focuses on three key areas: 1) Expand on the controlled synthesis of
multicomponent nanomaterials to explore their mechanisms of interaction with
ionizing radiation; 2) Investigate their radioluminescence and radiation
enhancing properties; 3) Implement computational models based on Monte Carlo
simulations to assess the contribution of the physical enhancement to the
radiosensitization properties of the nanomaterials based on their chemical
compositions and morphologies. The experimental work will involve chemical,
electrochemical, and spectroscopic techniques to quantify reactive species
involved in the radiation enhancement and the materials' optical properties.
Computational work will be carried out using GEANT4 particle transport code to
model the interaction of the X-rays with the studied nanostructures. Ultimately,
this research will establish correlations between the material structure and
properties in the solid-state, specifically considering the effects of the X-ray
parameters such as the energy spectrum of the X-ray beam and the rate at which
the energy is delivered to the system have on the behavior of the materials
systems. Overall, the proposed experimental and computational tools will lead to
an understanding of the structure-property relationships of the nanomaterials
and will advance the synthesis, evaluation, and simulation of radiation
enhancing and radioluminescent nanomaterials to enable their implementation in
various fields. Overall, both the undergraduate and graduate students involved
in this work will have the opportunity to get hands-on experience in an
accelerator-based environment at the JMU's Madison Accelerator Laboratory while
participating in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research both at VCU and
JMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.