* 2138150
* I-Corps:  Interactive Software for Hyperspectral Image Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Mikhail Berezin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to simplify
the workflow, reduce analysis time, and enable deep searching capabilities
across hyperspectral datasets using a new computational platform. Hyperspectral
imaging, or chemical imaging, is the combination of spectroscopy and digital
imaging. The proposed system incorporates advanced imaging and machine learning
algorithms to streamline data processing and enable users to focus on the
application itself, rather than spending time and money on developing image
processing algorithms. Hyperspectral imaging is broadly used to diagnose
diseases and measure a patient's response to therapy, to enhance product quality
by enabling optical sorters to identify and remove defective products, and to
identify minerals from drill cores and remote sensing. A potential early
application for the software platform will be in agriculture to identify early
stress in crops, assess soil health, quantify water resources, and predict
harvest yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
software platform for deep mining of data derived from hyperspectral imaging.
The system performs several essential operations in the spectral imaging domain
and enables advanced image analysis for users across a range of technical
proficiencies. The strength of the proposed software lies in its intuitive
design that enables the user to perform high level data analysis from image
processing to machine learning via a visual, interactive interface. Built around
a collection of current and proprietary spectral imaging algorithms, the
software facilitates the search of hidden information inside large datasets,
providing broad improvements in data analysis. The package can be operated
without prior programming skills and allows most currently used data formats to
be processed in real time. The interactivity, object identification, and machine
learning algorithms enable high efficiency during analysis of hyperspectral
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.