* 2138523
* ERI: In-Situ Fabrication of Dual-Template Imprinted Nanocomposites for Simultaneous Detection of Glucose and Cortisol
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Yixin Liu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,972.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People with diabetes are 2-3 times
more likely to have depression than people without diabetes. Meanwhile,
depressive or anxiety symptoms, often associated with elevated cortisol (the
“stress hormone”), can lead to the onset of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Monitoring
both glucose and cortisol levels regularly in a cost-effective and effortless
way is highly desired to manage diabetes and stress, and prevent prediabetes
from progressing to full-blown T2D. Enzyme-based glucose sensors monopolize the
current glucose monitor industry, and the traditional detection of cortisol is
carried out in centralized laboratory settings based on immunoassays using
antibodies and enzymes. Natural receptors such as enzymes and antibodies often
suffer from high cost, poor stability, and complexity. This project aims to
develop an enzyme-free and antibody-free electrochemical sensor to
simultaneously detect glucose and cortisol coupled with machine learning
techniques. The knowledge gained from this research will lead to low-cost
biosensing devices and manufacturing processes that will not only increase
access to decentralized, personalized, and preventive healthcare but may also be
applied to other chemicals, biomarkers, and pathogens detection. This project
will contribute significantly to workforce training by promoting the
interdisciplinary research of sensing, computing, and machine learning-based
data analytics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term research goal
is to develop a low-cost, easy-to-manufacture and high-performance biosensing
technology based on electropolymerized MIPs (e-MIPs) as the platform to detect
biomarkers in human biofluids for decentralized diagnostics and personal health
monitoring. Towards this goal, the aim of this ERI project is to pilot an in-
situ fabrication procedure to construct an enzyme-free and e-MIPs-based
electrochemical sensor to simultaneously detect glucose and cortisol with high
sensitivity and selectivity. The proposed sensor consists of metal/metal oxide
(M/MO) nanostructures to mimic enzymes’ catalytic activity for glucose oxidation
and a molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) to mimic antibodies’ selective
biomolecular recognition for glucose and cortisol. The project will explore a
fully in-situ fabrication procedure to synthesize and integrate functional
nanomaterials with MIPs directly on the electrode’s surface. This process is
fast, facile, and highly reproducible, and the sensor is immediately ready for
use without further processing. The proposed sensor is designed to provide
distinct dual signals correlated with cortisol and glucose concentrations, which
can be quantified simultaneously by a well-configured machine learning model.
The novel dual-sensing mechanism will establish a new path to enable multiplex
detection leveraging upon the powerful inference capability of machine learning.
This project will also deliver an in-depth understanding of the critical factors
that impact the sensing performance, which will provide valuable guidelines for
future MIPs design for biosensors. Low cost and high performance of MIPs, facile
fabrication process, microfluidic-integration readiness, and multiplex detection
capability all together will lead to cost-effective biosensors and biodevices
not only for Point-of-Care (POC) diagnosis and personal health monitoring but
also for other applications such as smart agriculture, water quality, and food
safety monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.