* 2138062
* Molecular, Biochemical, and Structural Studies of the Mechanism of S-RNase-Based Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Teh-hui Kao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

Most flowering plant species produce flowers with male and female reproductive
organs (anther and pistil) located in close proximity in the same flowers. This
arrangement is conducive to self-fertilization, where pollen from the anther
lands on the pistil and germinates, leading to fertilization of the ovule,
followed by seed development. As plants cannot move freely to select mates, they
have evolved a variety of strategies to prevent deleterious inbreeding. Self-
incompatibility (SI) is one such strategy, by which the pistil rejects
genetically identical self-pollen and only accepts non-self pollen for
fertilization. SI is thought to be a major factor for the explosive success of
flowering plants. Two fundamental questions are: how does a pistil distinguish
self- and non-self pollen, and how does this self/non-self recognition result in
specific rejection of self-pollen? Multiple mechanisms have been adopted by
flowering plants to achieve this goal. The PI has been using Petunia inflata as
a model to study a SI mechanism found in Solanaceae and two other families. In
this project, the PI and his collaborator will use molecular, biochemical,
genetic, genomic, and structural approaches to study this mechanism, employed by
pollen, to mediate degradation of variants of a toxic protein produced by non-
self pistils to allow outcrossing and to leave untouched the variant produced by
self-pistils, allowing these pistils to destroy self-pollen tubes. The results
have wider implications for the study of other biological systems employing
self/non-self recognition. If the SI machinery could be reconstituted in crop
plants to facilitate hybrid seed production, this would have tremendous
agronomic benefits. The PI will engage a postdoc, and graduate and undergraduate
students to prepare them for future professional careers and will host summer
research of high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
pollination in Petunia inflata is determined by the polymorphic S-locus;
matching of the pollen S-haplotype with either S-haplotype of the pistil results
in growth inhibition of pollen tubes. S-RNase encodes the pistil determinant;
multiple S-locus F-box (SLF) genes encode the pollen determinant. Based on the
collaborative non-self recognition model, each SLF interacts with some of its
non-self S-RNases to mediate their ubiquitination and degradation inside pollen
tubes, thereby opening the door to non-self fertilization. None of the SLFs
interact with their self S-RNase, allowing the S-RNAse to inhibit growth of
self-pollen tubes. All SLFs are assembled into SCF (Skp1-Cullin1-F-Box protein)
complexes, each containing self-incompatibility (SI)-specific Cullin1 (PiCUL1-P
or PiCUL1-B) and Skp1 (PiSSK1) subunits, and a canonical Rbx1. This project will
study three themes: SCFSLF-S-RNase interactions, nature of SCFSLF, and
regulatory proteins of SCFSLF, SLF and S-RNase. Obj. I examines the role of two
amino acids of S2-SLF1 in its specific interaction with S3-RNase; identifies
protein(s) that is(are) required to stabilize the interaction between SCFS2-SLF1
and S3-RNase; determines the structure of SCFS2-SLF1:S3-RNase:X by Cryo-EM. Obj.
II uses organelle and cytosol markers to determine whether SLFs are localized to
the pollen tube cytosol. Obj. III examines the roles of the amino acids unique
to PiSSK1, PiCUL1-P, and PiCUL1-B in their function in SI; and models the
structure of SCFS2-SLF1. Obj. IV studies the proteins that may be involved in
regulating the dynamics of SCFSLF (activation of the complex and degradation of
SLFs). Obj. V examines the role of S-locus-localized PDIL (Protein Disulfide
Isomerase-Like) in SI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.