* 2138192
* RAPID: Identifying the Drivers of Optimal COVID-19 Allocation
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Alison Galvani, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 199,976.00

COVID-19 vaccines have been rapidly developed and deployed in many countries
including the United States. Globally, supply remains constrained, especially in
low-income countries. When supply is limited, vaccine allocation is often
prioritized based on age, a policy decision in the United States that was
supported by mathematical modeling. However, this allocation may not be ideal
for low-income countries with different demographics and which may have
substantially higher background immunity by the time vaccines become available.
Furthermore, several variants of concern (VOC) have emerged with higher
transmissibility, capable of immune evasion, or both. Such evolutionary shifts
in traits of dominant or rising VOC may also impact optimal vaccine allocations.
Similarly, if booster vaccines are required to prevent VOC in the US, optimal
allocation may be affected by widespread partially-protective vaccine-induced
immunity from the initial doses, compared to the largely unexposed populations
for which the initial models were constructed. This research will identify the
parameters which are most influential for determining the optimal vaccine
allocation, as well as the interplay between these parameters. The project will
have significant implications for informing policy globally for the COVID-19
pandemic. This project will also provide training opportunities for professional
personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To execute this project, researchers will
construct a dynamic transmission model of SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of
COVID-19, and integrate the model with an optimization algorithm that identifies
the vaccine allocation strategy most effective at reducing disease burden given
supply constraints. They will parameterize this model to a high-income country
and a low-income country scenario, two settings with diverse demography, social
contact patterns, and exposure histories. For both scenarios, the researchers
will evaluate whether optimal allocation is robust to changes in parameters
including background levels of natural or vaccine-induced immunity and vaccine
performance against key VOC. The researchers will also conduct sensitivity
analyses, including with regard to model design and geographic scale, as well as
empirical uncertainty in parameter values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
was funded in collaboration with the CDC to support rapid-response research
projects to further advance federal infectious disease modeling
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.