* 2138286
* Track 2: Customized Multi-tier Assistance, Training, and Computational Help (MATCH) for End User ACCESS to CI
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* James Griffioen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 04/30/2027
* USD 10,491,277.00

Customized Multi-tier Assistance, Training, and Computational Help (MATCH)
provides End User Support services as part of the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
Coordination Ecosystem: Services &amp; Support (ACCESS) program. NSF-supported
computational cyberinfrastructure (CI) has been highly successful in advancing
science and engineering over the last few decades. The use of CI has become
ubiquitous in research, from traditional fields such as bioinformatics,
computational chemistry and astrophysics, to new areas including text
interpretation, visual arts and other humanities. This shift is not only
happening in large research labs at major institutions, but also increasingly at
smaller institutions where researchers are also looking to make use of CI
resources. Along with that success, there have been significant changes to the
makeup and size of the user community, improvements to the underlying compute,
storage, and networking platforms used, and radically different methods by which
researchers and CI professionals communicate. These changes require a rethinking
of the role of user support services and how they are delivered. To address
this, MATCH proposes a new model for implementing user support services that
will encourage cost-effective, scalable support that can reach a broader
community. The MATCH project develops new approaches, content, services,
technologies, and expertise to make it easier for NSF CI users to find and
utilize the specific level and type of support needed to effectively carry out
their research. With this strategy, the MATCH project expands the reach and
impact of NSF CI, serving both traditional and new members of the research
computing and data community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MATCH approach comprises
three major themes: (1) leverage modern information delivery systems to simplify
user interfaces; (2) leverage experts from the community to develop training
materials and instructions that can dramatically reduce the user learning curve
for several increasingly important CI computational techniques; and (3) employ a
matchmaking service that will maintain a database of specialist mentors and
student mentees that can be matched with projects to provide the domain-specific
expertise needed to leverage ACCESS resources. Specifically, MATCH employs a new
ACCESS MATCH Portal (AMP) that will serve as the single front door for end users
to obtain guided support and assistance. Expert-monitored Q&amp;A platforms will
ensure user questions are accurately answered and addressed in a timely fashion,
and easy-to use user interfaces such as Open OnDemand and Pegasus will be
enhanced and improved to further simplify CI use and provide context directed
help when problems are encountered. The system matches community experts with
user needs to create documentation and other training materials or provides
personal interactions that address the current real world needs of ACCESS users.
By restructuring end user support, MATCH creates a multi-level infrastructure
capable of scaling to assist a growing research community with increasingly
specialized support needs, enabling new discoveries at the forefront of science
and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.