* 2138893
* OPP-PRF: Assessing the relationship among fire, temperature, and precipitation in the Arctic during the Pleistocene
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Emily Tibbett, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 285,631.00

Rising temperatures associated with increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentrations are causing more fire events globally, including in the Arctic.
Arctic fire events have regional impacts including changing the plant community
to those that are more flammable. In addition, the burning of previously frozen
Arctic soils can release stored carbon, adding more CO2 to the atmosphere. The
intensity and number of wildfires in a region are controlled mainly by
temperature and precipitation. Climate models can project future temperature
well but regional precipitation data are limited which hampers the ability to
accurately project Arctic wildfires. This study will compare wildfire frequency
to temperature and precipitation during times in the past that were not
influenced by human activity. The results can be used to improve regional Arctic
climate models of precipitation impact on fire frequency. Results of this study
will be communicated to policymakers to assist with decision making in response
to future warming. The project will generate educational materials and hands-on
science projects related to climate change and fire in the Arctic for outreach
to primary school students around the country through virtual classrooms. The
project will engage undergraduates through lab work, a conference presentation,
and a workshop for the Eureka! Summer Science Camp at the University of
Massachusetts which engages girls ages 12-18 to explore STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fire disturbances are predicted to increase in the Arctic
with rising temperatures while precipitation also impacts fire frequency and
intensity. Future projections show increases in temperature, precipitation, and
fire events. However, climate models are limited in their ability to reconstruct
precipitation, which inhibits estimates of fire frequency. In addition, it is
unclear if precipitation is the primary driver of fire frequency or if it works
in tandem with rising temperatures. Previous assessments of past Arctic fires
have produced contrasting results with both wetter and more arid conditions
being associated with an increase in fire. To address this, more precipitation
records that exclude the impact of human-induced fires are needed to constrain
potential feedbacks. This research will investigate variability in Arctic
climate through reconstructing precipitation, temperature, and fire throughout
the Pleistocene using organic geochemical techniques. Ocean Drilling Program
Site 647, located near southern Greenland, will be studied as this Site spans
known interglacials such as Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 11 and super interglacial
MIS 31-33. Sea surface temperatures (SST) generated from three different organic
geochemical techniques will be compared to concentrations of compounds produced
by burning biomass, such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
levoglucosan. These data will allow examination of time periods of increasing
wildfires in connection with the temperature history. The SST and fire biomarker
concentration will be compared to hydrogen isotopes (δ2H) of plant leaf waxes
from the same core, which provides additional information on moisture transport
pathways in the Arctic. The study will evaluate if higher temperatures during
interglacials result in more poleward moisture transport, which is reflected in
more enriched δ2H due to changes in moisture source as increasing temperatures
leads to wetter conditions in the Arctic. Overall, the use of multiple proxies
will generate new records spanning both glacial and interglacial periods across
the Pleistocene to assess variability in the relationships between temperature,
precipitation, moisture source, and fire in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.