* 2138985
* GOALI: Turnkey  Model  Predictive  Control: automated design, model identification, tuning, and monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* James Rawlings, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 314,467.00

The goal of this research is to develop an integrated framework for design,
model identification, tuning, and monitoring of industrial model-based control
systems. New techniques will be developed to identify models from process
measurements that enable practitioners to tune the control system to the
application of interest. The proposed methodology is termed turnkey because
process identification experiments and subsequent control system tuning
parameter calculations will be automated. An added benefit of the turnkey
approach is to remove the large variability introduced in current control system
vendor products that require user experience and simulation studies to select
these tuning parameters. The proposed control technology can be readily
monitored to detect changes in the disturbances to the process and suggest
intervention strategies. This automated monitoring of the control system is
absent in industrial approaches in use today, providing a significant
opportunity for improved business performance across many industrial sectors. In
collaboration with the projectâ€™s industrial partner, Eastman Chemical, the
proposed approach will be demonstrated on a full-scale, commercial, industrial
chemical process. The approach also will be demonstrated in inexpensive
university control laboratory experiments so that undergraduate students can be
exposed to state-of-the-art control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intuitive
notion of online, repeated optimization of a model-based forecast as a means to
design an automatic feedback control system has now taken hold in most advanced
control technologies applied in the chemical process industries (e.g., model
predictive control - MPC) as well as many other industrial sectors that include
robotic motion control, flight autopilot systems, and land vehicle guidance
control. Since the difficult and time-consuming element of controller deployment
is obtaining models, the intellectual merit of the proposed research is to
advance the state of the art in identifying linear actuator-to-sensor models
plus the integrating disturbance models required for MPC. This combination of
models is required in essentially all industrial applications, but no integrated
theory is available for this task. Providing a turnkey system to move directly
from data to values for all tuning parameters and demonstrating its performance
on a challenging industrial process will enhance both the underlying fundamental
control theory as well as the transfer of this technology to complex industrial
manufacturing facilities. Although targeted to both traditional and new classes
of chemical process control applications, the modeling, design, and monitoring
methods developed in this research are sufficiently general to be applied to
automated manufacturing problems arising in any manufacturing facility having
production targets and constraints on materials, workflows, and
inventories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.