* 2138047
* Women in Cognitive Science: Networking, Visibility, and Career Pathways
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristi Multhaup, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,937.00

The goal of Women in Cognitive Science is to improve the visibility of women in
the field and to create an environment that invites discussion of the issues
that all scientists, but women in particular, may be required to negotiate in
the trajectory of creating and sustaining a successful career. A combination of
online events, networking opportunities, and virtual or in-person workshops are
designed for women in cognitive science, especially women in the early stages of
their academic career. The workshops focus on building networks for success,
promoting visibility of women scientists and their stories, and exploring
pathways to academic and non-academic careers in cognitive science. A robust
suite of online events will take place throughout the year and provide ongoing
opportunities for women in cognitive science to build opportunities for research
collaboration, seek mentoring across career stages, and engage in discussion of
strategies for improving visibility and career advancement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual and in-person workshops will take place at
meetings of the Psychonomic Society, the Cognitive Science Society, the
Association for Psychological Sciences, and the American Psychological
Association. The workshops will take the form of public forums with invited
speaker-panelists to initiate discussion about best practices for the
professional advancement of women in cognitive science at the individual and
institutional level. These workshops will include online engagement to increase
exposure, and will also feature "speed-mentoring" for personalized assistance to
early career researchers. By partnering with established societies, the WiCS
group will maximize the opportunity for systemic change that addresses the
career challenges of a group that continues to be underrepresented in senior
academic and industry positions in the cognitive
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.