* 2138868
* ERI: Representation of Braille Characters and Graphical Patterns using Dynamic Tactile Displays
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Dhanya Nair, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2024
* USD 187,881.00

Braille displays are commercially available assistive devices that help the
blind/visually impaired (VI) access digital information. However, braille
displays are very expensive and are generally designed to display text only. The
main reason for the high cost of the braille displays is the large number of
braille cells used to provide tactile feedback. This research aims to identify
how braille text and graphics can be effectively presented on the same platform
integrated with a smartphone, using a small grid of tactile pins, at a much-
reduced cost. A mobile tactile display will be developed that converts the
images touched on the mobile screen to tactile images presented onto the
fingertips of the user. This will help the blind/VI user feel the trends in
charts and map directions providing access to vital information which currently
needs to be printed out on embossed papers. Representing both braille and
graphics on a display attached to a mobile device will help people with visual
impairment explore a touchscreen as effectively as their sighted counterparts
even in noisy environments where audio feedback is less reliable. This project
will also address the braille literacy crisis by engaging the younger VI
generation with tactile information presented through charts and trends and
helping them realize the significance of braille over audio representations
alone. The understanding gained from this research will enable the future
development of wearable tactile displays and tactile texture representation on
smartphones. The mobile tactile display will be tested on both VI and sighted
users to study their adaptability towards the system. This project will also
provide undergraduate and graduate engineering students an opportunity to
participate in the complete development cycle of an assistive device, working in
close collaboration with the VI individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to integrate braille and graphics on the same platform,
using a small dynamic tactile grid. This project will characterize user
acceptability of a dynamic tactile system when the braille or graphical patterns
are presented in a personalized manner (calibrated for user preferred vibration,
slip-speed, etc.). An initial 6x6 refreshable tactile grid has been developed,
with pin spacing adhering to braille standards and resolution capable of
presenting straight lines and curves (or simple graphics). This initial
prototype will be utilized to perform systematic studies on how VI read braille
and graphics presented to stationary or semi-stationary fingers. The tactile
patterns will be presented using different methods - sequential movements,
column-wise, as well as simultaneously on the tactile display. The braille and
graphics patterns will also be presented using stationary and vibrating pins,
with and without sliding motion. A comparative study, between the finger
movement while exploring freely on paper versus on the tactile display, will be
performed to understand system limitations and possible enhancements. The
effectiveness of each presentation method will be evaluated based on user
response, response speed, comprehension, and likeability. The secondary goal of
this project is the knowledge generation on how sighted users interact with
passive tactile displays and their adaptability towards such systems. A mobile
tactile display will be developed with software that converts touchscreen images
into low-resolution simple graphics that continuously transfer graphics to
tactile display. The efficacy of this system will be evaluated on 20 VI
subjects, plus a few sighted users, to assess their ease of use, and ability to
read and comprehend both braille text and mobile
graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.