* 2138993
* Collaborative Research: ANT LIA:  Cumacean -Omics to Measure Mode of Adaptation to Antarctica (COMMAA)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Sarah Gerken, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2026
* USD 358,453.00

Part I: General description&lt;br/&gt;Cumaceans are small crustaceans, commonly
known as comma shrimp, that live in muddy or sandy bottom environments in marine
waters. Cumaceans are important for the diet of fish, birds, and even grey
whales. This research program is assessing cumacean diversity and adaptation in
different regions of Antarctica and evaluate this organisms adaptations using
molecular methods to a changing Antarctic region. The research stands to
significantly advance understanding of invertebrate adaptations to cold, stable
habitats and responses to changes in those habitats. In addition, this project
is advancing understanding of the biology of Cumacea, a globally diverse and
biologically important group of animals. Targeted training of early career
students and professionals in cumacean biology, molecular techniques, and
bioinformatics is included as part of the program. A workshop at the Los Angeles
County Natural History Museum will also train 10 additional graduate students,
with a focus on training for underrepresented groups. Project outreach also
includes social media, outreach to schools in very diverse school districts in
Anchorage, AK, and creation of museum events and an exhibit at the Alabama
Museum of Natural History. Finally, engagement by the team in activities related
to the National Ocean Science Bowl promotes broad engagement with high school
students for Antarctic science learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to use
cumaceans as a model system to explore invertebrate adaptations to the changing
Antarctic. This project is leveraging integrative taxonomy, functional,
comparative and evolutionary genomics, and phylogenetic comparative methods to
understand the true diversity of Cumacea in the Antarctic. The team is
identifying genes and gene families experiencing expansions, selection, or
significant differential expression, generating a broadly sampled and robust
phylogenetic framework for the Antarctic Cumacea based on transcriptomes and
genomes, and exploring rates and timing of diversification. The project is
providing important information related to gene gain/loss, positive selection,
and differential gene expression as a function of adaptation of organisms to
Antarctic habitats. Phylogenomic analyses is providing a robust phylogenetic
framework for understudied Southern Ocean Cumacea. At the start of this project,
only one Antarctic transcriptome was published for this organism. This project
is generating sequenced genomes from 8 species, about 250 transcriptomes from
about 70 species, and approximately 470 COI and 16S amplicon barcodes from about
100 species. Curated morphological reference collections will be deposited at
the Smithsonian, Los Angeles County Natural History Museum and in the New
Zealand National Water and Atmospheric Research collection at Greta Point to
assist future researchers in identification of Antarctic cumaceans. Beyond the
immediate scope of the current project, the genomic resources will be able to be
leveraged by members of the polar biology and invertebrate zoology communities
for diverse other uses ranging from PCR primer development to inference of
ancestral population sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.