* 2138008
* Quantum Mechanics of Interacting Electron Fluid in Berry-curved Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Dmytro Pesin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2024
* USD 255,427.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
studies of experimentally measurable manifestations of quantum mechanics in the
collective behavior of electrons in solids. Quantum mechanics has proven crucial
to explaining the behavior of this electron fluid. However, more often than not,
macroscopic properties (e.g., electrical conduction) of the electron fluid can
be described quite classically. For instance, the equations describing viscous
flow of the electronic liquid are very similar to those that describe water,
showing essentially classical behavior. The present project goes beyond this
traditional point of view in developing a quantum theory for electron
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal investigator will focus on the
interaction of magnetic order with higher-energy states in three-dimensional
analogs of graphene, called Weyl and Dirac semimetals. He will study electron
motion in the presence of a magnetic field on the edge of a two-dimensional
"topological insulator" and deviations from the classical equations for viscous
fluid flow. These topics will bring out the quantum effects in solids as a
characterization tool for their microscopic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will involve graduate and undergraduate students and will facilitate
their training in modern methods of condensed-matter theory. The educational
efforts will also be directed toward implementation of modern classroom
techniques (e.g. the "flipped" classroom) into the teaching practices of the PI.
The outreach program will be directed toward training high-school students and
acquainting them with the demands and traditions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to provide
theoretical insights into the interaction of electronic degrees of freedom with
macroscopic order parameters as well as transport and hydrodynamic properties of
the interacting electronic fluid in (disordered) gapless topological phases,
with a strong focus on experimentally observable phenomena. The research program
contains three main thrusts. The common thread connecting these thrusts is the
quantum mechanics of electrons on the lattice, manifested through geometric
phases. The thrusts are&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Anomaly-induced electric control
of magnetic degrees of freedom in Weyl materials: the PI will develop the theory
of interaction between the electronic degrees of freedom of a topological metal
with a macroscopic magnetization. Specifically, he will focus on i) the anomaly-
induced magnetic anisotropy for anomaly detection and magnetization control, ii)
the theory of current-induced spin torques in 3D topological metals, and iii)
the manifestations of band topology in textured magnetic phases and magnetic
excitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Nonlinear transport and magnetotransport
phenomena in Weyl and other geometric metals: the PI will study nonlinear
phenomena rooted in band geometry (not having classical "Drude" analogs) in 3D
and 1D gapless systems. The specific directions will include i) developing a
general theory of E2B-corrections to transport in metals, ii) non-linear
anomalous Hall effect in disordered Weyl semimetals, and iii) the theory of
kinetic magnetoelectric effect and nonlinear transport on 1D topological and
Rashba edges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Anomalous hydrodynamics in crystals: the
PI will develop the theory of quantum effects in electron-electron collisions
and their influence on electronic hydrodynamics. The specific directions PI
Pesin will pursue within this thrust focus on i) anomalous transport in the
hydrodynamic regime, in particular in multi-valley Berry-curved
(semi-)conductors, ii) the anomalous Hall viscosity from electron-electron
collisions in gapless systems, and iii) chiral vortical effect in
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods of the project will include standard
tools of many-body theory, including the Keldysh diagrammatic technique and the
quantum kinetic equation approach to quantum transport, as well as some
numerical modeling. The results of the program will be used to provide guidance
for materials research, paying particular attention to the realistic aspects of
systems with nontrivial topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.