* 2138929
* ERI: Precision Dosing in Critical Care: An Automated Modeling and Control Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Hossein Mirinejad, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This Engineering Research Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables
patient-specific fluid resuscitation therapies in critical care of hemorrhage, a
leading cause of deaths from traumatic injuries, thereby promoting the progress
of science and advancing the national health and welfare. Death caused by
hemorrhagic injuries may be preventable if critical care interventions are
urgently and effectively deployed to restore lost blood volume. Fluid infusion
dosages, including both rate and timing of administration, notably impact
resuscitation outcomes. Under-dosing strategies are inefficient in restoring
cardiac functions, whereas overly aggressive dosing regimens may lead to serious
adverse events such as soft clots, thereby increasing mortality rates. Most
existing dosing techniques are based on one-size-fits-all models or a small
number of dose-response profiles. Such approaches sacrifice the control
performance at the expense of robustness against inter-patient variability. A
framework for identifying the correct dosage for each individual patient is
currently lacking. This project will address this deficiency by developing a
data-driven, integrated modeling and control framework for precision dosing that
is able to resolve individual differences in dose response and predict optimal
patient-specific dosing strategies, even with limited and noisy measurements.
The knowledge advanced by this project may not only improve patient outcomes,
but also significantly reduce costs associated with critical care services.
Efforts aiming to attract and train students in STEM will include K-12 outreach
using a fluid resuscitation testbed, as well as research experiences for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make
fundamental contributions to the science of physiological closed-loop control
systems: complex cyber-physical systems that involve interactions between
patient monitors, therapeutic devices, complex patient physiology, and clinical
users. It will achieve this outcome by first developing and validating a new
system identification framework that uses a statistical bound on the prediction
error to constrain a robust nonlinear state space model of a patient-specific
dose response. Next, it will formulate an automated, computationally efficient
control strategy for achieving the desired outcome subject to the predicted
dose-response dynamics, initial and boundary conditions, and mixed state-control
path constraints. Finally, feasibility and performance will be assessed against
real-world clinical datasets of human subject dose-response measurements.
Evaluation will be conducted both using computer simulations and by implementing
computational models of physiologic variables and computer-based fluid
resuscitation controllers in a hardware-in-the-loop testing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.