* 2138250
* Workshops: Broadening Participation of Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the NSF Research Traineeship and Innovations in Graduate Education Programs
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kejun Wen, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,879.00

This award to Jackson State University is supported by the National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) and Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) programs. The project team will bring together members of the Carnegie
Doctoral Universities High Research (R2) Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), experts in graduate education, graduate students, other
HBCUs, and NSF program officers. Two workshops will be organized to address
challenges related to increasing the number of STEM Ph.Ds. from underserved
populations and providing support and training to investigators from the
participating institutions to generate creative proposals for the NRT and IGE
programs. The workshops are intended to provide information, understanding, and
training on how new graduate models can be created to increase the recruitment,
retention, and graduation of minority Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project endeavors to develop strategies and critical recommendations that will
address growing national concerns about the number of African Americans applying
to Ph.D. programs in STEM. By promoting the close interaction of NSF program
officers with a coalition of R2 HBCU graduate education stakeholders, the
workshops are intended to increase interest in and awareness of the NRT and IGE
programs and the number of proposals submitted by R2 HBCU institutions. The
specific goals of the workshops are to 1) understand and investigate how to
leverage relationships between R2 HBCU institutions and the NRT and IGE
programs; 2) investigate current models and best practices between the coalition
of R2 HBCUs that may support recruitment, retention, and positioning of Ph.D.
STEM students into the U.S. workforce, and 3) provide proposal writing training
to support the production of competitive proposals to the NRT and IGE programs
to support these models. Additionally, this project will be a path forward to
filling in the gaps in outreach to and communications with R2 HBCUs by the NSF,
which can lead to greater diversity in the STEM fields. The model that results
from this project can then be tested and applied to other NSF programs where R2
HBCUs are underrepresented in funding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research needs. The Innovations
in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate
education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test, and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.