* 2138674
* ERI: Mechanical Behavior of Dualphase Complex Concentrated Alloys at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Zhe Fan, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 177,460.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiative (ERI) project is to study a special type of alloy called complex
concentrated alloys (CCAs). CCAs are materials recently found to have superior
mechanical properties. Materials that have high strength at high temperature are
highly desirable for many engineering applications. CCAs consist of multiple
principal elements and include high-entropy alloys, which contain five or more
principal elements. CCAs have been researched as potential structural alloys for
high temperature applications, such as heat exchangers, gas turbines, and
nuclear reactors. Generally, single-phase face-centered cubic CCAs have low
strength at high temperatures. Meanwhile, single-phase body-centered cubic CCAs
are brittle at room temperature. Dualphase (face-centered cubic and body-
centered cubic) CCAs capture the best of the features. They can exhibit both
good ductility at room temperature and high strength at high temperatures.
However, the current understanding of the mechanical behavior in dualphase CCAs
is limited. This project aims to investigate mechanical behaviors and find the
best ways to improve the strengths of dualphase CCAs at various temperatures.
The knowledge learned from this project could lead to the design of dualphase
CCAs for high temperature applications. The multi-disciplinary research will
provide graduate students with diverse training in various engineering fields.
This project will also positively impact research opportunities of
underrepresented groups and engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to fundamentally understand how interface,
microstructure, and chemistry affect the strength and deformability of dualphase
CCAs from room temperature to high temperatures. Specifically, the PI will (1)
investigate the interplay between temperature-dependent barrier strength of
face-centered cubic and body-centered cubic CCAs; (2) reveal the role of
interface on dislocation transmission and plasticity transfer between phases;
(3) elucidate the effects of dislocation activities on fracture resistance of
dualphase CCAs. To address these scientific questions, this project will employ
site-specific nanoindentation to probe the mechanical behavior and deformation
mechanisms in dualphase CCAs at various temperatures and perform detailed
surface morphology and microstructure characterization through high resolution
scanning probe microscopy and electron microscopy. The results of this project
can provide knowledge to alleviate the brittle failure of body-centered cubic
CCAs at room temperature through interfaces and enhance the high temperature
strength of dualphase CCAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.