* 2138903
* ERI: Exploration of the Design, Dynamics and Control of Self-Decoupled,  Cable-Driven Serial Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Tao Shen, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 198,978.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant supports research that explores novel design, modeling
and control methods for serial robots with fully cable-driven actuation. A
serial robot is like a human arm. It consists of a series of rigid rod-like
objects (analogous to human upper arm and forearm) and consecutively
interconnected through joints (like an elbow). Serial robots are relatively
compact in size and are easy to operate. Thus, serial robots are widely used in
industrial automation, space exploration, medical services and many other
applications. However, use of serial robots is quite limited in settings with
restricted space to move and harsh environmental conditions. Space limitations
dictate that robotic structures must be small, compact, and strong at the same
time. These requirements are difficult to achieve with current robotics designs
containing motors at their joints. While harsh conditions, such as heat or
chemical exposure, can damage the electronic components and actuators directly
installed on robotic joints. The fully cable-driven robot considered in this
project will provide a potential solution to these two challenges. This design
will situate electronic components and motors/actuators far away from any harsh
elements and utilize cables/wires to transmit the power. However, the joints of
a cable-driven serial robot are coupled by the cable transmission, and as such,
the rotation of one robotic joint affects the motion of the other joints, making
precise position control extremely challenging. This award supports fundamental
research that will identify solutions for overcoming motion coupling issues in
cable-driven serial robots, modeling the unique dynamics, and building a
controller suitable for enabling this dynamic modeling. The knowledge acquired
through this research will significantly enhance fundamental understanding of
the control dynamics in complex coupling mechanisms and support more widespread
use of cable-driven serial robots. The research teamâ€™s partnership with medical
equipment industry will expand societal benefits of this work to medical
robotics, thus advancing US economic prosperity and well-being. This robotics
research will also help to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in research, positively impact engineering education, and prepare students with
industrial workforce skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained through
this research will improve the understanding of cable-driven actuation in serial
robots, generate a method to realize the self-decoupling of the cable
transmission, and create a paradigm for modeling and controlling cable-driven
serial robots. In particular, the work (1) will evaluate the hypothesis that
coupling can counter coupling to realize motion decoupling, and develop an
advanced self-decoupling mechanism based on this hypothesis; (2) will model the
robotic dynamics and build a force-position integrated controller for high-
performance control; and (3) will prototype a robot based on this research to
perform evaluation analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.