* 2138982
* Conference: 2022 Protein Folding Dynamics Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Naomi Latorraca, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2022
* USD 6,000.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to attend the 2022 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Protein Folding
Dynamics, which will be held in Galveston, Texas on January 8-9, 2022. This GRS
brings together a diverse group of early career scientists, including graduate
students, postdocs and those transitioning to independent positions, to share
their research with peers and broaden their scientific networks in the broad
field of protein folding. This seminar allows early career scientists to discuss
current research through seminars and poster sessions, informally exchange new
ideas, technologies, and resources, and develop their professional network.
Hence, this conference will facilitate training and professional development of
the next generation of scientists, including underrepresented minorities, in the
field of protein folding. The GRS program also includes a panel discussion on
mentoring. The GRS also serves as a career development experience for the co-
chairs and organizers who are postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining how protein sequence gives rise to
conformational ensembles that encode their dynamics represents an active area of
investigation in molecular biophysics. This Gordon Research Symposium will
further the field of protein folding by addressing several essential topics,
while highlighting how combined experimental and computational research can lead
to breakthroughs in scientific understanding. The GRS serves as a vital link for
investigators around the world to share their latest, often unpublished
discoveries, discuss pioneering ideas and launch new collaborations. Topics at
the forefront of the field will be covered, including protein folding pathways,
structure, dynamics, and mechanism, intrinsically disordered proteins and
functional ensembles, sequence variation and mutational landscapes, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.