* 2138553
* ERI: A Fundamental Investigation of the Effectiveness of Cathode Regeneration Process for Spent Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Hosop Shin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the consumption of lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs) in the transportation and consumer electronic sectors rapidly
increases, the volume of spent LIBs requiring disposal or recycling is expected
to reach more than 11 million metric tons by 2030. However, less than 5% of
spent LIBs are currently recycled. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop an
environmentally friendly and economically viable LIB recycling technology to
manage the hazardous, albeit valuable, large volumes of spent LIBs. This project
will systematically explore a direct recycling process that could potentially
maximize the return value from end-of-life LIBs, aiming to recover and reuse the
most valuable cathode material in spent LIBs for new LIB manufacturing. The
outcomes of the project will facilitate the development of direct cathode
recycling that contributes to minimizing the environmental impacts of LIB
wastes, securing the future supply of battery raw materials, lowering the cost
of LIB production, and improving the sustainability of the LIB industry. The
research results will be broadly disseminated through academic journals,
conferences, science festivals, and educational videos, inspiring new ideas for
LIB recycling technologies and improving peopleâ€™s understanding of the economic
and environmental impacts of LIB recycling. Furthermore, students of various
education levels, especially underrepresented minorities and women in the STEM
fields, will be trained by providing hands-on laboratory experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to establish a
fundamental understanding of the effectiveness of direct recycling on spent
cathodes at different degrees of degradation. Given the fact that end-of-life
LIBs are generated under different cycling conditions, the spent cathodes are
expected to exhibit various levels of degradation that involve lithium loss,
irreversible phase transformation, inter/intragranular cracking, dissolution of
transition metals, and surface layer formation. To simulate the spent cathodes
at various degradation conditions and how they are regenerated by a direct
recycling process, different types of chemically delithiated cathodes are
synthesized, characterized, and regenerated. This project seeks to attain its
primary goal by pursuing two specific aims: (1) to examine the chemical,
structural, and electrochemical stabilities of chemically delithiated cathodes
during solvent-based separation processing and (2) to determine the
effectiveness of direct cathode regeneration for rejuvenating chemically
delithiated cathodes at different degradation extents. The findings from this
research will advance our understanding of the mechanisms behind direct cathode
recycling and accelerate the process development. The new knowledge gained from
this project will lay a solid foundation to guide the formulation of strategies
for effectively regenerating cathode materials from spent LIBs at different
state-of-health conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.