* 2138756
* ERI: Tailoring Piezoresistive Effect of Nanocomposites using Topological Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Long Wang, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/29/2024
* USD 194,734.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;Polymer nanocomposites hold significant
potential as multifunctional electronic components, which can provide tremendous
novel opportunities for advancing various applications, such as structural
health monitoring (SHM), healthcare, robotics, and national security and
economy. Among the unique properties of nanocomposites, strain sensitivity
(i.e., piezoresistive effect) has been commonly observed. High piezoresistive
effect of nanocomposites can remarkably benefit strain sensing in SHM, wearable
sensors, and robotics, among others. On the other hand, piezoresistive effect
can also be undesirable and hinder the applications of nanocomposites as
electronic components for flexible displays, energy harvesting, and multimodal
sensors. Therefore, the piezoresistive effect of nanocomposites needs to be
effectively designed and tuned to optimal ranges depending on target
functionality. Current design approaches mostly focus on engineering the
material components of nanocomposites, which generally entail empirical and
inefficient processes due to the complex process-structure-property
relationships of resulting material systems. To address this challenge, this
research aims to establish an innovative design strategy based on topological
design to engineer the piezoresistive behavior of nanocomposites in a
predictable manner. This project will provide hands-on research opportunities to
engage underrepresented and first-generation college students in developing
nanomaterial-based electronics. In addition, a new course and several
multidisciplinary capstone design projects will be developed based on this
research project, which will enrich and improve the engineering education at a
minority-serving institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the correlation between the piezoresistive effect of nanocomposites
and topological design by focusing on three research thrusts. First, two main
categories of topologies, including stress-concentrating and stress-releasing
topologies, will be designed for altering the stress distribution in the
material system. Their mechanical responses to external loads will be
characterized via finite element analysis and load tests. Second, carbon
nanotube-, graphene-, and silver nanowire-based piezoresistive nanocomposites
will be fabricated using additive manufacturing techniques and be patterned to
form the pre-designed topologies. Electromechanical experiments will be
conducted to characterize and compare the piezoresistive response of the
patterned nanocomposites. In addition, statistical analysis will be performed to
investigate the correlation between the piezoresistive behavior and the
topological design. Third, to better understand the piezoresistive performance
of patterned nanocomposites, stochastic material models will be developed by
statistically reconstructing the microstructures of nanocomposites based on
microscopic images. Then, the material models will be used for simulating the
electromechanical responses of different topologies. The simulation results will
be compared with the experimental measurements. This research will generate new
fundamental knowledge on the effects of topological design on the piezoresistive
behavior of nanocomposites, which will enhance the design efficiency and
performance of nanomaterial-based multifunctional
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.