* 2138606
* ERI: A Novel Solution to Enable High-Voltage DC-Links in Electric Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Hui Zhang, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 187,599.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The history of electric vehicles
can be traced back to the 19th century. After the initial rise, electric
vehicles declined with the mass production of cheaper gasoline cars. Until the
last century, electric vehicles came back into sight due to fossil fuel shortage
and environmental concerns. Besides reducing fossil fuel consumption and
environmental benefits, electric vehicles offer numerous other benefits such as
increasing fuel diversity, providing opportunities to integrate more renewable
energy into the grid, and offering individual benefits including better driving
experience and less expensive and frequent maintenance, etc. Today, the wider
adoption of electric vehicles will rely on future technological advances to
further reduce the cost and charging time of electric vehicles and increase
efficiency, power density, and performance at the same time. One of such
technologies is to use high-voltage DC links in electric vehicles. It has been
reported that using higher DC voltage in electric vehicles gives higher power
density, less weight, smaller components, less loss and heat, and faster
charging, etc. Thus, using a high DC link voltage has become a new design trend
in the electric vehicle industry. The proposed project will focus on the power
conversion solutions in electric vehicles to address the challenges encountered
in this transition from low-voltage DC links to high-voltage DC links. It will
advance the power conversion technology for electric vehicles and other similar
power conversion systems, which eventually will improve the United Stateâ€™s
competitiveness in the global electric vehicle market, reduce fossil fuel
consumption and CO2 emissions by promoting the adoption of electric vehicles,
and increase energy diversity and foster national security and energy
independence. The education components in the project will enhance engineering
education and produce a highly skilled and qualified engineering workforce,
attract more students in STEM learning as the future workforce in the high-need
areas, and help improve the competencies of future STEM teachers. The project
will also broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, particularly,
first-generation college students and children in poverty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a cost-effective,
highly efficient, and easy-retrofit inverter technique to facilitate the faster
development and adoption of high-voltage DC links in electric vehicles. More
specifically, the goal will be achieved by 1) developing less costly traction
inverter solutions for electric vehicles with a high-voltage DC link by using
four-switch three-phase inverter topology, 2) investigating and optimizing the
control and efficiency of the inverters using simulations, 3) developing
prototypes of the proposed inverters and demonstrating their performance as a
comparison to traditional solutions to validate the proposed method, and 4)
exploring the applications of silicon carbide devices in the proposed inverters
for further efficiency improvement and conducting comparative studies in these
methods. The project will advance the knowledge of the proposed inverters and
providing mathematical insights on their analysis and control. It will also
provide a novel, original, and potentially transformative solution to enable
high voltage DC-links in electric vehicles, which can facilitate the faster
development of high-voltage DC-link designs. The technology that will be
developed in the project can also benefit many other systems such as solar and
wind generation, energy storage, utilities, and industrial drive, etc. by
providing a low-cost alternative. Besides, it provides the possibility to
overcome the cost barrier of wide-bandgap devices and promote their applications
for better efficiency and more energy savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.