* 2138938
* ERI - Simulation methods for competitive adsorption in Bronsted acidic zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Tyler Josephson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2024
* USD 207,777.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of synthetic
zeolites for use as catalysts and adsorbents is a multi-billion-dollar industry.
Zeolites are materials having molecule-scale pores that enable catalytic
applications in petroleum refining, automotive emissions treatment, and biomass
processing. Zeolites frequently catalyze chemical reactions in water, as is the
case when producing renewable fuels and chemicals from biomass. The interactions
of water molecules with the zeolite catalysts are incredibly complex, but it is
important to understand how these systems behave so that zeolites can be
optimized for application-based performance. Unfortunately, existing
computational modeling tools struggle to both accurately and efficiently predict
how complex chemical mixtures interact with zeolite catalytic active sites. This
project will develop simulation techniques that will enable orders-of-magnitude
improvements over current approaches, thereby generating fundamental knowledge
of how water interacts with zeolite catalyst active sites. Symbolic regression,
a machine learning tool for identifying equations that represent a given
dataset, will also be explored for describing fundamental interactions between
acids and bases. Community-based learning and outreach activities are planned to
engage high school students in symbolic regression for math, science, and
machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance Monte Carlo
simulation methods to enable efficient sampling of water adsorption in acidic
zeolites. Specific aims include 1) introducing Monte Carlo moves for directly
sampling protonation states of water clusters in zeolites, 2) demonstrating
simulations of competitive adsorption of water and alkanes using literature
force fields, and 3) generating interatomic potentials for acid-base
interactions by using symbolic regression to learn equations from quantum
chemistry calculations. The anticipated outcomes will lay the groundwork for
simulations of competitive chemisorption in porous materials with active sites,
as well as discover new equations for simply characterizing potential energy
surfaces of acid-base interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.