* 2138836
* ERI: Investigation of the Effect of Venous Valve Morphology on Fluid Flow Conditions and Disease
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Matthew Ballard, Utah Valley University
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2024
* USD 192,521.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) award will support fundamental research that will build
understanding of the impact of venous valve properties on the development of
disease. Therefore, this work will promote the progress of science and advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare. The body pumps blood using a
combination of venous valves and muscle contractions. Together, the valves and
muscles pump blood against gravity to get from locations such as the legs back
to the heart. Deep vein thrombosis occurs when blood cells build up in the veins
near venous valves to form blood clots known as thrombi. Thrombi prevent the
valves from functioning properly, and can lead to pulmonary embolism, which is a
leading cause of death in the United States and other industrialized countries.
It is known that fluid flow conditions in the veins influence when and where a
thrombus forms. However, the effect of various properties of venous valves on
flow conditions and thrombus formation is mostly unknown. This work will use
both computer simulations and experimental testing to identify the most
important venous valve properties. Then, this work will determine how these
properties affect flow conditions and lead to thrombus formation. This work will
reveal how and where venous valves contribute to thrombosis. These results will
ultimately improve assessments of thrombosis risk. Additionally, this research
will advance engineering education and diversity. Community outreach activities
will include the use of venous valve models in local schools in underserved
neighborhoods. This project will also provide opportunity for undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups, to learn the research
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluid dynamic factors such as shear stress, fluid
stasis, and fluid residence time are thought to generally be critical to
thrombus formation. In this supported work, a combined approach consisting of
both fluid-solid interaction modeling and simulation, and experimental model
valve flow imaging and characterization will be employed. These two approaches
will complement and support each other in elucidating the effect of valve
morphology on the aforementioned disease-conducive flow conditions. The work
here will not only help give understanding of the effects and behavior of
physiological valves, but will also lead to more effective design of prosthetic
valves to avoid problems seen in certain physiological
morphologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.