* 2138293
* ERI: CAS- Climate: Design for Recyclability: Perovskite Solar Technology for Sustainable Energy Future
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* ilke celik, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite solar photovoltaic
(PV) cells have recently attracted worldwide attention, and there is great
potential for them to enter the global PV market in the 2020s. Still, perovskite
PVs stakeholders would benefit from knowing more about how to manage the waste
from perovskite solar modules (PSM) sustainably. If PSMs are eventually sent and
crushed in landfills, harmful compounds carrying heavy metals could leach into
the environment. Considering the current short lifespan of PSMs, society may
face environmental problems due to the deployment of PSMs. This project aims to
develop the tools for identifying design-for-recyclability (DfR) guidelines that
may provide sustainable pathways for PSM and initiate long-term research avenues
in sustainable end-of-life management (EoLM) of emerging technologies. The
project aims to integrate three objectives synergistically: (1) Identify
economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable EoLM scenarios (reuse,
repurpose, remanufacture, etc.) for PSMs; (2) Optimize circular EoL options for
providing more environmentally friendly secondary materials than extracting
primary materials; and (3) Foster environmental sustainability for solar
industry stakeholders by developing enviro-economic models, creating decision
support tools, and offering workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two
principal foci. First, PSM architecture will be designed with recyclability
principles. The focal point of DfR is producing valuable products from
recycling. This opportunity was missed for established PV technologies- e.g.,
for silicon PV, the typical outputs of the recycling process are low in economic
value. Many PV recyclers do not want to accept waste PV or leave the EoLM cost
to the end- users. However, it may be possible to open the glass-glass sandwich
structures of PSM modules without crashing glass content. As a result, PV
recyclers could generate valuable products (coated float glass, flat glass, Au
or Ag chunks) at the EoL, producing viable products that can be remanufactured
and reused or repurposed in PV and other industries. Second, the PI will assess
potential processes involved in EoLM using sustainability-based tradeoff
analyses. This approach resides at the crossroads of the abatement cost concept
from environmental economics and damage cost concept from sustainability
engineering. The PI aims to apply these concepts to construct an EoLM scenario
that maximizes net social benefits (including private cost and benefits and
abatement costs). Considering that PSMs are an important niche market for the
solar energy industry, it is appropriate to formulate enviro-economic models to
assess the EoL phase of PSMs and inform PV stakeholders regarding the pathways
for environmentally, economically, and socially sustainable solar energy. This
project seeks to lead to environmentally sustainable and economically viable
perovskite solar technology even in the EoL phase. The project team will work
closely with US Manufacturing of Advanced Perovskite, leading American solar
companies, and international not-for-profit associations of the energy industry.
The project team will work closely with Rapid Cityâ€™s Standing Committee for
Sustainability, increasing awareness about environmentally friendly and feasible
EoL management alternatives locally, and organizing events (e.g., Earth Week
celebrations), developing outreach activities and screening documentaries, and
holding public seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.