* 2138522
* ERI: Harnessing Probabilistic Deep Learning Method Integrated with Tailored Features for Enhanced Real-Time Machinery Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kai Zhou, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,050.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) grant will fund research that enables real-time quality control
and accurate decision making in the operation of complex machinery, including
critical components in modern manufacturing, thereby promoting the progress of
science and advancing the national prosperity. Fault diagnosis and prognosis for
machinery systems play an indispensable role in ensuring integrity, safety, and
performance. Due to many sources of uncertainty, reliable real-time fault
monitoring and prediction are beyond current capabilities. Machine learning-
based techniques show promise in overcoming the limitations of traditional
measurement approaches, but state-of-the-art tools lack the ability to identify
faults that were not encountered during training on previously collected data.
This project will overcome these limitations by creating a new machine-learning
framework that uses probabilistic ideas to account for measurement uncertainty,
is sensitive to time-varying fault signatures, and trains continuously on real-
time data. The new framework will enable substantial performance enhancements in
reliability, efficiency, practicality, and robustness of machinery fault
diagnosis and prognosis in aerospace, transportation, and infrastructure
industries. Related software tools and curated datasets will be shared publicly
in order to promote technology transfer and broad access to the research
methodology. Undergraduate research opportunities will provide hands-on learning
experiences and, leveraging a partnership between Michigan Tech University and
three Michigan community colleges, help broaden participation in STEM of
students from currently underrepresented groups and the institutions that serve
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental contributions
to the integration of several deep-learning technologies with an algorithm for
optimized sensor placement to enable the use of real-time vibration measurements
for detection and prediction of machinery faults also outside of those in a
given training data set, robustly to measurement noise and time-varying
operating conditions, and reliably even given limited data. It will achieve this
outcome by relying on a Bayesian convolutional neural network architecture that
builds a probabilistic model for feature detection, a long short-term memory
architecture that is sensitive to intrinsic temporal correlations characteristic
of the progressive nature of faults, and a variational inference-based
backpropagation optimization algorithm for real-time model updating, further
facilitating generalizations to previously unseen faults. This project will use
the Shapley Additive Explanations approach to quantify the importance of signal
features for fault detection, and will apply this metric to optimize sensor
placement for an experimental gearbox that will be used to test and validate the
algorithmic framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.