* 2139353
* Defining research and educational priorities in Near-Surface Geophysics: a workshop and survey in light of the Vision for NSF 2020-2030 Earth in Time report
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 99,892.00

Human society, and all life of Earth, depends on Earth’s “near-surface”
environment. The soils, water, ground water, microbes, and rock provide
resources, allow construction, and shape local environments and their
resilience. This is the locus of diverse natural hazards, such as landslides,
volcanic hazards, earthquakes, and floods, and persistent soil and water
pollution. Geoscientists have recently developed a diverse range of techniques
to probe and study this environment in increasing detail, to help understand it
and improve responses to these hazards and challenges. There is huge potential
benefit in integrating these approaches and standardizing and sharing broadly
and collectively the diverse data and observations of these studies—both for
advancing science questions and for immediate societal uses and benefits, for
example in planning and resilience to climate change. This proposal will survey
the full near-surface research community and support a workshop to plan and
develop this integration of approaches, data, and training for the future. This
proposal will thus support a recommendation from the National Academies on
future Earth science priorities for NSF outlined in the Earth-in Time consensus
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-priority questions about the shallow
subsurface (or uppermost ~100 m) of the Earth, where lithosphere, hydrosphere,
biosphere, and atmosphere meet, could be addressed with integrated near- surface
geophysics instrumentation, data, and training. We propose to survey diverse
scientists and bring them together in a town hall discussion and virtual
workshop series to create and disseminate such an inventory and plan for future
integration of diverse approaches and data, including around training to address
scientific targets as well as societal needs and challenges while stressing
diversity and equity broadly. The products of this work would help define the
merits, and roadmap, of this integration, including the recommendation of the
National Academies report Earth-in-Time for a near surface geophysical center to
facilitate integrated near-surface studies. A goal of the workshop’s outcomes is
to identify what the near-surface Earth Science community considers the highest-
value scientific research targets as well as provide recommendations to improve
education and outreach on near-surface geophysics topics to the geoscience
community and related communities such as engineering and those involved in
natural hazard mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.