* 2139167
* EAGER: Transforming Optical Neural Network Accelerators with Stochastic Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ishan Thakkar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,735.00

In the past decade, machine learning algorithms and models such as Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) have become increasingly prevalent for many emerging
applications, such as medical prognosis, autonomous transportation, weather
forecast, speech recognition and translation, image/video recognition and
synthesis. This increasing prevalence has necessitated that the computing
hardware platforms that process DNNs deliver consistently high performance and
fast processing speeds. This need has driven computer hardware architects to
design custom accelerator chips for processing DNNs. As researchers explore more
sophisticated and powerful models of DNNs, the compute speed and throughput
requirements from these DNN accelerator chips also increase. Traditional
electronic implementations of DNN accelerator chips are breaking down under this
pressure, which is catastrophic as it prevents the immediate widespread adoption
of high-performance artificial intelligence that can transform society and
improve lives. Fortunately, silicon photonics-based optical computing (OC) has
emerged as an exciting paradigm that can replace slow electronic processing of
DNNs with much faster, light-speed DNN processing. By processing DNNs directly
in the optical domain, OC-based DNN accelerator chips have the potential to
provide up to a thousand times faster processing speeds than traditional
electronic chips. However, viable realization and deployment of OC-based DNN
accelerators present enormous challenges, because the silicon-photonic building
blocks of such accelerators consume very high static power, require excessively
large silicon real estate, exhibit susceptibility to uncertainty induced errors,
and lack flexibility. This project will involve transformative research to
overcome these fundamental challenges and pave the way for realizing future OC-
based DNN accelerator chips that are miniature in size, but possess the
computing power to enable lower-cost, ultra-fast, and highly reliable processing
of artificial intelligence tasks. Close collaborations with academic partners at
the NSF NNCI node, Kentucky Multiscale, will aid in the rapid prototyping of the
developed technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key contribution of this project
will be to design potentially groundbreaking architectures of OC-based DNN
accelerators that will employ stochastic computing (SC) to realize various DNN
processing functions. This project is critical early exploratory research
because it focuses on a radically transformative goal of merging the disciplines
of SC and OC in a highly synergistic manner for the important use case of DNN
accelerator design. Such synergistic integration of SC and OC has never been
explored before and involves interdisciplinary perspectives and new approaches
that are considered to be more “high risk-high payoff” than the typical research
in CSR or other areas of CISE/NSF. The proposed synergistic integration of SC
and OC will lay down a blueprint for realizing a new class of DNN accelerator
architectures that will combine the processing speed benefits of OC with the
area-efficiency, flexibility, static power efficiency, and error tolerance of
SC, and be at the heart of the revolutionary artificial intelligence of the next
generation to transform our lives in innumerable ways. Moreover, by exposing
graduate students to the diverse aspects of stochastic arithmetic, probability
theory, optical computing, nanofabrication, deep neural networks, and electro-
optical characterization, this project will contribute towards an agile, high-
tech workforce that will maintain continued US leadership in technological
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.