* 2139237
* Coarse-Grained Modelling and Synthesis of Structurally Stable Defect-Engineered Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Reum Scott, Scott, Reum
* Fellowship Award
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made as part of the FY 2021 Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (MPS-Ascend). Each fellowship
supports a research and training project at a host institution in the
mathematical and physical sciences, including applications to other disciplines,
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. This fellowship to Dr. Scott
Reum supports his research project entitled "Coarse-Grained Modelling and
Synthesis of Structurally Stable Defect-Engineered Metal-Organic Frameworks."
The host institution for the fellowship is Cornell University, and the
sponsoring scientists are Dr. Julia Dshemuchadse and Phillip Milner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Scott Rem, will conduct research on Metal-Organic
Frameworks (MOF). The proposed project consists of three specific aims: 1) Build
a coarse-grained modeling framework for MOFs with geometrically mismatched
dopants; 2) Synthesize defect-engineered MOFs and characterize their structural
properties; 3) Compare different local disorder motif geometries. The self-
assembly of framework structures will be simulated with a coarse-grained model
via molecular dynamics. Informed by the computational results, defect-engineered
metalâ€“organic frameworks will be synthesized via solvothermal synthesis, after
which they will be structurally characterized by x-ray diffraction and electron
microscopy techniques. The geometries of different disorder motifs will be
investigated using both computational and experimental approaches, while the
functional properties of the defect-engineered compounds will be characterized
using spectroscopic methods. The mismatched defect-containing materials prepared
as part of this program will greatly expand the structural motifs and functional
properties that can be unlocked using this promising class of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.