* 2139551
* IUCRC Phase I Brigham Young University: Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Randal Beard, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2027
* USD 301,480.00

The world’s aviation industry is moving towards autonomous air mobility and
sensing, where new developments in artificial intelligence, energy systems,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, advanced manufacturing, and
multidisciplinary design are enabling new air vehicle concepts and new ways of
using aviation in the daily transport of information, people, and cargo. The
Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS) will produce new
fundamental engineering knowledge, will develop new technologies, and will train
a new workforce needed by pooling the technical know-how of America’s leading
engineering research universities with innovative companies ranging from
startups to long-established leaders in the aerospace
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAAMS research focuses on improving air vehicle
performance, sustainability, safety systems, manufacturability, and reliability
by integrating research in traditional aerospace fields such as control,
aerodynamics, structures and materials, communication, and energy storage with
new disciplines including artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
robotics. Brigham Young University’s contributions to CAAMS include research
specializations in GPS-denied and degraded navigation, algorithms for autonomous
tracking from unmanned aircraft using electro-optical and infrared cameras,
guidance and control of electric vertical take-off and landing (eVTOL) aircraft,
multi-vehicle coordination and control, unmanned aircraft traffic management,
airborne infrastructure monitoring, and eVTOL aircraft aerodynamic modeling and
design optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous air mobility and sensing
includes a broad range of vehicle concepts, integrated subsystems, supporting
infrastructure, traffic management tools, and applications that exploit
increasingly autonomous capabilities in aviation. These autonomous systems have
the potential to improve safety and reliability, reduce costs, and enable new
missions of national and global importance. The global market for autonomous
aircraft is expected to reach $1.5 trillion by 2040, and CAAMS will be a key
asset in enhancing US competitiveness. Center research will support dozens of
students every year, giving them hands-on experience with advanced autonomous
systems and direct understanding of industry perspectives and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center outcomes will be broadly disseminated through
archival publications, presentations at engineering and computer science
conferences, and technical interchanges with aviation industry members. A single
center-wide data repository will be established by the lead site with a
password-protected web portal that can be accessed by all center industry
members. Project data will be made available to center members annually and will
be made available upon request to the public two years after the center fiscal
year has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.