* 2139078
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Key Processes Controlling Burning of Heterogeneous Fuel in Wildfires
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* David Blunck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2025
* USD 265,039.00

Identifying key physical processes that control the spread of wildfires is
becoming increasingly important as the cost and risk to humans increase with
rising wildfire activities. Such knowledge is needed to improve models used by
fire managers to inform containment and prescribed burn strategies. Most
fundamental studies have focused only on studying the burning behavior of dead
fuels (e.g., dead trees). This focus is problematic because many wildfires
actually burn through mixtures of live and dead fuels. The composition of live
and dead fuels can be vastly different, for example live trees have higher
moisture content than dead trees. In this work, a series of experiments and
computational simulations will be conducted to better understand how burning
changes when mixtures of living and dead fuels are present. It is expected that
as a result of the knowledge gained from this study, models of fire spread will
be improved, and in turn, the tools used by fire managers will become more
accurate. Improved accuracy of models can help to reduce the costs associated
with conducting prescribed burns or containing
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most fundamental wildfire studies have focused
only on the burning behavior of dead fuels. This focus is problematic because
most wildfires actually occur through live, or mixtures of live and dead fuels.
With this background, the overall objective of this work is to identify key
physical and chemical processes that control ignition and spread of fire within
heterogeneous (i.e., live and dead) fuels. The following aims will be addressed
as part of this effort: (1) Elucidate key physics that cause differences in
burning behavior of fuels as contributions from convective and radiative heat
transfer are varied, and (2) Identify how key physical and chemical processes
change when mixtures of living and dead fuels burn. The primary approach to
attaining the specific aims will be to conduct well-controlled experiments and
corresponding simulations where mixtures of live and dead fuel particles are
systematically heated until ignition and ultimately burnout occurs. The
experiments will apply laser-based and other diagnostics to determine
temperatures and pyrolysis rates of fuel particles, equivalence ratios, and
residence times. The simulations will use a multiphysics Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) description to determine time history and spatial distribution of
key variables (e.g., velocity, temperature, chemical composition etc.).It is
expected that as a result of knowledge gained from this study, fire managers,
practitioners, and scientists will be better informed about the burning behavior
of mixtures of live and dead fuels. This understanding can be used to update
physics-based field-scale fire spread models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.