* 2139025
* ERI: Drones-Enabled Active Sensing System (DEASS) for Detection of Subsurface Defects in Civil Infrastructure through Synchronized Drone Swarming and Thermal Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Liujun Li, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 199,946.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project will explore an active thermal imaging system carried
by a pair of drones, one (leader) for thermal imaging and the other (follower)
for active heating (e.g., microwave), to enable subsurface defect detection in
the next-generation inspection of civil infrastructure in a GPS-denied
environment (e.g., underneath bridge decks). Due to its limited payload and
battery time, a single drone cannot support additional payload and its
associated accessories required for active sensing. The concept of two leader-
follower drones is thus introduced. This award supports fundamental research for
the development of a drones-enabled active sensing system through synchronized
drone swarming and thermal imaging. The new technique will transform the current
passive surface deterioration inspection practice, which is subject to the
change in sunlight conditions, into an active thermal imaging inspection for
subsurface condition deterioration, such as delamination and horizontal cracks
in reinforced concrete structures. In addition to infrastructure inspection and
maintenance, the new technique will impact multiple frontiers with cooperative
robot swarming and active sensing, such as interactive manufacturing and
healthcare, and academic communities in science and engineering. The technique
and research results will be transferred into the hands of engineering
professionals through a national workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The drones-
enabled active sensing system will be investigated via software/hardware-in-the-
loop simulations and experimental tests. This research will overcome two
technical challenges: (1) to synchronize drone swarming and thermal imaging in
an energy-efficient strategy and (2) to enable new thermal imaging detectability
with a heat source distributed on a leader-follower drone platform to stimulate
the appearance of subsurface defects in active imaging. It will lay a foundation
on cooperative robot swarming and active sensing research in multiple frontiers.
First, it will develop a new strategy of leader-follower formation for drone
swarming with visual relative navigation and collision avoidance based on a
three-dimensional stereo vision and potential field algorithm during cooperative
active sensing and inspection of subsurface defects in a GPS-denied environment.
Second, it will establish optimal characteristics of active sensing of microwave
heated concrete decks with optimized microwave excitations (energy source,
frequency and duration) and sensing protocols (measurement sensitivity, frame
rate and time window). Third, it will develop a method to evaluate and improve
the performance of cooperative drone swarm formation and active thermal imaging
of defects in a markup solid deck concrete bridge and a potential field
infrastructure inspection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.