* 2139028
* ERI: Dynamic Wireless Channel Pad: A Lightweight and Effective Security Design Towards Non-cryptographic IoT Confidentiality
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Tao Wang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The variety and novelty of different IoT applications indeed improve the
efficiency and service quality of our daily lives. But it also incurs on a range
of security concerns. As IoT devices may gather geographical information,
monitor users’ privacy activities, and record clients’ biometric features, one
of the critical concerns is how to preserve the confidentiality of such
sensitive-data traffic when IoT devices communicate with others. Specifically,
due to the broadcast nature of wireless signals, conversations between IoT
devices are vulnerable to eavesdropping attacks. This project aims to enforce
security in devices that cannot afford cryptography operations. In particular,
the project will develop a lightweight channel-aware security design that can
deliver information securely and is suitable for implementation in resource-
limited IoT devices. The scheme will be fined-grained and not protocol-oriented.
It is potentially compatible with all existing wireless standards (e.g., WiFi 6,
Zigbee, Bluetooth, 5G) and can accommodate diverse requirements of different
wireless networks (e.g. cellular network, Wi-Fi network, satellite
communication). In addition, the scheme developed will be useful beyond IoT
applications. It can be deployed over any network featured with wireless
connectivity, especially for those lacking key management infrastructures. In
addition, the scheme can work together with cryptography algorithms on the
application layer to provide cross-layer security guarantee. Beyond that,
educational activities are an integral part of this project, the PI plans to
share the outcomes of this project into his courses to motivate more students to
get involved in cybersecurity research. The PI will also actively participate in
outreach activities to increase the participation, activities, and engagement of
students from diverse groups in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to propose an effective and light-weight security design that
takes advantage of dynamic signal variation in wireless context to protect
sensitive network traffic emanating from IoT devices. The scheme can achieve
information-theoretical security and is suitable for implementation in low-cost
IoT devices where limited energy and circuitry can be dedicated for security.
Specifically, the proposed scheme aims to exploit the inherited randomness
feature of communication channels to achieve confidentiality of sensitive data
without key distribution and management. In addition, the project plans to
employ security design into relatively simple baseband processing procedures,
which incur less overhead and only consume a very limited amount of resources.
The project will focus on investigating important research problems associated
with the proposed channel-aware security design using analytical modeling,
comprehensive simulations, and experimental evaluations. In particular, the
project aims to 1) identify practical issues towards the implementation of the
proposed scheme and developing techniques that address the issues; 2) validate
and refine the design via a thorough theoretical analysis and comprehensive
simulations; and 3) build a practical wireless environment and systematically
evaluate the effectiveness, efficiency, and reliability of the proposed
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.