* 2139497
* Targeted Basic Research to Enable Antarctic Science Applications of Cosmogenic-Nuclide Geochemistry
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,064.00

This project will conduct basic research into geological dating techniques that
are useful for determining the age of glacial deposits in polar regions,
Antarctica in particular. These techniques are necessary for determining how
large the polar ice sheets were in the geologic past, including during past
periods of warm climate that likely resemble present and near-future conditions.
Thus, they represent an important technical capability needed for estimating the
response of polar ice sheets to climate warming. Because changes in the size of
polar ice sheets are the largest potential contribution to future global sea-
level change, this capability is also relevant to understanding likely sea-level
impacts of future climate change. The research in this project comprises several
observational and experimental approaches to improving the speed, efficiency,
cost, and accuracy of these techniques, as well as a scientific outreach program
aimed at making the resulting capabilities more broadly available to other
researchers. The project supports a postdoctoral scholar and contributes to
human resources development in polar and climate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on several areas of
cosmogenic-nuclide geochemistry, which is a geochemical dating method that
relies on the production and decay of cosmic-ray-produced radionuclides in
surface rocks. Measurements of these nuclides can be used to quantify the
duration of surface exposure and ice cover at locations in Antarctica that are
covered and uncovered by changes in the size of the Antarctic ice sheets, thus
providing a means of reconstructing past ice-sheet change. The first proposed
set of experiments are aimed at implementing a 'virtual mineral separation'
approach to cosmogenic noble gas analysis that may allow measurement of nuclide
concentrations in certain minerals without physically separating the minerals
from the host rock. If feasible, this would realize significant speed and cost
improvements for this type of analysis. A second set of experiments will focus
on means of identifying and quantifying non-cosmogenic background inventories of
some relevant nuclides, which is intended to improve the measurement sensitivity
and precision for cosmic-ray-produced inventories of these nuclides. A third
focus area aims to improve capabilities to measure multiple cosmic-ray-produced
nuclides in the same sample, which has the potential to improve the accuracy of
dating methods based on these nuclides and to expand the situations in which
these methods can be applied. If successful, these experiments are likely to
improve a number of applications of cosmogenic-nuclide geochemistry relevant to
Antarctic research, including subglacial bedrock exposure dating, dating of
multimillion-year-old glacial deposits, and surface-process studies useful in
understanding landform evolution and ecosystem
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.