* 2139816
* Keeping Shelters in Place: Understanding the Impacts of Residential Landlord Decision-Making on Post-Disaster Housing Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Daniel Kuhlmann, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 10/31/2024
* USD 667,420.00

This research is responding to the local threats to rental housing security that
emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic. Rental housing occupies a significant
portion of the housing stock in US metropolitan areas, yet researchers know very
little about the specific characteristics of the institutional and non-
institutional entities that hold titles to those properties and determine
housing supply, rents, and the conditions of both buildings and units. To
further complicate this scenario, regulatory environments and rental housing
market dynamics vary greatly across space, both within and between metropolitan
regions. Resiliency, the ability to withstand and recover from a disaster or a
shock, is shaped by the conditions of the local housing market and the
associated regulatory environment. However, it is also shaped by the behaviors
of the landlord population operating within that milieu. In the absence of
existing knowledge about landlord characteristics, behaviors, and needs, cities
and policy makers responding to disasters are left guessing how to stabilize
their rental markets, keep renters housed, deliver meaningful assistance to
property owners, and plan for an effective post-disaster recovery. This study
contributes to the progress of science by investigating rental property owner
characteristics and identifying meaningful rental owner categories as they
relate to disaster and post-disaster decision-making. It contributes to the
national health, prosperity and welfare by linking that knowledge to disaster-
related rental housing outcomes in specific places. The COVID-19 pandemic has
demonstrated that the security of the rental housing market is intertwined with
a landlord’s ability to tackle financial challenges. The decisions that
landlords make in the midst of a disaster affect not only their tenants’ ability
to remain housed, but the ability of the city to respond to and recover from the
event and ensure future housing stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of this study is that when responding to disasters, non-institutional
rental property owners make property and investment decisions that accelerate
ownership consolidation and reduce post-disaster housing security within
communities. The research is structured as a longitudinal study using an
innovative, convergent approach that brings together social science and data
science in order to create new datasets and tools for data analysis. It fills a
major gap in existing knowledge by investigating landlord decision-making across
the stages of the disaster management cycle and identifying meaningful
categories of non-institutional rental property owners based on landlord
characteristics. This study sets out to answer not just who landlords are, but
how they respond to disasters and how disaster-induced changes in the landlord
population might continue to affect the built environment of cities and
communities into the future. There are two nested research efforts within this
proposal: to understand landlord characteristics and decision-making within the
context of the post-pandemic recovery and potential future shocks or disasters;
and, through data science approaches, to identify and characterize the landlord
population and the potential value of better data utilization for promoting
rental housing security during local recovery from hazard-related shocks and
stresses. The overall project goals to improve housing outcomes within local
disaster recovery efforts draw from the domain of social science including
planning, sociology, economics, and finance. The project goals to create tools
that improve the local institutional capacity for identifying and communicating
with landlords rely on the domain of data science research. This project’s
integrative methodology strengthens the capacity of each domain, generating an
innovative approach where social science research is able to resolve the
enduring problem of landlord invisibility and the data science techniques are
refined through their application to real world problems. The unit of analysis
for this study is the rental property owner, specifically non-institutional
investors, in nine mid-sized US cities. These cites, though of similar size,
have varied housing stocks, socioeconomic characteristics, and political
orientations. They also provided unique state and local responses to the COVID
housing crisis. Five of the cities are located in states that are part of the
Gulf Coast region. All have either been recently affected by hazard-related
disasters or are at high risk of experiencing a disaster. This chronological
range of disaster experience and recovery will allow the tracking of landlord
perspectives across the disaster management cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.