* 2139845
* EAGER: CCF: SHF: Scalable Software Verification through Automated Derivation of Domain-Specific Optimization Tactics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hamid Bagheri, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,944.00

The ever-growing reliance of society on software-intensive systems drives a
continued demand for increased software dependability, making it more important
than ever. Formal-verification techniques provide the highest degree of software
assurance, with their strengths residing in their automated yet rigorous
analysis capabilities. Performing such formal analyses is, however, an expensive
endeavor, facing scalability issues. This challenge is exacerbated when
considering the evolving nature of complex systems. The high cost of formal
verification is thus prohibitive for rapidly evolving large-scale systems,
despite the benefits it can offer for reliability, safety, and security. This
research seeks to develop techniques for automating the development of
optimizations for software-verification techniques with the aim that each system
of interest can have verification tailored to its specific characteristics,
thereby significantly reducing the verification cost. This, in turn, allows
software engineers to continuously analyze evolving systems online, rather than
the current practice of performing expensive, long-running formal analysis once,
if at all, during the entire development process. In addition to graduate
students, this project will attempt to involve undergraduate, female, and
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
explores the possibility of driving the automated discovery of domain-specific
optimizations for software-verification techniques. Historically, such
optimizations have arisen from the insights of a few dozen experts in software
verification worldwide. This research is taking a different approach. The
project seeks to automatically infer domain-specific, sound optimizations to
trim the verification bounds without requiring any prior domain expertise on the
part of the analyzer, promising to make software verification significantly more
scalable and cost-effective. The intellectual merit of this research is a novel,
speculative analysis, underpinned by established, proven model-finding
technologies to automatically recognize opportunities for the derivation of
sound optimizations, without requiring domain expertise or excessive overhead,
thereby significantly diminishing the analysis cost. This research promises to
advance the state-of-the-art by rendering bounded formal verification more
tractable, thereby expanding the areas that can practically benefit from formal
verification techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.