* 2139003
* ERI: CAS- Climate: Improving green roof technologies by modeling species-specific impacts in the urban microclimate
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Samantha Hartzell, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 193,418.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the benefits of green roofs
become clearer, local governments are increasingly beginning to mandate or
incentivize their use in new construction. Green roofs have been shown to
increase stormwater retention, lower cooling costs, and mitigate the urban heat
island effect, but these effects depend strongly on the implementation details.
For example, certain photosynthetic succulent species, such as Sedum sp., are
commonly selected for use on green roofs because of their resiliency and low
maintenance requirements. However, the water use efficiency of these species
ranges from six to ten times higher than that of typical herbaceous plants,
leading to significant changes in rooftop temperature and runoff rates. A
critical consideration of vegetation choice, substrate, and maintenance
strategies is needed to advance our understanding of these technologies. The
investigator seeks to build upon recent advances in plant modeling to accurately
predict water use and ecosystem services of green roof scenarios as a function
of vegetation type and under a variety of environmental conditions. The
modelling efforts will be informed using data collected from green roof
monitoring sites, including a garden green roof experiment on the Portland State
University campus. It is anticipated that the work will result in modeling
approaches for green roof cooling and runoff as a function of vegetation type,
climate conditions, and substrate depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While recent
experimental work has shown significant impacts of vegetation type on green roof
ecosystem services, the mechanisms of these impacts have not been thoroughly
evaluated, making it difficult to generalize the results to different climates
and vegetation types. This work will improve understating of, and ability to
model, vegetation impacts on green roof cooling in a systematic manner. Results
will also improve understanding of model upscaling, taking into account the
inherently nonlinear response to moisture, temperature, and light conditions.
This work will enable the development of tools for evaluating the
appropriateness of various vegetation types in green roof settings as a function
of prevailing climate conditions, aiding in the formulation of green roof policy
guidelines and the valuation of appropriate green roof incentives. Data
collected at the green roof site on the Portland State University campus will be
made publicly accessible on a university website. In conjunction with the open-
source Photo3 model of the soil-plant-atmosphere continuum, the data will be
employed to develop easy-to-use, hands-on modules in a new Ecohydrology class at
Portland State University. The combined data and model will be packaged together
in Google Colaboratory as a teaching tool for the engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.