* 2139277
* Collaborative Research: Advancing turbidity currents: moving sources, polydispersity and aggregation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Thomas Peacock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 255,634.00

Gravity currents are mostly horizontal flows that are driven by density
variations in a fluid or by density differences between two fluids. They play a
central role in the transport of sediment in lakes, rivers, and oceans, and they
are also important in emerging and potentially transformative technologies such
as deep-sea mining and geoengineering. Despite a rich history of research on
gravity currents, some fundamental scenarios have yet to be explored or remain
substantially unresolved. This collaborative project will integrate analytical
modeling, numerical simulation and laboratory experimentation with a unique
field experimental data set to advance understanding of particle-laden gravity
currents. This project has potential for transformative impacts by informing
environmental regulations for such emerging industries as deep-sea mining. Deep-
sea mining is expected to re-suspend large volumes of sediment in the pristine
abyssal ocean environment, and the knowledge and models developed through this
project will provide the toolbox needed to assess the evolution of these
sediment plumes. The project will provide training for university students at
all academic levels and for high-school students who will participate in the
project through established programs at MIT and UCSB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is divided into three interconnected topics. The first concerns the
evolution of gravity and particle-driven currents released from a moving source.
The goals are to understand how the ratio of source speed to buoyancy velocity
influences the dynamics of the current, investigate the role of background
current, and develop empirical models that predict transport processes. The
second point of focus is to quantify sediment detrainment from polydisperse
particle-driven currents and determine its sensitivity to the particle size and
velocity distribution through concurrent laboratory experiments and numerical
simulations. Empirical models of polydisperse particle-driven currents will be
extended to include entrainment and detrainment and incorporated into the moving
source gravity current model. Finally, the role of flocculation and aggregation
of particles on the propagation of polydisperse particle-driven currents will be
experimentally investigated by systematically varying the sedimentâ€™s history,
with the goal of developing macroscale numerical models for flocculation and
integrating the findings into the moving source model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.