* 2139328
* Collaborative Research: Interactions of Urban Systems with Storms and Heatwaves, and Resulting Impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Alan Hamlet, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 255,344.00

This award provides funding to advance fundamental understanding of urban
processes as a function of land surface properties, atmospheric chemistry, and
human adaptive choices designed to reduce impacts of storms and heatwaves over
urban areas. The study will focus on Chicago, New York, and Denver regions that
vary in geography, climatology, urban characteristics, and urbanization
processes. The resulting improvement in the understanding of urban processes is
ultimately expected to improve the quality of life for vulnerable urban
communities impacted by more frequent and extreme storms and heatwaves events.
This project will help evaluate the impact of green infrastructure choices and
future urban expansion. The use of satellite datasets for storm and heatwave
characterization, data assimilation, and validation will ensure portability to
other urbanized areas across the world with limited in-situ and radar
observations as well as cities with similar climatic conditions. The project
will disseminate project findings through peer-reviewed publications and
presentations at conferences and workshops, webinars to citizens and city
administrators, and social media for global reach. The project will train a
postdoc and two graduate students to be next-generation atmospheric scientists
with interdisciplinary expertise in climate model development,
hydrometeorological data analysis, and urban sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize a combination of numerical model
development activities, model enhancements, and new measurement techniques from
space and the earthâ€™s surface to characterize the nonlinear effects of land
cover, urban morphology, geometry, scale, and aerosol heterogeneity on the urban
boundary layer processes impacting storms and heatwaves. This project will
contribute to the following objectives: (i) analyze the effects of interactions
between the atmosphere and intra-urban land surface properties and
characteristics on storms and heatwaves, (ii) analyze the contribution of urban
aerosols on storms and heatwaves, and (iii) analyze the impacts of changing
urban landscapes due to human development and adaptation choices. The project
will also articulate atmospheric chemistry interactions due to urban aerosol
heterogeneity and intra-urban land surface processes related to convergence and
convection that modify storms and heatwaves. The weather-chemistry linkages
using new model development activities and model enhancements will likely
improve weather forecasting capabilities for cities. Project techniques and
resulting findings will also serve as a new paradigm for integrated studies for
sustainable and resilient urban systems, especially in evaluating how future
urbanization and urban climate change adaptation strategies like green and cool
roofs will impact storms and heatwaves over urban
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is co-funded by the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology and Environmental Sustainability
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.