* 2139883
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Numerical Modeling and Field Observations of Hurricane Impacts to Natural and Hybrid Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Navid Jafari, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 393,419.00

The protection of coastal communities, economic hubs, and infrastructure
networks is critical to our national security and long-term prosperity. Natural
infrastructure consisting of barrier islands, dunes, wetlands, mangroves, and
reefs has been promoted to mitigate coastal flooding and erosion. However, the
collective effectiveness of natural elements and how they work together with
hard infrastructure as a hybrid system to provide flood risk reduction remain
unknown. This project harnesses the unique hydrodynamic, eco-geomorphic, and
geotechnical data collected from rapid field campaigns of Hurricanes Laura and
Delta (2020) on the Louisiana Chenier Plain to fill this key knowledge gap. The
research integrates morphodynamic modeling of coastal wetlands with field-based
hydrodynamic, eco-geomorphic, and geotechnical measurements to assess and
predict the performance of natural and hybrid infrastructure subject to
hurricane impacts. The project will leverage existing outreach programs and
regional partnerships to disseminate research results. The research team will
share the modeling tools and new understanding developed with the coastal and
geotechnical research communities, as well as practicing engineers and resource
managers. The project provides unique opportunities to cross-train undergraduate
and graduate students in both coastal and geotechnical engineering areas at two
institutions and develop both field observation and numerical modeling
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective coastal hazard mitigation requires
integrative field observations and numerical modeling to characterize dynamic
coastal processes at appropriate space and time scales. This project integrates
overland flow and morphodynamic modeling of coastal wetlands with hydrodynamic,
geomorphic, ecological, and geotechnical measurements to transform our
understanding of the response and recovery of natural and hybrid infrastructure
impacted by hurricanes. The project harnesses the unique data collected during
hurricanes to (i) advance the understanding of the spatiotemporal variation in
overland flow, storm surge, and wave attenuation (flood protection) provided by
hybrid infrastructure; (ii) evaluate the efficacy of numerical models to predict
coastal erosion and sediment transport across a natural landscape; and (iii)
explore the role of geotechnical properties, stratigraphy, and vegetation
biomechanical properties in controlling the magnitude of shoreline retreat and
vegetation uprooting by hurricanes. The comprehensive field, laboratory, and
remote-sensing data collection, complemented by numerical modeling, will
identify and evaluate root and soil properties and their roles in uprooting and
erosion processes. The novel field testing will enable successful collection of
observations that were previously challenging or impossible to quantify. It is
anticipated that the integrative approach and modeling tools will be applicable
to other coastlines for evaluating natural and hybrid infrastructure performance
for coastal resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.