* 2139002
* OPP-PRF Calving, Icebergs, and Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Alexander Huth, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 10/31/2022
* USD 124,081.00

Icebergs influence climate by controlling how freshwater from ice sheets is
distributed into the ocean, where roughly half of ice sheet mass loss is
attributed to iceberg calving in the current climate. The freshwater deposited
by icebergs as they drift and melt can affect ocean circulation, sea-ice
formation, and biological primary productivity. Furthermore, calving of icebergs
from ice shelves, the floating extensions of ice sheets, can influence ice sheet
evolution and sea-level rise by reducing the resistive stresses provided by ice
shelves on the seaward flow of upstream grounded ice. The majority of mass
calved from ice shelves occurs in the form of tabular icebergs, which are
typically hundreds of meters thick and on the order of tens to hundreds of
kilometers in length and width. Tabular calving occurs when full-thickness ice
shelf fractures known as rifts propagate to the edges of the ice shelf. These
calving events are infrequent, often with decades between events on an
individual ice shelf. Changes in tabular calving behavior, i.e., the size and
frequency of calving events, can strongly influence climate and ice sheet
evolution. However, tabular calving behavior, and how it responds to changes in
climate, is neither well understood nor accurately represented in climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a tabular calving parameterization
for climate models will be developed. The parameterization will be derived
according to data generated from a series of realistic and idealized century-
scale tabular calving simulations, which will be performed with a novel ice flow
and damage framework that can be applied at the scale of individual ice sheet-
ice shelf systems: the CD-MPM-SSA (Continuum Damage Material Point Method for
Shelfy-Stream Approximation). During these simulations, the geometry of the ice
shelf, mechanical/rheological properties of the ice, and climate forcings such
as ocean temperature will be varied to determine the rifting and calving
response. The calving parameterization derived from these experiments will be
implemented in a Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) climate model,
where it will be coupled with a bonded-particle iceberg model. Then, experiments
will be run to study the feedback between changes in iceberg calving behavior
and climate. Success of this project will improve our understanding and
representation of the ice mass budget, ice sheet evolution, and ocean freshwater
fluxes, and will improve projections of climate change and sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.