* 2139112
* NSF Student Travel Grant for IEEE Cluster 2021
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Sunita Chandrasekaran, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,750.00

The Cluster 2021 Conference is a premier conference in the field of cluster
computing and in the use of cluster systems for scientific and commercial
applications. The conference brings together researchers, developers and users
from academia, industry, laboratories, and commerce to discuss recent advances
and trends in many areas related to cluster computing, including applications,
architectures, programming, data and visualization. The conference will be held
online from September 7-10, 2021. The project will fund students to participate
in the conference, to engage deeply with the Cluster research community. The
Cluster student participation program provides a comprehensive means for
students to improve their overall research skills and career planning efforts,
beyond presenting posters and papers. The project serves the national interest,
as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the progress of science as it provides a
forum to disseminate research efforts, connect researchers, and train the next
generation of scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to Covid-19 safety issues, the
conference will be fully virtual. The student program committee for the
conference is recruiting students with an emphasis on diversity and inclusion of
underrepresented groups and from a diverse set of institutions. The conference
will run specific student-centric sessions during the conference, including
sessions on research presentation training, research career guidance, industry
interaction, and a meeting/discussion with the authors of the best paper
candidates from the conference. While the project will enable funding a
significant fraction of the students attending the conference, some students are
presenting papers and posters at the conference and will be given priority for
funding. The funding provided by NSF will have a significant impact on the
careers of the future generation of researchers in cluster computing, while
encouraging diversity in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.