* 2139462
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Algebraic Methods for Systems of Difference-Differential Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Alexander Levin, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2025
* USD 187,666.00

Differential, difference and difference-differential equations constitute main
tools that scientists and engineers use to create mathematical models of real-
life phenomena. Whereas continuous-time and discrete-time processes depending on
several factors are described by systems of partial differential and difference
equations, respectively, processes that include both continuous and discrete
components (such as processes with time delay caused by the time required to
transport mass, energy or information) are governed by systems of partial
difference-differential equations (PDDEs). Furthermore, very often
characteristics of physical, chemical or biological processes have certain
symmetries, which can be captured mathematically as transformation group
actions. Thus, the development of computational methods and algorithms for
systems of PDDEs and such systems with group action is of primary importance in
applications. Despite the over sixty-year history of constructive methods in
differential and difference algebra, there are currently no efficient
computational techniques for algebraic PDDEs. This project aims to develop the
theory, methods and algorithms to determine the structure of solutions of
systems of such equations including algebraic PDDEs with symmetry group actions.
The research results will be applied to systems that describe mathematical
models in physics, chemistry and biology. The educational goal of the project is
to create an interdepartmental program on applications of symbolic computation
that will involve undergraduate and graduate majors in computer science,
mathematics, physics and biology at the Catholic University of America
(CUA).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key research directions of this project are as
follows. (1) Development of computational methods and algorithms for difference-
differential elimination and for decomposition of solution sets of systems of
algebraic PDDEs into unions of simple components. Extension of the obtained
techniques to systems with group actions and/or weighted operators. (2)
Development of algorithms for building Groebner-type bases in difference-
differential modules and algebras. Applications of these algorithms to the
computation of dimension functions of algebraic PDDEs that arise in
applications. (3) Consistency analysis of finite difference approximations of
algebraic differential equations via the techniques of generalized Groebner
bases and difference-differential characteristic sets. (4) Application of the
obtained methods and algorithms to systems of PDDEs that play fundamental roles
in physics, engineering, chemical and biological modeling. The main methods and
approaches of the project include the techniques of generalized difference-
differential characteristic sets and relative Groebner bases, the use of
dimension polynomials and quasi-polynomials, and decomposition methods for
systems of algebraic PDDEs and such systems with group action and weighted basic
operators. The results will be demonstrated in interdisciplinary research
projects at CUA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.