* 2139572
* Nanomechanics of Tubulin Extraction from Microtubules and Adhesin Catch-Bond Rupture
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Thomas Perkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,149,515.00

Cell shape and structure are supported by a filamentous network composed in part
by microtubules, dynamic assemblies of building blocks known as tubulin dimers,
that are constantly remodeled according to the cell’s needs. These assemblies
play important roles in cell division and organization and serve as “tracks” for
the transport of cargo. The assemblies can be disassembled by cellular machinery
that extracts a tubulin dimer from the microtubule, but the force required to do
so and the overall stability of the microtubule is unknown. Understanding this
process will provide insight in how mutations lead to microtubule defects that
have physiological consequences, and to understanding how cancer drugs like
Taxol exert their effects. This project’s technology development will facilitate
better characterization of compounds such as Taxol by enabling direct
measurement of the degree of stabilization at the level of a single tubulin
dimer. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide an excellent
training opportunity for high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students and
will be integrated into a course, with a hands-on lab
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a single-molecule
force-spectroscopy assay to extract tubulin from a microtubule (MT) by pulling
on the C-terminal tail of β tubulin. Advanced atomic force microscopy (AFM)
studies will characterize the nanomechanical properties of tubulin extraction
using a variety of pulling protocols and modified AFM cantilevers for improved
force precision and temporal resolution. Analysis of the resulting data will
yield the energetics and forces that stabilize tubulin within the MT lattice. It
will also yield insight into the mechanism of severing enzymes, which act
against the force needed to extract tubulin. Severing enzymes are molecular
motors that extract tubulin dimers from MTs and are an important means to
modulate MT dynamics. The mechanism of severing enzymes remains unknown. Related
hexameric molecular motors exert a maximum force of ~20–30 pN. Yet, coarse-
grained simulations predict a much higher force (~400 pN) needed to extract a
tubulin dimer. This project will resolve this dichotomy by directly measuring
the force needed to extract an individual tubulin dimer from a MT, a long-sought
goal. To facilitate this assay development, the mechanical properties of several
adhesin-ligand pairs will be characterized as a means to optimize their use as
short, genetically encoded handles and evaluate their catch bond behavior. This
project will thereby accelerate AFM-based force-spectroscopy studies of diverse
biological systems including membrane proteins and nucleic
acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.