* 2139895
* Collaborative Research: Testing Critical Zone Controls on Mountain-Scale Relief in a Tropical Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Kenneth Hughes, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2025
* USD 284,503.00

The Critical Zone is the thin layer of Earth that extends from the base of the
soil layer to treetops and supports most terrestrial life on our planet. This
project examines how differences in Critical-Zone processes influence topography
through a comparative experiment of two different bedrock units on the tropical
island of Puerto Rico. On the island, ancient volcanic rocks form steep, high
peaks and have clay-rich soils, whereas granitic rocks underlie relatively more
subdued, rolling hills covered by sandier soils. This study will evaluate the
impact of these differences on the occurrence of landslides, the size of
sediment grains that populate river channels, and the size and frequency of
floods. The principal hypothesis is that landslides cut more deeply in the clay-
rich soils and, as a result, deliver coarser sediment to rivers. The coarser
sediment, in turn, better shields the river channel from erosion such that
larger floods are needed to carve the underlying bedrock. In addition, the clay-
rich volcanic soils retain more rainwater, resulting in fewer floods than areas
covered by sandy granitic soils. The net result is that the volcanic rocks
maintain a higher elevation and steeper topography than the granitic terrain.
This project will test these ideas through detailed landslide mapping, grain-
size measurements, statistical analyses of streamflow gaging data, and
measurements of long-term landscape erosion rates. This project will form the
basis for graduate and undergraduate research experiences and also engage
additional students at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayag√ºez and Colorado
State University in an experiential learning, research, and cultural exchange
program centered on comparing and contrasting the landscapes in Puerto Rico and
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variations in topographic relief, steepness, and
height are often observed to correlate with differences in bedrock geology. Most
often, these changes are interpreted to result from differences in the
erodibility of the underlying bedrock. On the tropical island of Puerto Rico
intermediate-to-mafic volcaniclastic units underlie high relief, steep
mountains, whereas felsic-rich granitic-to-granodioritic rocks are characterized
by gentler, rolling hills. Preliminary results indicate that unweathered bedrock
strength and fracture density between these two rock units is similar, implying
the differences in primary rock strength or erodibility cannot explain the stark
contrast in topography. Previous studies show that the soils developed atop each
of these rock units are distinct, with the more mafic units comprised of clay-
rich soils and sandier soils developed in the more felsic units. These
differences in soil characteristics and associated Critical Zone architecture
promote relief production in the volcaniclastic units relative to the granitic
units. Specifically, differences in the Critical Zone affect the magnitude of
incision thresholds by controlling bedload grain size distributions and the
frequency of floods that breach these thresholds by modulating shallow,
subsurface hydrology. These hypotheses will be tested by mapping landslide
locations, measuring grain size distributions in sediment deposits, analyzing
flood statistics from existing stream gaging stations, and calculating long-term
erosion rates from cosmogenic radionuclides. Datasets will be synthesized into a
modeling framework that predicts fluvial landscape relief as a function of rock
strength, the magnitude of incision thresholds, and the frequency of threshold
breaching floods. This project is jointly funded by the Geomorphology &amp;
Land-use Dynamics program in Earth Sciences and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.