* 2139982
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: ASTrA: Automated Synthesis for Trustworthy Autonomous Utility Services
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Pierluigi Nuzzo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2025
* USD 334,001.00

Large-scale systems with societal relevance, such as power generation systems,
are increasingly able to leverage new technologies to mitigate their
environmental impact, e.g., by harvesting energy from renewable sources. This
NSF CPS project aims to investigate methods and computational tools to design a
new user-centric paradigm for energy apportionment and distribution and, more
broadly, for trustworthy utility services. In this paradigm, distributed
networked systems will assist the end users of electricity in scheduling and
apportioning their consumption. Further, they will enable local and national
utility managers to optimize the use of green energy sources while mitigating
the effects of intermittence, promote fairness, equity, and affordability. This
project pursues a tractable approach to address the challenges of modeling and
designing these large-scale, mixed-autonomy, multi-agent CPSs. The intellectual
merits include new scalable methods, algorithms, and tools for the design of
distributed decision-making strategies and system architectures that can assist
the end users in meeting their goals while guaranteeing compliance with the
fairness, reliability, and physical constraints of the design. The broader
impacts include enabling the automated design of distributed CPSs that
coordinate their decision-making in many applications, from robotic swarms to
smart manufacturing and smart cities. The research outcomes will also be used in
K-12 and undergraduate STEM outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
framework, termed Automated Synthesis for Trustworthy Autonomous Utility
Services (ASTrA), addresses the design challenges via a three-pronged approach.
It uses population games to model the effect of distributed decision-making
infrastructures (DMI) on large populations of strategic agents. DMIs will be
realized via dedicated networked hybrid hardware architectures and algorithms we
seek to design. ASTrA further introduces a systematic, layered methodology to
automate the design, verification, and validation of DMIs from expressive
representations of the requirements. Finally, it offers a set of cutting-edge
computational tools to facilitate our methodology by enabling efficient
reasoning about the interaction between discrete models, e.g., used to describe
complex missions or embedded software components, and continuous models used to
describe physical processes. The evaluation plan involves experimentation on a
real testbed designed for zero-net-energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.