* 2139801
* CNS Core: Small: One Size doesn't Fit All: Workload-Aware Cost Optimization for Decentralized Applications on Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Yuzhe Tang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 498,624.00

Decentralized applications (or DApps), such as cryptocurrencies and other
blockchain applications, offer benefits over conventional centralized
applications by not assuming trust in a central provider, which may be
compromised. As a result, DApps have the potential to disrupt a wide range of
businesses, notably decentralized finance. However, today's DApps yield a high
monetary cost to end-users due to their intensive use of expensive blockchains
underneath. This project aims to optimize DApps' costs by orders of magnitude,
without sacrificing security or introducing additional delays. The PI proposes
to study the previously unexplored design space for workload-aware cost
optimization over blockchains. The PI will design and evaluate a wide range of
new cost-saving techniques, such as bundling requests in transactions,
dynamically reorganizing data storage, introducing workload-adaptive control
mechanisms, and others. A key project outcome will be the development of a cost-
optimizing middleware system that is effective under real DApp workloads, and
that can be easily retrofitted onto operational blockchains (e.g., Ethereum).
Software tools for transaction record-and-replay will also be built and released
to enable workload analysis on blockchains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will improve the understanding of DApps' costs under dynamic workloads and
impact the research communities in distributed systems, middleware, blockchains,
and cyber-security. In addition, it will impact various blockchain and DApp
developer communities. It will facilitate the adoption of DApps and help to
decentralize many industries, including the web, information technology (IT),
and finance technology. Finally, the PI will leverage existing venues, such as
MoST (Museum of Science and Technology in Syracuse) and LSAMP (Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation) for effective outreach to K-12,
underrepresented students, and general audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.