* 2139740
* Evaluating COVID-19 Mitigation Strategies in Schools with a Spatially-Explicit Agent-Based Model of Infection Dynamics
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ilya Zaslavsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project will develop and refine a simulation modeling system to help
schools and school districts evaluate the effects of interventions to control
COVID-19 infections among students, focusing first on schools in San Diego
County, CA. The goal is to help individual schools choose the most effective
strategies for their unique circumstances, particularly each school’s
population, classroom layouts and ventilation, neighborhood infection rates, and
school bus commutes. The interactive model will allow decision makers at the
school and district levels to evaluate the potential impacts of both
pharmaceutical interventions, like vaccination and testing, and non-
pharmaceutical safety measures including social distancing, mask-wearing,
limiting interactions between different student cohorts, decreasing classroom
occupancy, and improving ventilation. Finding the best combination of such
measures is central to safe school re-opening, which is critical for improving
child education and development and allowing parents to return to work. As
school-aged children, many of whom are not vaccinated, are disproportionately
affected by new and more dangerous COVID-19 variants, this simulation service
will provide much-needed insights to our partners among decision-makers at the
school and district level in San Diego County and elsewhere in the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The school infection model simulates aerosol and droplet
transmission as students, teachers, and staff (modeled as human agents) interact
during typical school day activities, including classroom instruction, cafeteria
lunch, recess, and traveling on a school bus. The likelihood that a healthy
agent is exposed to the virus increases as they come near infected, asymptomatic
agents or spend significant time in poorly ventilated spaces. The model
considers spatial information about room layouts and ventilation, and simulates
school day schedules down to 5-minute intervals. Building on a successful
prototype for elementary schools, this project will extend the model to middle
and high schools and to neighborhoods with different socio-economic and
demographic characteristics. Additionally, it will enable simulation of
infection dynamics for athletics activities and analysis of infection patterns
under different COVID-19 variants. Making the model accessible via a science
gateway will let school administrators, researchers, teachers, and students run
simulations on a supercomputer, then visualize and compare model outputs under
different scenarios. As in the prototype phase, the project will engage
undergraduate students in all aspects of model development, and in presenting
results to public health and education experts and to the general public – an
essential component of their training as data scientists working on societally-
impactful topics like education and health equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.