* 2139041
* Producing New Geo-media to Increase Outreach and Diversity
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Doug Prose, EARTH IMAGES FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,902.00

A new television series, Doug's Geology Journal, will be produced and premiered
on the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) network under this project. The series
is designed to make geological concepts compelling to a large and diverse
television audience. For viewers who want to delve deeper into geology, and for
teachers wishing to use the series' content as a teaching aid in the classroom,
a series website will be launched with classroom lessons, and additional related
video content that instructs students in making their own science video with
minimal equipment. Also under this project, a separate one-hour television
documentary, Planet of the Plates, about geology's leading theory, plate
tectonics, will be produced. This project aims to bring to the attention of the
public exciting geologic advancements and the work of a community of
geoscientists making new discoveries in challenging settings around the world.
This is crucial at a time when knowledge of geological concepts is becoming
increasingly important in addressing growing natural resource shortages, climate
change, and geologic hazards such as earthquakes, flooding, landslides, and
volcanic eruptions. This project addresses the desire of the PBS audience for
more geoscience-oriented programming, while highlighting the vital work of a
highly diverse groups of scientists to more fully understand and appreciate the
Earth's geological attributes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will enable
the production and distribution of the first set of episodes of a new geoscience
television series for PBS and international broadcast, as well as distribution
via streaming and DVD. A companion website of educational resources that expand
the impact of the series to the classroom will be launched, including a training
video that instructs users in the basics of making their own video about their
own science explorations. A new television series, Doug's Geology Journal
(working title) will be produced and premiered on the Public Broadcasting
Service (PBS) network under this project. The producers of both the series and
the one-hour documentary are Doug Prose and Diane LaMacchia of Earth Images
Foundation, filmmakers who have produced eighteen successful documentaries for
PBS broadcast, filmed on location on all seven continents. The primary goals of
this project are to produce outreach products that raise public awareness and
interest in geoscience concepts, research and careers, as well as to provide
effective educational resources to enhance the teaching of geology by K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.