* 2139219
* EAGER: Technology to Review Online Videos for Education (TROVE)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Anirban Roy, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,932.00

Online videos are becoming increasingly popular with young children. This
presents a challenge for parents and educators who want them to watch
educational videos but may lack the ability or time to distinguish educational
from non-educational content within the rapidly growing universe of online
video. To our knowledge, there are currently no machine learning methods for
classifying educational video content; current methods rely on humans to
identify video content. But human content reviews cannot keep pace when, on
average, approximately 500 hours of content are uploaded to YouTube every
minute. The goal of this project is to develop Technology to Review Online
Videos for Education (TROVE), a machine learning-based tool to identify early
childhood mathematics content in a high volume of videos. This capability will
enable new approaches to increase young children’s exposure to developmentally
appropriate mathematics content in videos, which has been shown to improve
mathematics learning outcomes. TROVE will lay the groundwork to identify a range
of subjects in videos, including literacy, science, and social-emotional
content. Further, the technological advances developed under this project will
have applications in other fields, including adaptive learning, social media
analytics, propaganda detection, and video summarization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our multidisciplinary team of education and machine
learning researchers will develop a content classification engine to identify
mathematics content in online videos. We will define developmentally appropriate
mathematics content at the toddler, preschool, and kindergarten levels based on
the Head Start Early Learning Outcomes Framework and Common Core State
Standards. To train the content classification engine, researchers who have
demonstrated reliability in identifying the target mathematics content will
annotate the mathematics content in 100 hours of online videos. The project’s
central research question asks, how accurately can the content classification
engine identify early childhood mathematics content in videos, as compared to
humans? To answer this, we will compare the mathematics content identified by
TROVE to that identified by researchers in a set of videos that were not used to
train the classification engine. We will share our findings with education
technology researchers and developers, educators, and policymakers via a peer-
reviewed journal article and blog post. TROVE has transformative potential to
support young children’s learning through exposure to high-quality,
developmentally appropriate educational videos. Further, this technology may
enable large-scale research on the impacts of children’s exposure to educational
and non-educational video content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.