* 2139692
* Rydberg Exciton in Atomically Thin Semiconductor for On-chip Quantum Optoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sufei Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,881.00

Rydberg atom refers to a high energy atom with a size much larger than the atom
at its lowest energy state. The large size of the Rydberg atoms enables strong
interactions among themselves that can be exploited for quantum information
science. Light excitation of semiconductors can generate positive and negative
charges bound together, known as excitons. The tightly bound exciton at the high
energy state, known as Rydberg exciton, is an analogue to the Rydberg atom and
shares many superior properties, such as the strong interaction. Rydberg
excitons in traditional semiconductors are either not stable enough or difficult
to be patterned and controlled. The atomically thin semiconductors known as
transitional metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), however, host robust excitons and
usher in an exciting platform of manipulating Rydberg excitons in two-dimension
(2D). The Rydberg exciton in TMDCs also has a new quantum degree of freedom. We
have recently developed a new measurement technique with high sensitivity to
probe the largest 2D Rydberg exciton ever reported. In this proposal, we will
pattern the atomically thin semiconductor so that we can control the in-plane
electric field and study its interaction with the 2D Rydberg excitons. We will
also probe the strong interaction between Rydberg excitons, which will pave the
way for a new platform for quantum information science. The integrated education
components train the next generation workforce for semiconductors, nanoscale
technology, optical science and engineering through research opportunities,
curriculum development, and outreach activities, with a particular emphasis on
educating and recruiting under-represented groups. Both existing programs at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and newly developed outreach programs will be
utilized to encourage K-12 students to study in the field of quantum information
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Rydberg
atoms refer to the atoms with the outer electron occupying the highly excited
state with a very large principal quantum number n. The strong interaction
between Rydberg atoms leads to nonlinear effects such as the Rydberg blockade,
providing a promising route for quantum computing and simulation. Rydberg
exciton, an excited state of the optically excited electron-hole pair, is a
condensed matter analogue of the Rydberg atom and can be directly used for
optoelectronic devices thanks to mature fabrication and control technologies of
semiconductors. Although high-order Rydberg excitons have been extensively
studied in Cu2O crystals, it is difficult to pattern and control the Rydberg
exciton in bulk semiconductors. Atomically thin semiconductors host robust
exciton with large binding energy, which can also be efficiently controlled
electrostatically, thereby opening doors to exciting opportunities for quantum
optoelectronics. Here we propose to construct high-quality monolayer
transitional metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) devices in which we fabricate an on-
chip p-n junction. We also propose to probe and control the Rydberg excitons
through our recently developed photocurrent spectroscopy techniques, with which
we have shown unprecedented high order Rydberg excitons in monolayer WSe2 with n
= 11. We will investigate the Rydberg exciton’s sensitive response to the
external electric and magnetic fields. We will also explore nonlinear effects
and try to demonstrate the 2D Rydberg exciton blockade for the first time. This
proposal will not only directly demonstrate a prototype of a quantum sensing
device based on 2D Rydberg excitons but also paves the way for a ground-breaking
platform to manipulate highly tunable 2D Rydberg excitons for quantum
information science and engineering. The closely integrated research and
education components provide training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate,
and K-12 students on advanced optical spectroscopy, nanoscale device
fabrication, and quantum materials, with special emphasis on recruiting under-
represented groups. This proposal also includes outreach programs for K-12
students, such as working with Troy Boys and Girls
Club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.