* 2139300
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Ecohydrological responses to climate change: Changing flowpaths, aging groundwaters, and alterations to aquatic ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Laura Rademacher, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 355,269.00

This project will advance understanding of how decreased groundwater recharge
associated with climate change affects mountain groundwater systems and
groundwater-dependent ecosystems. Mountain aquifers across the western United
States serve as regional short-term storage reservoirs that provide a stable
water supply for agricultural activities, nearby cities, and threatened
ecological communities. Project activities will occur in the Sierra Nevada
Sagehen Experimental Forest (SEF) and include field hydrological, geochemical,
ecological community analysis of springs and an assessment of indicators of
ecosystem stress. In the SEF, spring groundwater age was previously correlated
with increased chemical weathering and ecosystem richness. These observations
serve as an important baseline of hydrological and ecological health for
comparison with modern observations. Broader impacts from this work focus on
three areas: 1) strengthening personnel development by supporting undergraduate
researchers and collaboration between two early career scientists; 2) supporting
ongoing community science efforts through engagement with the annual BioBlitz
event at the SEF; and 3) supporting K-12 STEM education through the development
of a “Green Box” focused on project discoveries in collaboration with the Desert
Research Institute’s Science Alive team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate how decreased precipitation and increased temperature in the SEF
have altered the distribution of contributing flowpaths to springflow
generation. The research plan includes two years of spring hydrological sampling
in the SEF for a suite of geochemical analytes, groundwater age tracers, and
physical spring characteristics. The project will also investigate how benthic
macroinvertebrate communities (BMI), including endemic and relic species, in the
SEF have changed over the last 30 years, how these changes relate to flowpath
changes, and how broader BMI community structures relate to modern hydrological
and geochemical characteristics. The research will use ecological and stable
isotopic analysis of BMI to reveal community structures and food web dynamics.
This research will identify indicators that reveal impending collapse (i.e.,
hydroecological thresholds) of perennial springflow and groundwater-dependent
ecological niches in mountain groundwater systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Ecosystem Sciences
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.