* 2139004
* EAGER: An Inference Methodology to Illuminate Nonlinear Neutrino Flavor Transformation for Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eve Armstrong, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

Probing the physics underlying cosmic explosions is vital for understanding the
makeup of the observable Universe. Specifically, the explosions of massive stars
are candidate sites for the nucleosynthesis of some heavy elements – the
building blocks of structures including life on Earth. Meanwhile, important
aspects of the physics of these explosions are difficult to access via
traditional approaches in nuclear astrophysics. This is due both to a lack of
adaptability of existing codes to the required mathematical framework and to
computational complexity. Moreover, important features of these explosions
remain artificially hidden from the tools built to describe them. Meanwhile,
inference is an alternative methodology, related to machine learning techniques.
In the geosciences and neurobiology, inference has demonstrated success in
illuminating problems akin to those noted to hinder progress within nuclear
astrophysics. The potential for inference to illuminate these problems is high,
and thus this project will explore inference to bear upon them. Innovations
cultivated within one scientific arena can be transformative when applied to
disjoint fields. Integral to the research is the training of undergraduates,
many with socio-economic backgrounds under-represented in science. Students also
engage in comedic science public outreach.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The physics
noted as “artificially hidden” from traditional techniques is direction-changing
backscattering in the neutrino flavor field in these high-density environments.
Neutrinos are elementary particles whose “flavor” dictates the manner in which
they interact with other particles. Flavor in large part sets the neutron-to-
proton ratio as well as energy and entropy deposition, thereby in-part dictating
the mechanism of explosion and nucleosynthesis. Direction-changing
backscattering can occur in the flavor field and significantly shape the
explosion, but it presents a two-point boundary-value problem: a framework that
traditional numerical integration is ill-equipped to handle. This project
investigates the ability of statistical data assimilation (SDA) to illuminate
this problem. SDA is a Bayesian inference methodology, invented for numerical
weather prediction, to predict sparsely-sampled nonlinear systems. In principle,
SDA is well-suited for solving boundary-value problems, and it is expected to
outperform integration in computational efficiency. This project seeks to
establish whether SDA can outperform integration in terms of 1) solving the
direction-changing backscattering problem, and 2) efficiency so as to avoid
sacrificing physical detail. In preliminary results, SDA efficiently recovers
solutions obtained by integration in the non-backscattering regime. These
findings call for a deep examination of SDA’s ability to handle the back-
scattering problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.