* 2139351
* RESEARCH-PGR: Functional Genomics of Beneficial Legume-microbe Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Dickstein, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,914,069.00

Legume crops are a primary source of food for humans, feed for livestock, and
raw materials for industry. Legumes are integral to sustainable agricultural
systems by virtue of symbiotic nitrogen fixation with bacteria called rhizobia,
which injects 50 million tons of fixed-nitrogen into such systems annually.
Legumes also form beneficial arbuscular mycorrhizal symbioses with soil fungi,
which enhance the acquisition of soil phosphorous and other nutrients. These two
symbioses enable productive plant cultivation with less fertilizer, which
reduces the environmental impact of agriculture. Focusing on the legume species,
Medicago truncatula this project will identify key plant genes required for
symbiosis with bacteria and/or fungi and advance our understanding of what are
arguably the two most important plant-microbe symbioses in agriculture. This
project brings together seven research groups from six research and teaching
institutions in five states to form a world-class, virtual center for legume
symbiosis research that will generate great synergy and provide outstanding
trans-disciplinary training opportunities in genomics, bioinformatics and other
disciplines. Training will be provided at career levels ranging from
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, to undergraduate students with the
aim of developing skillsets necessary for successful scientific careers.
Outreach components of this project will engage high &amp; middle school
students, adults in the general public and children in educational and fun
scientific experiences. The proposed activities will benefit society by helping
to train the next generation of scientists and by helping to make agriculture
more sustainable and environmentally-
friendly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legumes are integral to sustainable
agricultural systems by virtue of symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) with
bacteria called rhizobia, and beneficial arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbioses
with soil fungi that enhance the acquisition of soil phosphorous and other
nutrients. Although thousands of plant genes have been associated with these
symbioses via transcriptome studies, the symbiotic role and importance of most
of these genes remain unclear. Focusing on the legume, Medicago truncatula this
project will take advantage of a very large existing Tnt1 transposon-insertion
mutant population for functional genomics of SNF and AM symbiosis. One hundred
and ninety Tnt1 insertion mutants with novel Nod+Fix- or regulatory phenotypes
have already been identified in a genome-wide non-biased forward genetic screen.
New sequence-capture technologies will accelerate the identification of the
causal mutations enabling the identification of new genes involved in nitrogen
fixation and autoregulation of nodulation. Functional genomics activities,
enabled by a large Tnt1 mutant population and indexed flanking sequence tag
resource will focus on transporter proteins involved in nutrient transport
during rhizobial and AM symbioses. A combination of Tnt1 mutants and mutants
generated through CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing will be used to investigate a set
of 138 genes conserved for AM symbiosis identified previously through a
comparative phylogenomics approach. Together, these activities will identify key
symbiotic genes and advance our understanding of two plant-microbe symbioses
that are crucial for sustainable agriculture.