* 2139417
* EAGER: Methods for chromatin profiling of plant gametes and zygotes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Russell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,980.00

Plant reproduction requires the fusion of a male gamete, a sperm cell, delivered
by the pollen, and a female gamete, an egg cell within the ovule, to form a
unique cell called the zygote that ultimately regenerates a new plant. The
instructions for making functional gametes and zygotes are contained within
their genome sequences, as well as modifications of the proteins constituting
the chromatin packaging of their DNA that will determine which genes will be
switched on or off. These modifications of the chromatin proteins throughout the
genome can be revealed by a technique called chromatin profiling. However,
chromatin profiling requires large numbers of cells, and currently is out of
reach for highly specialized cells such as female gametes and zygotes, whose
isolation is both difficult and laborious. As a result, we know almost nothing
about the chromatin modifications that mark these critical stages of the plant
life cycle. The project will develop new methods to isolate gametes and zygotes,
and adapt methods of chromatin profiling that require lower numbers of cells.
Successful development of such methods will enable detailed characterization of
genome-wide modifications to the chromatin of these important cells, and more
generally, they could be used for chromatin studies of any rare cell types in
plants. Understanding how gametes form embryos has agricultural applications for
increased seed yields, for regeneration of plants from tissue culture, for
haploid plants for rapid breeding, and for hybrid seed production through clonal
propagation to reduce costs of hybrid seeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods to
study egg cells and zygotes currently rely on laborious dissection that is
performed one cell from one ovule at a time. We will address this needle in a
haystack problem through a novel strategy using an affinity-tag based protocol,
initially in Arabidopsis, to specifically fish out egg cell or zygote nuclei
from the thousands of somatic cells in the ovule. Because of the relative ease
of harvesting large numbers of ovules, the protocol should be scalable for bulk
isolation of egg cells or zygotes from rice and other plants. A second hurdle
for chromatin profiling is that methods currently used in plants require tens of
thousands of cells. Recently, a method called CUT&amp;Tag, which requires one to
two orders of magnitude fewer cells, has been used for low-input chromatin
profiling in animals. However, this method is not tested for profiling of plant
chromatin at very low-inputs. We will attempt to adapt the new CUT&amp;Tag
method for low-input chromatin profiling of plant cells to enable chromatin
studies of purified egg and zygote nuclei at the scales that will be isolated by
the proposed affinity tag approach. More generally, successful development of
the above proposed methods will have an impact beyond these reproductive cells,
as they will open up the wider possibility of chromatin studies in plants at the
single cell type level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.