* 2139837
* Optimal restoration of electricity distribution networks under rolling time windows and prediction of restoration time
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Payman Arabshahi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 387,971.00

This NSF project aims to develop transformative techniques to optimize the
scheduling of crews to repair and restore electricity distribution networks
following a large windstorm, an ice storm, or another type of natural disaster.
Due to the nature of these networks and the need for crews to travel to
different locations to perform repairs before power can be restored to
customers, this optimization is particularly complex. However, it can be
formulated as a budget-constrained, profit maximizing multiple traveling
salesman problem on an edge and node weighted graph. This variant of the
classical traveling salesman problem has not been studied before. The primary
intellectual merits of the project include developing a formulation of the
optimal repair and restoration process that is not only mathematically rigorous
but also incorporates many practical constraints that must be considered for the
resulting schedule to be feasible, developing algorithms to implement this
formulation that are flexible and computationally lightweight and thus support
easy re-optimization as additional information becomes available, and shedding
light on novel variants of the multiple traveling salesman problem, which will
be of independent interest to researchers in other disciplines such as computer
science and operations research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe weather events can
cause extensive damage to electricity distribution networks, depriving thousands
of customers of light, heat, and power. Such disruptions in the supply of
electricity have serious social and economic impacts and can have grave
consequences for the health or life of vulnerable populations. It is thus
imperative for electric utilities to repair their network and re-store power as
soon as possible. This project thus has the following broader impacts: (1) it
will provide these utilities with tools to help them optimally dispatch their
repair crews, reduce the time required to restore power, and hence minimize the
harm done to the affected communities, (2) it will also help utilities provide
their customers with more accurate estimates of when they might expect power to
be restored, thus helping them decide whether to stay put or seek shelter
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.