* 2139062
* Acquisition of Research Equipment to advance the Geospatial Applications in Natural Science Laboratory - Precision Geomatics Extension (GAINS-PGE)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 152,762.00

New Mexico Highlands University requests funds for the acquisition of upgrade
research equipment to advance the capabilities of the Geospatial Applications in
Natural Sciences (GAINS) Laboratory. The mission of the GAINS Laboratory is to
serve as New Mexico Highlands Universityâ€™s geospatial technology resource center
by providing a broad variety of geospatial hardware and software. The surveying
geospatial equipment requested in this proposal will complement and expand the
research, teaching, and learning capabilities of the facility. The intellectual
merit of the many research and teaching endeavors attest to the breadth of the
applications and services that the GAINS Laboratory provides. The laboratory
will advance new and ongoing studies in archeology, engineering, geomorphology,
tectonics, water resources, local and regional tectonics, volcanology, and new
and on-going studies in wildlife, range, and natural resources management. The
GAINS Laboratory serves as a hub for geospatial knowledge and technical support
for a diverse group of partners including local, federal, and state agencies,
non-profits, Native American tribes, and private landowners. The lab has
developed training workshops and individual instruction to support local land
management and asset inventory projects. It has also partnered with other New
Mexico entities on unique projects to enhance community engagement using
geospatial technologies. By driving the development of collaborative
international research endeavors, the lab is also recognized across Europe and
parts of Asia as an outward looking center of
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GAINS Laboratory at New Mexico Highlands
University is the only Applied and Service Geospatial Laboratory in northern New
Mexico, eastern Arizona, and the southern Colorado area. The surveying
geospatial equipment requested in this proposal will complement and expand the
research, teaching, and learning capabilities of the facility. The proposed
instrument acquisition will facilitate GAINS users' research, serve the
university, local, state, and private stakeholders, and support underrepresented
student learning opportunities. The award will advance new and ongoing studies
in archeology, engineering, geomorphology, tectonics, water resources, local and
regional tectonics, volcanology, and new and on-going studies in wildlife,
range, and natural resources management. The new equipment will advance the
GAINS Laboratory mission, as well as that of the university, and provide partial
funding in "Support of Outreach and/or Broadening Participation Activities" to
engage other audiences in geospatial technology applications, workshops, and
training. It also serves as the keystone of an international wildlife ecology
collaboration among the Denver Zoo, William and Mary University, and various
academic and conservation organizations in Mongolia. Undergraduate and graduate
students transferring from other universities and community colleges have often
developed superb geospatial data development and analysis skills. The new and
existing infrastructure provided by the laboratory provides an environment where
they can continue to develop and apply these hard-earned
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.