* 2139189
* I-Corps:  Identification of a stable hybrid carrier for large-scale expression of recombinant miRNAs and siRNAs in E. coli
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Aiming Yu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of a high-yield, cost-effective production platform for natural RNA
interference (RNAi) agents. This project addresses the increasing interest in
developing natural RNA-based agents for therapeutics and translational research.
Since RNA-based drugs have the capability to approach targets (such as small
molecules and proteins) that are unavailable by other methods, this project will
open new directions for treating incurable diseases with naturally produced
drugs. With the use of fermentation technology, this research may result in the
cost-effective production of natural RNA-based drugs for both academic research
institutes and pharmaceutical companies. If successful, this project will
establish a novel RNAi bioengineering platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the identification of a stable, fully humanized
hybrid carrier for large-scale expression of recombinant micro RNA (miRNA) and
small interfering RNA (siRNA) in a common strain of E. coli. Current RNA
interference (RNAi) research and development is often limited to the use of
chemically-engineered or synthesized RNAi agents that require various and
extensive artificial modifications for stability. These artificial modifications
can provoke immunogenicity. The overall purpose of this project is the
development of a unique platform for the economical and sustainable production
of natural RNAi agents that are produced and folded in living cells. Early work
has demonstrated that bioengineered miRNA/siRNA agents carry few natural post
transcriptionally-modified nucleosides and exhibit favorable stability within
human cells and mouse models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.