* 2139987
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Molecular Mechanisms of Immune Response to a Herbivore-Associated Peptide Elicitor
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Savithramma Dinesh-Kumar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 253,450.00

Plants are defended from pests and pathogens through a sophisticated immune
system to recognize attackers. The molecular pathways which control immune
responses to chewing herbivores such as caterpillars are poorly understood.
Detection of insect attackers is mediated by receptors at the plant cell plasma
membrane which bind characteristic molecular patterns of attack and send
intracellular signals to active defense responses. How these receptors carry out
recognition and signaling functions is of critical importance for disease and
pest resistance including in crop plants. This proposal seeks to define pathways
and molecular factors which control plant responses to herbivores within an
attacked plant leaf. Understanding these factors will allow targeted breeding
and/or engineering of resistance traits against herbivores. The project will
also launch an innovative cross-campus internship to solidify undergraduate
identity as a plant biologist. Two undergraduates each summer will participate
in the alternative campusâ€™ Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) internship at University of Washington or UC Davis in a mentored
research experience, before returning to their home campus for their senior
year. Participation for each student in two plant immunity labs will strengthen
confidence and feeling of self-efficacy in promising BIPOC or first-gen
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage Inceptin Receptor (INR),
a newly discovered pattern recognition receptor (PRR) which detects Inceptin, a
herbivore-associated molecular pattern (HAMP) found in caterpillar oral
secretions. INR is a leucine-rich repeat-containing, receptor-like protein and
is specific to a subtribe of legumes, the Phaseolinae. The project will use
backcrossed lines of common bean with an introgressed INR deletion to quantify
the contribution of INR to overall herbivore defense. Receptor-dependent
responses following live herbivore challenge will be quantified at multiple
timepoints and spatial scales. Reverse genetic approaches will be used to test
the contribution of putative herbivore-specific factors. A forward genetic
screen for novel legume factors will also be performed. The project will test
the hypothesis that INR-mediated responses to HAMPs reflect amplification of
damage-associated processes as well as specific targets for strong anti-
herbivore defense responses. The proposed work will span plant-pathogen and
plant-herbivore interactions to contribute to a holistic view of PRRs functions
in plant biotic interactions. INR is a candidate for transfer into legume and
non-legume species that lack this specific PRR, including soybean. Understanding
the immune contribution of a HAMP recognition module will inform the use of PRRs
to confer agricultural traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.