* 2139786
* Computing in the Arts - The Algorithm is the Medium
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Bill Manaris, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,987.00

This project aims to redefine how we teach computer science to reach new kinds
of computing students, students who apply computing to different fields in the
arts, such as visual art (drawing, painting, photography), music, dance,
sculpture, printmaking, art history, theater and performance art, among others.
In this context, “the Algorithm is the Medium”, and as such young creators need
to learn to think algorithmically and interweave algorithmic modeling and
development of computational solutions into their art thinking and practice.
Algorithms have existed for at least 2,000 years (e.g., Euclid's algorithm). In
music and art, algorithms appear as early as Guido d'Arezzo (ca. 1000 A.D.), and
in compositions by Bach, Mozart, John Cage, Iannis Xenakis, among others. Modern
examples include data sonification for scientific or aesthetic purposes, such as
sonifying biosignals, images, orbits of planets, and human movement (e.g.,
dance), among others. This project will focus on Computing in the Arts (CITA),
an NSF-funded model curriculum, which is part of the new movement to combine art
and design with science, technology, engineering and math (STEM + Art = STEAM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build a strong, yet
diversified community of CS+Art educators and practitioners with the ultimate
goal of developing new curricular guidelines to synthesize the creativity and
design of art with the mathematical rigor and formality of computer science,
technology, and engineering. A six-year longitudinal study shows that the CITA
model curriculum attracts and retains almost twice as many female students,
compared to traditional CS degree programs, and graduates 45.6% women compared
to the 19% national average in CS. This project consists of two workshops, one
in Fall 2021, and one in Spring 2022. The project will produce a report as an
outcome, and lay the foundation to develop curricular guidelines for building
effective CITA degree programs in US universities and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.