* 2139185
* Two-Dimensional Amorphous Carbon with Tunable Atomic Structures As A Novel Dielectric Material for Advanced Electronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/28/2026
* USD 700,485.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Atomically thin electronic materials
developed recently could transform the current semiconductor industry built on
bulk silicon and enable more powerful electronic devices with their extremely
scaled thickness and unique physical properties. However, the synthesis of
atomically thin insulators with controllable atomic structures and electrical
properties is a significant challenge. This research projects seeks to develop a
unique process to prepare atomically thin carbon-based insulators from solution-
processable precursors. Their atomic structures can be adjusted to optimize
their properties for different demanding applications in electronics. The
thickness of the prepared insulating thin films can be precisely controlled down
to atomic resolution, and they can be formed with excellent uniformity across
the whole surface of semiconductor wafers. Results from this project shed light
on the structure-property relationship for atomically thin solids that lacks an
ordered internal structure, and could technologically lead to faster, more
powerful, and more portable cell phones and computers. The project provides
summer research internships for local high-school students from underrepresented
groups and helps to develop a hands-on module with focus on the application of
machine learning in material characterizations for undergraduates. These
outreach opportunities prepare sustainable, adaptable, and globally competitive
science and engineering workforce to benefit US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to develop two-dimensional (2D) amorphous carbon with unique
atomic structures and material properties as a novel and transformative
dielectric material for advanced electronic applications. The project starts
from developing a unique process to prepare 2D amorphous carbon monolayer with
tunable degree of medium range ordering, based on the tiling and cross-linking
of zero-dimensional carbon dots with intrinsic crystalline-amorphous core-shell
structure as solution-processable precursors. Layer-by-layer deposition further
enables the precise control over the film thickness at atomic resolution.
Scientifically, the unique properties of the atomically thin 2D amorphous carbon
will be correlated with the detailed atomic structures combining material
characterizations, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, and
density-functional theory simulation. Technologically, the 2D amorphous carbon
monolayers and multilayers are used as the key dielectric component in 2D
material-based transistors and memristors to enable enhanced device performance
and reduced variability compared to their counterparts built on bulk metal
oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.