* 2139178
* Toward Quantitative Three-Dimensional and Three-Component Velocimetry in Reactive Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Lin Ma, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 326,698.00

The fundamental property called 3D3C velocity is important in a wide range of
disciplines and its resolution is important for many societal challenges,
including clean energy. For example, 3D3C velocity is required for better
understanding and better design of energy systems, including gas turbines, wind
turbines, and hydrogen engines. 3D3C velocity is flow velocity in all three
dimensions (3D) with all three components (3C) resolved. Measuring this property
is very important and considerable efforts have been invested to invent
velocimetry techniques that can obtain 3D3C velocity measurements. However,
challenges remain in these measurements, especially around quantifiable accuracy
and in reactive flows. This project aims to enable quantitative 3D3C velocity
measurements in reactive flows to pave the way for the design of cleaner energy
solutions. In addition, the project will be integrated into the researchers’
daily teaching activities, K-12 outreach activities, design projects, and
industrial collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, the project will
concentrate on one issue: the poorly-understood uncertainties of our current
3D3C velocimetry techniques in reactive flows. This project proposes to resolve
this issue and enable quantitative 3D3C velocity measurements in 3 progressive
steps. Step I aims at understanding existing techniques’ uncertainties at a
fundamental level. This step will design novel experiments so that the ground
truth velocity can be known a priori and the errors can be directly quantified.
Based on Step I, Step II then aims at inventing new strategies to significantly
improve the accuracy of 3D3C velocimetry. Preliminary results have identified
several promising ideas including new tomographic reconstruction algorithms and
active correction of beam-steering caused by turbulence. And finally, Step III
proposes to apply the new understanding from Steps I and II and new strategies
to interpret existing data to establish a new database with enhanced accuracy
and well-defined error bars for the community. Velocity is the most basic
property both as a key input and a key output for model comparison. The
quantitative 3D3C results sought in this project are expected to be a valuable
database for the research community, both to validate existing models and also
to inspire new insights and new models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.