* 2139391
* CIC-E: COVID Information Commons Extension for Pandemic Recovery
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jeannette Wing, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

The COVID Information Commons, CIC
(http://covidinfocommons.datascience.columbia.edu/), was established in May 2020
via an NSF COVID Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award to facilitate information
sharing and collaboration across NSF-funded COVID research efforts. The initial
focus was on compiling publicly available information from all COVID-related
projects funded by the various Directorates across NSF in order to create a
easily searchable corpus. In addition to the publicly available information, the
CIC also collected self-report information from the projects via a voluntary
survey. A webinar series was created, featuring talks by researchers from the
NSF-funded COVID RAPID research projects. The CIC Extension will extend this
initial CIC effort to also include all projects funded by NSF related to the
pandemic recovery phase. In addition, it will seek to include publicly available
information on COVID-related efforts beyond those funded by the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial CIC effort clearly demonstrated the
benefits of bringing together information about a diverse set of COVID-related
projects into a single place, thereby enabling interested users to efficiently
search for information and discover linkages among diverse efforts. This helped
foster the creation of a community and helped catalyze collaborations. The CIC
Extension will carry forward this idea to include projects in the pandemic
recovery phase, and will additionally incorporate contemporary ways of
interacting with the information such as via search and discovery of linked
information using semantic search methods, and the use of domain ontologies and
knowledge graph mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact is central to
the idea of the COVID Information Commons, which pulls together publicly
available information along with voluntary self-report information on NSF-funded
COVID-related research projects in order to enable search and discovery of
information and collaborations among individual efforts. The CIC has
demonstrated early successes in creating such collaborations among researchers
from diverse scientific disciplines and from different parts of the country
drawn together by their common interest in studying the COVID pandemic. By
extending the CIC effort to the pandemic recovery phase, the CIC Extension will
reach an even larger and more diverse community of COVID researchers and
facilitate networking among researchers engaged in COVID-related research. The
CIC Extension will also build upon and expand the successful research webinar
series and undergraduate engagement programs initiated in the initial phase of
this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in part under
the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.