* 2139805
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the molecular mechanisms of hormone-like function of terpenoids
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nitzan Shabek, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2025
* USD 714,689.00

Plants emit an amazing diversity of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that play
numerous roles in plant growth and development. They are also targets of
released compounds as a part of plant-plant communication, as well as plant-
insect and plant-microbe interactions. Plants are constantly exposed to
atmospheric VOCs and can differentiate and respond to specific cues, therefore
VOC perception is an essential part of information exchange. Due to the plethora
of biological processes dependent on VOCs, significant progress has been made
towards understanding the biosynthesis of plant VOCs and their regulation, and,
in recent years, the molecular mechanisms involved in VOC emission. However, to
date little is known about how VOCs are perceived by plants and trigger cellular
response(s). This project will characterize signaling pathway(s) involved in
perception of volatiles and mode of action of volatile signals, particularly
terpenoids, in plant growth and development. This research will also answer the
long-standing question about the nature of unknown endogenous plant signaling
molecule(s). The results will fill important gaps in our understanding of plant
olfaction and elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying volatile perception
and responses in plants. The obtained information will be groundbreaking for our
understanding of plant interactions in the ecosystem and uncover the differences
between volatile perception in plants and that in animals and insects. Given the
VOC multifunctionality and overall lack of understanding of volatile perception
in plants, this research will identify new targets for metabolic engineering for
simultaneous improvement of plant defense and fitness. The proposed research
will provide multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students,
and postdoctoral researchers. The educational program will also introduce STEM-
based research to a local middle school with minority students. The goals are to
improve student enthusiasm, interest, and perceptions about scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perception is an essential part of plant-plant,
plant-insect and plant-microbe interactions, but the molecular mechanisms remain
unknown. The absence of reliable molecular markers of the perception state makes
the investigation of plant communication difficult. The recent discovery in
petunia flowers of inter-organ aerial transport of volatiles via natural
fumigation and hormone-like function of terpenoids, provides an excellent
platform for investigating the mode of VOC perception and dissecting signaling
cascade(s) involved. Preliminary results in Petunia hybrida flowers led to
hypothesis that a karrikin-like signaling pathway is involved in perception of
volatile signals via a karrikin-insensitive receptor, PhKAI2ia, and mediates
terpene-dependent stigma development. This research will employ an integrative
strategy comprised of genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, metabolic
profiling, structural and cell biology to (1) identify the targets of the new
KAI2ia-dependent volatile sesquiterpene signaling pathway; (2) perform
structure-functional analysis of PhKAI2ia receptor and elucidate the molecular
features that determine its substrate specificity/selectivity; and (3) determine
whether the KAI2ia-dependent sesquiterpene signalling pathway operates via MAX2
ubiquitin ligase essential for karrikin signaling. This work will uncover yet
unknown role(s) of KAI2is in plant VOC perception, illuminate KAI2ia-dependent
signaling pathway from organismal to molecular levels and answer the question of
how MAX2 ubiquitin ligases deliberate ligand-specific
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.