* 2139569
* Collaborative Research: Expedite CSI Processing with Lightweight AI in Massive MIMO Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Feng Ye, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 02/28/2025
* USD 174,520.00

Next generation wireless communications will need to support heterogeneous
devices with different capabilities on communications, computations, and power
to deliver applications with various performance demands such as high data rate,
low power consumption, and low latency. Massive multiple-input multiple output
(MIMO) has been widely considered a compelling technology for achieving high
capacity and high spectrum efficiency in the future wireless communication
networks. To fully unleash the potential performance gains claimed by massive
MIMO communication systems, it is of vital importance to have timely and
accurate channel state information (CSI) at the transmitters, especially at the
base station side. The main goal of this project is to explore a systematic
approach that accelerates the CSI processing by orders of magnitude in massive
MIMO communication systems. The project will lay a foundation to enhancing data
rate and energy efficiency, spectral efficiency in the next-generation wireless
communications. The research efforts associated with the project can have a
significant impact on the lightweight artificial intelligence (AI) design for
wireless communication systems, which will further improve many application
domains, including beyond 5G wireless networks, autonomous machine-to-machine
communications, vehicular networks, and Internet-of-Things. The outcomes of the
project can foster the transition of our society into the intelligent wireless
networking age, where wireless communication systems can provide seamless
support to match many different wireless applications for massive network
devices and support many services with high computation demands and quality of
service needs. Moreover, the Principal Investigators are committed to
integrating research and education by introducing emerging computing and
lightweight AI in wireless communication systems into the current electrical and
computer engineering curricula in the three participating universities. The
project will also provide opportunities for students to learn, develop and apply
advanced wireless communications, which they would not receive from a
traditional B.S. or M.S. curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the coherence
time requirement in massive MIMO systems can be extremely difficult for CSI
processing due to the complex traditional model as well as AI model development
and inconsistent performance across environments. In this research project,
theoretical analysis and performance evaluations will be obtained for novel
algorithms designed for 1) optimization on the decompressed feature in the CSI
reconstruction process, 2) simplifying the AI structures for multi-rate
compression and reconstruction, and 3) autonomous CSI reconstruction performance
evaluation and AI model update. The optimized features and simplified AI
structures can significantly reduce the complexity in terms of floating point
operations per second (FLOPs). Thus, the AI implementation can be accelerated by
1 to 2 orders of magnitude without losing reconstruction accuracy for timely CSI
processing in massive MIMO communication systems. The systematic methodologies
can be readily extended to facilitate many other applications that encounter the
similar challenges and present similar needs on reducing latency and computation
needs. Furthermore, this research project can greatly promote the understanding
in AI-supported massive MIMO systems for better spectrum and power efficiency
and will contribute fundamentally to the design of highly efficient machine-to-
machine communications that require high level of
autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.