* 2139411
* I-Corps:  Multiline Ring Anchor for Floating Offshore Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Charles Aubeny, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
cost-effective anchor for mooring arrays of floating structures to the seabed,
with applications in offshore wind and wave power generation, large scale
aquaculture, and coastal protection. Anchorage/mooring system costs can comprise
a significant portion of the total capital cost for these types of projects, so
cost savings derived from this anchor may improve the economic competitiveness
of the overall project. The Multiline Ring Anchor (MRA) has a circular symmetry
to permit multiple mooring line attachments to a single anchor, greatly reducing
the number of anchors within an array of floating units. The MRA is designed for
high efficiency - high load capacity relative to its size - thereby requiring
decreased amounts of steel, smaller and fewer transport vessels, and smaller
installation and handling equipment. The MRA is also designed to provide
resistance to both horizontal and vertical mooring line loads, the latter being
essential for taut mooring systems in deep-water developments. Seabed soil
conditions are highly variable in U.S. waters, leading to a need for a versatile
anchor that can be installed and function in a wide range of soil
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the merging of two
research areas associated with the development of the Multiline Ring Anchor
(MRA). The first involves wind and wave modeling to quantify the stochastic,
time-varying loads placed on platforms that are transmitted through the mooring
lines down to the anchor. This study considers different platform types and both
catenary and taut mooring systems. The second research area involves
investigation of the geotechnical performance of the anchor when subjected to
such loading. This research thrust comprises parallel numerical simulations and
geotechnical centrifuge tests of the MRA embedded in clay and sand soils. The
geotechnical studies aim to quantify the maximum mooring line loads that the MRA
is capable of resisting and to confirm that repeated load cycles will not induce
gradual upward ratcheting movements of the anchor, which could deleteriously
affect anchor performance. The wind/wave modeling and geotechnical studies will
provide insights and knowledge extending beyond the direct focus of this study
and can be applicable to other mooring systems and
anchors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.