* 2139971
* NSF-DFG Echem: Elucidating Surface Structure Contribution of Facets, Steps and Kinks in Electrocatalysis of the Oxygen Evolution and Reduction Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ryan Richards, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 506,025.00

This project is an international collaboration between the Colorado School of
Mines (USA), the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (USA), Carl von Ossietzky
University Oldenburg (Germany) and the German Aerospace Center-Deutsches Zentrum
f√ºr Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR) in Germany. Electrolysis is a key technology to
generate green hydrogen using renewable energies while fuel cells are crucial
for converting stored energy into electrical energy. Both technologies require
catalysts which currently struggle with sluggish kinetics limiting their
efficiencies and thus requiring the development of improved electrocatalysts.
Currently, water electrolyzers and fuel cells use metals that are scarce and
expensive thereby limiting large-scale commercialization. In this research
program we target the use of earth abundant materials such as first row
transition metals (Ni, Fe, Co, Mn or Cu) in the form of metal oxides as
electrocatalysts through fundamental study and manipulation of the surfaces.
This project brings together American and German scientists and engineers to
work on this challenging project thus providing a unique educational experience
for the students involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to create higher performing, more durable non-precious metal
catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction
(ORR). Alkaline conditions established by the chemical nature of an anion
exchange membrane (AEM) enable the usage of alternative catalytic materials for
the OER in AEM water electrolysis (AEMWE) and ORR in AEM fuel cells (AEMFC). The
rock salt structure enables synthesis of shape-controlled metal oxide particles
with (111) or (100) surfaces, which are not (easily) achievable for other
crystal structures like spinels or pervoskites, allowing elucidation of their
role in oxygen electrocatalysis. Further, these materials offer ideal platforms
to systematically study the effects of tailoring the surfaces with steps and
kinks and making multi-metal oxides with elements of similar ionic radii (e.g.
Co, Mn, Fe). Our central hypothesis is that controlling the surface termination
and facet exposure of a catalyst can alter the coordination and bonding
environments at the surface thus changing the reactant-catalyst interaction and
the electrocatalytic OER/ORR activity. Therefore, the connection between
synthesis, surface morphology and electrochemical performance will provide the
underlying fundamental knowledge crucial for the design of
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was funded under the NSF-DFG Lead
Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)
opportunity NSF 20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.