* 2139697
* I-Corps: Tele-rehabilitation system for individuals with upper limb motor dysfunction
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Charmayne Hughes, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of a low-cost tele-rehabilitation system for individuals with motor
dysfunction. Numerous technology-enabled tele-rehabilitation systems presently
exist, but their relatively high cost, safety concerns, and bulkiness often
limit their application in decentralized environments. This project involves the
development of a low-cost, sensor-enabled mobile health system that records body
movements and derives quantitative metrics that are meaningful to both
clinicians and patients. Commercialization of this technology has the potential
to improve the way that sensorimotor disorders are managed in individuals with
neurological and musculoskeletal impairments. The technology platform could
serve as a model for home-based tele-rehabilitation, improving clinical practice
and access to care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a low-cost, sensor-enabled system for upper limb rehabilitation
that combines mobile technology, micro-electromechanical system inertial
measurement units, sensor-fusion algorithms, and biomechanics. The system
provides a way for rehabilitation clinicians to accurately quantify movement
quality and monitor patient compliance and quality of life. The technology will
be applied to assess motor dysfunction in stroke survivors and patients with
acquired traumatic brain injury. Test accuracy, consistency, reliability and
validity of the system's measurements will be
demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.