* 2139096
* Addressing Demographic Disparities in Students Choice of Engineering Disciplines (ADDS-CoED)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Diane Austin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 03/31/2026
* USD 454,335.00

One NSF strategic goal is increasing the diversity of engineering as a field, to
enhance the profession, increase opportunities for all demographics, and make
better use of America’s human resources. However, years of effort have had
limited success: women and ethnic minority students remain severely
underrepresented, starting with undergraduate engineering programs at
universities. Most of the underrepresentation is due to chronic extremely low
diversity in a few of the engineering disciplines (aerospace, mechanical,
mining, electrical, and computer engineering in particular). In contrast, others
(e.g. biomedical and environmental engineering) are roughly at gender parity.
Ethnic diversity shows analogous patterns. Preliminary data from the University
of Arizona suggest that this is due to female and minority students’
disproportionately low levels of interest in these disciplines. This project
will pilot a new approach to increasing diversity in engineering, at the level
of individual disciplines where diversity is lacking. We further hypothesize
that female and minority interest in mining and aerospace engineering would
increase if they were presented with a greater connection to social benefit.
Initially, the investigative team will carry out surveys and interviews at the
University of Arizona College of Engineering to measure preexisting demographic
differences in students’ levels of interest in engineering disciplines. We will
test these hypotheses with a mixed-methods intervention study focused on two
specific non-diverse disciplines (mining and aerospace engineering) at the
University of Arizona. Baseline data (surveys, interviews) will continue to be
collected in Year 1. Then, a targeted intervention to two low-diversity majors
(aerospace and mining engineering) will examine whether female and Hispanic
students’ interest and representation increases when introductory courses and
recruitment materials change to emphasize their socially beneficial aspects as
well as abstract engineering. Interventions in Year 2 will reorient the
introductory mining engineering course, and the recruitment materials given to
students for both mining and aerospace engineering, to address more of the
socially beneficial aspects of both disciplines. Surveys and interviews with
students over the course of the project will evaluate changes in women and
minority (mainly Hispanic) students’ interest in mining and aerospace
engineering, compared to the non-intervention group (mechanical, electrical,
computer engineering). Interventions will remain in place for Years 3-4 of the
project while additional data are collected. If successful, this project can
point the way to improving diversity in engineering at the level of the specific
engineering disciplines where it is most needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.