* 2139184
* I-Corps: Plasmonic Optoelectronic Immunosensing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Xiaogan Liang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
clinical and bedside-based biosensing system that allows precise detection of
biomarkers associated with acute coronary syndrome in whole blood samples. The
envisioned system can potentially provide such detection for the diagnosis of
acute coronary syndromes (ACSs) with short turnaround time, without
hospitalization, and without the use of expensive equipment. ACSs are the
leading cause of death worldwide, accounting for 31% of all global deaths. This
platform can potentially perform a test and guide immediate treatment in an
ambulance or in a remote location with limited resources. The platform is
anticipated to have a wide range of secondary applications for the different
identifiable indications and biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project aims to provide a clinical and bedside biosensing system to allow an
easy, rapid, cost-effective, and precise detection of biomarkers associated with
acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in whole blood. The diagnosis occurs via a smart,
portable, hand-held point of care system. The core technical innovation is an
integrated system with a nanoplasmonics-based, label-free, antigen-antibody
binding assay and an ultrasensitive, ultralow-noise photo signal detector with a
two-dimensional molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) photoconductive channel. This
integration of a self-contained optoelectronic biosensor module enables a point
of care system that results in highly sensitive detection without the need for
sample preparation. The project has the potential to address time and resource-
intensive diagnostics in the treatment of clinical cardiac arrest
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.