* 2139716
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Wearable Dynamic Microsystem Sampler for Collecting Microbial Volatiles (SenSorp)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Masoud Agah, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

The characterization and monitoring of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted
from different sources is immensely important in different disciplines. One of
these applications is the analysis of VOCs emitted from human skin for biomarker
discovery and disease diagnosis. Skin performs critical functions including
protection of internal living tissue and other organs, establishes contact to
the external environment and has high metabolic activity. Systemic as well as
localized skin diseases are known to modify the molecular and microbial
composition of human skin. Consequently, the skin is becoming recognized as a
wealthy source of diagnostic information regarding physiological status. There
is evidence of canines having a sophisticated olfactory ability to detect the
presence of COVID-19 disease from the volatile emission of body and the role of
skin volatiles in canine sensing of epilepsy attacks is thought to be
significant. It is important to develop new robust and smart analytical
workflows to study skin VOCs with the goal of new volatile biomarker
identification for wearable bio-diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research provides the first-of-its-kind approach for standardizing skin scent
collection and develops a readily deployable system as small as an apple watch
for point-of-care skin VOC collection. The proposed SenSorp is fabricated using
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) and 3D printing technologies and includes a
sampler to collect VOCs from skin and a sensor to track the amount of VOCs
collected. SenSorp measures the collected VOCs in real time and notifies the
user about the collected mass through its electronic circuity embedded within
the SenSorp’s Smart Key. SenSorp is equipped with a novel 3D printed package
that can prevent the adsorption of VOCs from the environment during sample
collection from skin and during the storage via its embedded valving mechanism.
The rotation of the Smart Key will open or close the VOC pathway from outside
(skin/environment) to the adsorption materials in the SenSorp. The SenSorp Auto-
Injector is the interface module to commercial gas chromatography instruments
for identification of VOCs present in the skin. The validation of the system in
controlled microbial environments with subsequent human subject studies is a key
step toward the final objective of this collaborative effort, which is to make
skin scent a robust medium for disease biomarker discovery and disease
diagnosis. The outcome of this project will set an outstanding example of how
microscale engineering and analytical chemistry can become highly complementary
methodologies to develop low-cost, accessible platforms for biomarker discovery
and disease diagnosis. This research will advance discovery while promoting
teaching and learning at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The outcome of
this research will be integrated with Virginia Tech’s outreach programs
targeting mainly under-represented groups in STEM led by the Center for the
Enhancement of Engineering Diversity (CEED). There will be wide dissemination of
the research outcomes to the engineering and scientific communities in peer-
reviewed journals, in presentation at multidisciplinary conferences, and in
social media (Youtube, LinkedIn, and Clubhouse).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.