* 2139278
* A conference to explore theories regarding how moral motives move people from STEM information learning to STEM-informed action
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,03/31/2023
* John Voiklis, Knology Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 03/31/2023
* USD 82,381.00

Informal learning institutions--museums, libraries, news organizations, and
others--work to inform their audiences about the rapidly emerging scientific
consensus on various topics. Often this information invites action such as
social distancing during a pandemic. What motivates people to act upon that
information (or not)? When recommended actions can yield good or bad outcomes
for oneself, the information needs to fit with motivational tendencies towards
preventing bad outcomes and/or promoting good outcomes. Recent theories indicate
similar motives for recommended actions that affect others: family, friends,
neighbors, and up the scale to the societal and the biological world. This small
virtual conference will bring together STEM researchers and practitioners to
offer a transdisciplinary and practically minded critique of the model of moral
motives and discuss its implications for actions related to STEM topics.
Specifically, the conference will use data collected by NSF RAPID grant
(#2027939) that connects people’s news consumption, their compliance with
COVID-19 prevention recommendations, and their judgments of whose wellbeing
(from self to society) recommended behaviors protect or promote.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This small virtual conference will recruit approximately
16 attendees including transdisciplinary scholars whose work addresses social
responsibility in the context of STEM informal learning and practitioners from a
broad range of sectors including science centers, libraries, zoos, and the
media. Individual disciplines will include anthropology, psychology, the
interdisciplinary fields of the learning sciences and judgement and decision-
making. The conference strategy will include synchronous, asynchronous, and
small group collaborations in addition to full-group discussion. Conference
activities will spread over 8 weeks. The structure of the conference is loosely
based on the Open Space Technology approach (i.e.: General &amp; Lantelme, 2014,
Owen 1997). To build capacity in these various informal learning sectors
participants will distill implications about moral motives into practical advice
to publish in the conference proceedings that will include a report on the
initial and collaboratively revised models. An editable version of the
proceedings will allow registered practitioners to further critique and develop
that advice. The conference proceedings will be distributed as a short Creative
Commons e-book with copies and links distributed on the website of the Center
for Advancing Informal STEM Education , and through all the participant’s
professional research and practitioner societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning
in informal environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM
in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.