* 2139763
* TCU Advanced Manufacturing Network Meeting
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Algirdas Kuslikis, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 108,500.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research and development capacity at
these institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover it will build and enhance
partnerships among TCUP institutions, tribal nations, local industries, and
university partners in developing the nationâ€™s workforce and strengthening
economies. The American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC) aims to
organize and convene a group stakeholders focused on building a Tribal Advanced
Manufacturing Network. The project aims to be a significant step in developing a
national distributed manufacturing workforce involving multiple Tribal Colleges
and Universities (TCUs), coordinating curriculum development, training, and
research partnerships that improve economic development on tribal nations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to bring together tribal economic
development stakeholders, which includes TCUs, tribal economic development
agencies, industry representatives in the manufacturing sector, and university
engineering departments to review the state of advanced manufacturing programs
at TCUs and on tribal nations, identify opportunities to develop a collective
strategy that includes a common agenda, shared measurable goals, a commitment to
regular communications among partners, and commitments to activities that
advance the overall goals of the initiative. The project aims to establish a
core set of components to drive the Tribal Advanced Manufacturing Network that
will ensure mutual benefits, determine opportunities for advancement, and
identify the most appropriate partnerships to grow the network. The format of
the meeting will include panel presentations, interactive dialogue, and
strategic planning sessions. A report and video will be produced and broadly
disseminated by AIHEC to partner institutions, tribal nations, and industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.