* 2139709
* The Transition from Back Arc to Slab Window to Continental Rifting, Evidence from the Subcontinental Lithospheric Mantle of West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 322,106.00

The subcontinental mantle lithosphere is created and modified at plate
boundaries through a complex and variable mix of tectonic and magmatic processes
that ultimately affect the evolution of the Earth's continents and mantle. The
project goal is to evaluate the processes that create, modify, and destroy the
subcontinental mantle lithosphere beneath Western Antarctica through the
interpretation of a well-integrated set of geochemical and microstructural data
from rock samples. The new data will be integrated with already existing
seismological observations and geochemistry of erupted basalts. The project will
estimate how the composition, structure, mechanical properties, temperature, and
foundering potential of the subcontinental mantle lithosphere change along a
transect through the Antarctic Peninsula, Jones Mountain, Marie Byrd Land and
Ross Island; areas that represent different tectonic and magmatic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project assesses the geochemistry and microstructure
on mantle xenoliths collected in West Antarctica to establish: 1) the xenolith
pressure-temperature conditions of the tectono-magmatic events, 2) the
variations in the degree of mantle hydration in time and space and its effect on
the associated microstructure, 3) the time and source of the subcontinental
mantle lithosphere metasomatic agents, 4) the link between mantle xenolith data
and the already existing seismological observations and geochemistry of erupted
basalts, 5) the effective viscosity of the subcontinental mantle lithosphere and
whether the deformation occurred prior to or was affected by the introduction of
water and melt, and 6) the contribution of the subcontinental mantle lithosphere
into the composition of the erupted basalts across West Antarctica. A key
question the project will address is how normal subduction, slab window and
continental rifting have produced differences in the inferred density and
viscosity structures; and how such difference affected the stability of the
subcontinental mantle lithosphere and its potential for ablation by mantle wedge
flow, aided by reductions in viscosity due to volatiles and melt, and/or
foundering beneath West Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.