* 2139567
* I-Corps: A diagnostic platform for the analysis of biomarkers in multiplexed immunoassays
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Katsuo Kurabayashi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable a
rapid, high-sensitivity, multiplex, digital immunoassay diagnostic platform.
With a short turnaround, the platform is able to test blood samples of
critically ill patients suffering from life-threatening conditions. If
successfully commercialized, the technology is expected to provide immediate
guidance for caregivers to make timely clinical decisions and proactively
intervene before disease conditions worsen. The platform can potentially reduce
the current mortality rate of infection-related acute illnesses in intensive
care units. Additionally, the platform allows for the simultaneous detection of
multiple biomarkers in a highly reliable and accurate manner. The I-Corps
project will explore the commercialization potential of the digital immunoassay
platform, exploring the use by diagnostic companies having clients in clinical
laboratory medicine, hospital procurement managers and doctors of pathology, and
researchers in biopharmaceutical companies as potential
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a prototype digital immunoassay platform using a pre-equilibrium digital
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay microarray. The microarray has been
demonstrated to allow real-time profiling of multiple biomarker molecules
(proteins and metabolites) for critically ill patients suffering from the side
effects of cancer immune therapy and COVID-19 infections. The platform confines
antibody-conjugated beads into an array of a large number of femtoliter-sized
microwells on a microfluidic chip, each forming a fluorescent pixel turned on
when the target analyte is bound. The highly localized confinement of antibody-
antigen immune complex formation within such a small volume enables single-
molecule detection of individual analyte binding events. The technique counts
the number of fluorescence signal-activated pixels from a snapshot image of the
entire microwell array taken for highly pre-equilibrated analyte binding events.
As a result, the platform achieves high testing speed, high sensitivity, and
potentially lower instrumentation cost than current
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.