* 2139091
* Science for Judges - Development of the Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence, 4th Edition
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Everly, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 874,752.00

The Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence is a primary reference source for
federal judges on questions of &lt;br/&gt;science in litigation. It is used not
only by federal judges, but by state judges, attorneys, legal scholars, and
&lt;br/&gt;law students. Its utility and widespread use is the result of the
fair and balanced presentation it provides of &lt;br/&gt;fundamental principles
of scientific methodology in areas likely to arise in expert testimony. Ten
years have &lt;br/&gt;passed since the publication of the last (third) edition
of the Reference Manual, and many of the chapters need &lt;br/&gt;updating to
account for recent developments in science and law. For example, the chapter on
DNA &lt;br/&gt;identification needs updating to take into account new genetic
testing techniques and methodologies, andthe &lt;br/&gt;chapter on neuroscience
must take account of new approaches for detecting neural activity. A new edition
will &lt;br/&gt;also need to address emerging areas of science that have become
important in litigation in recent years. The &lt;br/&gt;Committee on Science,
Technology, and Law of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
&lt;br/&gt;Medicine, in collaboration with the Federal Judicial Center (FJC) –
the research and education agency of the &lt;br/&gt;judicial branch of the U.S.
government – have agreed to pursue the development of a fourth edition of the
&lt;br/&gt;Reference Manual. The manual ultimately benefits society by
increasing the rigor with which the judiciary &lt;br/&gt;evaluates scientific
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A committee of 10-12 members representing both
the legal and scientific/ engineering/ medical communities &lt;br/&gt;will be
convened to develop new edition of the manual with input from the FJC. The new
edition will include &lt;br/&gt;updates of chapters from the previous edition of
the Reference Manual as well as new chapters that reflect &lt;br/&gt;emerging
areas of science, technology, and medicine relevant to the courts. The committee
will select the &lt;br/&gt;topics to be included in the manual, commission
expert authors to revise the current chapters or draft new &lt;br/&gt;ones,
review all draft chapters, approve the chapters for external review, submit the
manual for external &lt;br/&gt;review, and oversee chapter revisions as
necessitated by external review comments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
co-funded by the following NSF Divisions: Social and Economic Sciences;
Chemistry; Information and Intelligent Systems; Computer and Network Systems;
ITR/CISE Information Technology Research; Engineering Education and Centers;
Molecular and Cellular Biology; Research in Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.