* 2139035
* ERI: Mechanism for Improved Strength in Fast Pyrolysis Biochar Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Lori Tunstall, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,991.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engineering Research
Initiation (ERI) project will focus on elucidating the mechanisms that lead to
improved strength in fast pyrolysis biochar concrete. Biochar is a carbon-rich
material made from the pyrolysis of biomass. Biochar is produced via the thermal
decomposition of biomass in a zero or limited oxygen environment. Since biochar
is highly stable, the embedded carbon is resistant to decomposition, slowly
releasing CO2 over hundreds or thousands of years. This results in long-term
removal of carbon from the atmosphere, making biochar a powerful material for
carbon sequestration. Fast pyrolysis of biomass generates also a bio-oil and
synthetic natural gas, which can generate energy and decrease the use of fossil
fuels. Recently, biochar has gained momentum as a carbon sequestering agent for
use in concrete. However, this application has only utilized slow pyrolysis
biochar, which has much different properties than the fast pyrolysis biochar
adopted in this project. By using fast pyrolysis biochar, a preliminary study
shows that when 15 percent of cement weight is replaced with biochar, the
strength of concrete increases by nearly 40 percent. At 15 percent biochar to
cement substitution, the biochar can offset the greenhouse gas emissions
associated with concrete by at least 48 percent; at 32 percent biochar to cement
substitution, the biochar would make concrete a carbon negative building
material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal, three primary
objectives are identified: 1) to characterize the microstructural and
physiochemical properties of three distinct fast pyrolysis biochar products; 2)
to characterize the microstructure and chemical composition of cementitious
materials made with these three biochar products; and 3) to analyze the strength
behavior of the resulting concretes and the strength-microstructure
relationship. Furthermore, this award contributes to the education of a female
graduate student, and will provide research opportunities for middle school
girls with events designed to address the reported gap between STEM
interest/aptitude in adolescent girls and girlsâ€™ chosen career paths at later
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.