* 2139724
* EAGER: Towards a multimodal smart textile medical monitoring system for Neonatal ICUs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Krishna Kumar Venkatasubramanian, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 315,998.00

The rate of premature babies is rising in the US affecting 78 per 1000 live
births admitted to Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) yearly. Due to low birth
weight and underdeveloped body systems, premature babies are at a high risk of
experiencing both short-term and long-term health issues. However, to date,
NICUs still use gel-based sticky electrodes glued to the fragile, underdeveloped
skin of premature babies. Studies have reported that these electrodes could
cause skin harm such as rashes, irritation, breakdown, and stripping. Moreover,
these electrodes are connected using long wires that make the critical care for
nurses inconvenient, tedious, and time consuming. Drying sticky electrodes often
lead to a loose connection with the skin and ultimately compromise the quality
of medical monitoring. Because of long wires, parents find it difficult to
provide skin-to-skin/kangaroo care to their babies while in NICU. The central
objective of this EAGER proposal is to design and test a novel smart e-textile
system, a chest belt that can enhance medical monitoring practices in NICU. The
proposal synergizes the team’s expertise in areas of smart textile,
physiological monitoring, biosignal processing, and human-centered technology
design to address critical need for smart, safe, and connected monitoring
systems in NICUs. In addition to the scientific impacts of this EAGER, the
proposed work will advance national health by addressing multiple existing gaps
in NICUs. The educational and outreach plans will provide training opportunities
for women and under-represented minorities and will also develop a K-12
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
design and test a new NICU-centered wireless medical monitoring technology that
is designed from biocompatible smart textile materials requiring no adhesive
gel. Aim 1 will focus on NICU centered design and development of smart textile-
based medical monitoring systems. Aim 2 will focus on characterization and
evaluation of the proposed smart e-textile. The project will start with an
ethnographic study of the NICU, focus groups involving NICU nurses, and
interviews of parents of babies in the NICU to understand the challenges
associated with providing care to premature babies. This will lead to the
development of a novel functional prototype of a wireless smart textile
technology that can offer reliable monitoring of medical signals with improved
comfort. The project includes a feasibility study to measure the performance and
usability of the proposed smart textile on healthy adults and healthy infants.
The study will enable us to develop signal analysis methods for signal quality
index and noise characterization that are critical to address the issue of false
alarms in NICU caused by poor skin-electrode contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.