* 2139557
* 2021 Waterman Award
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Nicholas Carnes, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Nicholas Cranes, Creed C. Black
Associate Professor of Public Policy and Political Science at Duke University as
the 2021 Alan T. Waterman Award recipient. Dr. Carnes is recognized for his
path-breaking research on how a range of societal institutions influence
opportunity and inequality in the United States. Dr Carnes's new area of
scholarship offers new clarity on causes and consequences of changing
circumstances for workers and their families. His innovative work offers
original, invaluable, and comprehensive data for gaining new insights on how to
improve quality of life for millions of Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Carnes's research explores the impacts of diversity in educational background,
gender, and other demographic characteristics on representation, policy-making,
and decision-making. His work shows how people can be represented in decisions
of great importance and how expanding opportunities for underrepresented groups
can produce economic growth that benefits an increasingly diverse range of
citizens. Moreover, in collaborative research, Dr. Carnes explores government
and governance in a global context by drawing on cross-national data to examine
the correlation between the educational background of leaders and policy
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Carnes won the American Political Science
Association's (APSA) Harold D. Laswell Award for best dissertation in public
policy and APSA's Legislative Studies Section's Carl Albert Award for the best
doctoral dissertation in legislative studies. In 2014, his book White Collar
Government: the Hidden Role of Class in Economic Policy Making won both the
APSA's Gladys Kammerer Prize for the best book in US national policy and the
Alan Rosenthal Prize for Best Book or Article Written by a Junior Scholar that
has Potential Value to Legislative Practitioners (given by APSAâ€™s legislative
studies section).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Carnes received a B.A. in Political
Science from the University of Tulsa (2006), an M.A. in Politics from Princeton
University (2008), and a Ph.D. in Politics and Social Policy from Princeton
University (2011). He joined the faculty of Duke University in 2011, first as a
lecturer and subsequently as an assistant and associate
professor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.