* 2139368
* FET Core: Small: Workshop on Emerging Technologies of Post-Von Neumann Ising Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Hideo Mabuchi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 48,303.00

This project is devoted to organizing a strategic visioning workshop on Ising
Machines. The meeting will be held virtually over two days. Major themes include
overarching issues for Ising Machines as special-purpose computers for non-
convex optimization, strategies for maximizing the practical impact of future
research on Ising Machines, and assessment of current status and next steps for
hardware devices and architectures including both CMOS and non-CMOS (e.g.
optical) platforms. Recasting the foundations of computational optimization to
leverage emerging physics, mathematics, and management science will require an
expansive technology co-design approach that facilitates simultaneous and
coordinated rethinking of devices, architectures, algorithms and performance
metrics, in order to develop a concrete vision for optimization co-design
grounded in recent work on post-von Neumann Ising Machines (PVNIMs). The
intention of the workshop is to spark the coalescence of vertically-integrated
research communities around existing experimental hardware platforms and build
consensus regarding overarching goals for improving both the basic understanding
of non-convex optimization and the practical impact of frontier efforts. The
workshop will also build a new community around the emerging technology of post-
von Neumann Ising machines, and generally promote vertical integration of
research on the theory and practice of non-convex optimization. Advances in this
area have a high likelihood to impact broad areas of industry and policy. The
summary document to be prepared by the Steering Committee after the workshop is
intended likewise to influence research priorities across the CISE Directorate,
leading to increased opportunities for interdisciplinary research and training
in academic groups nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.