* 2139051
* OPP-PRF Investigating the influence of ocean temperature on Antarctic Ice Sheet evolution during the early to middle Pleistocene
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Michelle Guitard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 09/30/2023
* USD 302,445.00

Antarctic Ice Sheet stability remains a large uncertainty in predicting future
sea level. Presently, the greatest ice mass loss is observed in locations where
relatively warm water comes into contact with glaciers and ice shelves, melting
them from below. This has led researchers to hypothesize that the interactions
that occur between the ocean and the ice are important for determining ice sheet
stability and that increased warm water presence will accelerate Antarctic ice
mass loss and lead to greater sea level rise in the coming century. To better
predict future ice sheet behavior, it is critical to understand past ice-ocean
interactions around Antarctica, especially during warm periods and at times when
Earth’s climate was undergoing major changes. Past Antarctic ice mass and
environmental conditions like ocean temperature can be reconstructed using
sediments, which capture an environmental record as they accumulate on the ocean
floor. By looking at sediment composition and by analyzing geochemical
signatures within the sediment, it is possible to piece together a record of
climate change on hundred- to million-year timescales. This project will
reconstruct upper ocean temperatures and Antarctic ice retreat/advance cycles
from 2.6 to 0.7 million years ago, which encompasses the Mid-Pleistocene
Transition, a time in Earth’s history that marks the shift from 41-thousand year
glacial cycles to 100-thousand year glacial cycles. A record will be generated
from existing sediment cores collected from the Scotia Sea during International
Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 382. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mid-
Pleistocene Transition (MPT; ~1.25–0.7 Ma) marks the shift from glacial-
interglacial cycles paced by obliquity (~41 kyr cycles) to those paced by
eccentricity (~100-kyr cycles). This transition occurred despite little
variation in Earth’s orbital parameters, suggesting a role for internal climate
feedbacks. The MPT was accompanied by decreasing atmospheric pCO2, increasing
deep ocean carbon storage, and changes in deep water formation and distribution,
all of which are linked to Antarctic margin atmosphere-ice-ocean interactions.
However, Pleistocene records that document such interactions are rarely
preserved on the shelf due to repeated Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) advance;
instead, they are preserved in deep Southern Ocean basins. This project takes
advantage of the excellent preservation and recovery of continuous Pleistocene
sediment sequences collected from the Scotia Sea during International Ocean
Discovery Program Expedition 382 to test the following hypotheses: 1) Southern
Ocean upper ocean temperatures vary on orbital timescales during the early to
middle Pleistocene (2.6–0.7 Ma), and 2) Southern Ocean temperatures co-vary with
AIS advance/retreat cycles. Paleotemperatures will be reconstructed using the
TetraEther indeX of 86 carbons (TEX86), a proxy that utilizes marine archaeal
biomarkers. The Scotia Sea TEX86-based paleotemperature record will be compared
to records of AIS variability, including ice rafted debris. Expedition 382
records will be compared to orbitally paced climatic time series and the benthic
oxygen isotope record of global ice volume and bottom water temperature to
determine if a correlation exists between upper ocean temperature, AIS
retreat/advance, and orbital climate forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.