* 2139964
* Hat Creek Radio Observatory National Radio Dynamic Zone Prototype
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* David DeBoer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,446,437.00

This project enhances protection of radio astronomy facilities from radio
frequency (RF) interference, and provides early lessons learned to inform the
development of future National Radio Dynamic Zones that support a range of
spectrum sharing needs. Currently, radio astronomy facilities and their
observations are protected by prohibiting all transmissions in specific
frequency bands, requiring other RF users to coordinate their operations in
specific bands, or by designating radio quiet zones within which uncoordinated
transmissions are prohibited at all frequencies. However, increasing usage of
the RF spectrum by wireless devices of all kinds is believed to be increasing
the level of ambient RF noise. Further, the increasing demand for spectrum is
forcing increased spectrum sharing between disparate radio services. New and
innovative means are required to enable co-existence of radio astronomy
facilities and other passive spectrum users with active services. This project
contributes to these challenges by: performing a systematic survey of RF noise
at a representative radio astronomy observatory, the Hat Creek Radio Observatory
in California; extending an existing commercial software product, the Google
Spectrum Access System, to support spectrum sharing between communications and
radio astronomy; testing the extended spectrum sharing software at Hat Creek;
and exploring new approaches for bidirectional spectrum sharing between radio
astronomy facilities and other users. Broader impacts of the project include
techniques and standards for RF noise studies intended for broad adoption by the
community; workshops on noise measurement and spectrum sharing that bring
together radio astronomy and other communities while stimulating development of
common solutions; informing regulators about the trades involved in spectrum
sharing; and improving the ability of radio astronomy to operate in environments
with large amounts of RF interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four
research thrusts. (1) Assess the RF environment at Hat Creek Radio Observatory
to catalog, classify and identify the most significant interference sources. (2)
Conduct a longitudinal RF noise survey, remotely managed, making all data openly
available as a baseline for the broader research community, using a cloud-based
architecture for data sharing that enables different privacy-protecting
transformations on the raw data to be performed depending on the needs of the
researcher. (3) Extend the existing Google Spectrum Access System software
product to support automated radio astronomy spectrum coordination, covering 1
GHz to 15 GHz (work to be done by Google as an unfunded collaborator). (4)
Examine new potential bidirectional spectrum sharing architectures starting from
3-Tier (operational in the US CBRS band), automated frequency coordination
(planned for use in the US 6 GHz band), informing incumbent (proposed by US NTIA
for future bands), and an Operations Research based theoretical approach.
Results from the four thrusts will enable preliminary definition of the
requirements and operating procedures for future National Radio Dynamic Zones,
with a particular focus on evolution from current manual coordination processes
to future automated mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.