* 2139007
* Supporting Minority Serving Institutions in the Creation of a Diverse, Quantum-Ready Workforce
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Thomas Searles, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 134,723.00

Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 National Quantum Initiative Act
recognized the importance of strategic, federally coordinated support for
quantum information sciences and engineering (QISE) research to maintain
economic competitiveness, sustain national security, and fuel transformative
scientific advancement. This immediately accelerated the pace of an already
rapidly advancing field and, consequently, surged the demands for trained
quantum engineers. To satisfy these workforce needs and remain globally
competitive, the U.S. must train an increasing number of quantum engineers and
scientists. This requires reaching beyond the existing pipelines and providing
equal resources to a broader range of communities. Success relies on recognizing
the critical role and understanding the barriers faced by Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs), which train a disproportionately large number of
underrepresented students who earn bachelor's degrees in STEM fields. To this
end, a series of workshops entitled Supporting Minority Serving Institutions in
the Creation of a Diverse, Quantum-Ready Workforce have been designed to
prescribe a strategy to help broaden participation in QISE. Topics include
identifying quantum workforce needs, protocols to gain access to nationwide
facilities offering specialized equipment for quantum research, development of
specialized quantum courses and academic programs, and opportunities to develop
strategic partnerships with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
series is designed to facilitate quantum information science and engineering
(QISE) research and educational programs at Minority Serving Institutions
(MSIs). The series consists of two two-day workshops, which are scheduled for
October 2021 (virtual, hosted by the Colorado School of Mines) and February 2022
(hosted in San Juan, PR by the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez). Engaging ~80
QISE researchers from universities, industry, and national labs nationwide, the
goal of these events is to cultivate innovative ideas for bolstering MSI
participation and success in QISE through a combination of invited talks and
guided breakout group discussion sessions. This is achieved by first identifying
strengths and obstacles faced by MSIs that hinder their participation in QISE as
well as mechanisms to boost the number of quantum scientists from
underrepresented groups by means of raising the research competitiveness of
MSIs. To this end, activities also include advertising specialized resources:
proposal-writing training opportunities, quantum computing facilities, and
nationwide user facilities for growth, fabrication, and measurement of quantum
devices. The first workshop provides seed funding to select groups who present
competitive, innovative plans to achieve these goals; these groups subsequently
report on their progress during the second meeting. Outcomes include
implementation of several new initiatives and a whitepaper summarizing the
unearthed barriers and prescribing novel activities to fuel sustained increases
in the participation of underrepresented minorities in
QISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.