* 2139809
* Collaborative Research:  Sublimation of Snow (SOS)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Julie Vano, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 132,900.00

Snowpack plays a vital role in water resources, especially for regions that get
water from the seasonal melt of mountain snowfall. However, melting is not the
only way that the snowpack is depleted. Sublimation of snow refers to the
process by which snow changes directly to water vapor. The impact of sublimation
is not well understood, nor are the specific atmospheric conditions that lead to
more or less sublimation. This project will help to address questions related to
those topics by deploying a set of advanced instrumentation in Colorado in the
2022-23 winter season. The result of this project will be a dataset that can be
used to determine whether numerical models are handling sublimation correctly,
and if not, how to improve them. The research team will communicate with
relevant stakeholder groups, such as water managers, and develop short videos
that explain difficult concepts in clear language accessible to the general
public. Students will be directly involved in the field campaign, thereby
training the next generation of observational and data analysis
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct the Sublimation
of Snow (SOS) field campaign in Kettle Ponds, Colorado during the 2022-23 winter
season. Snow sublimation plays a significant role in water resources but the
physics that govern rates of sublimation are not fully understood. This project
will focus on the role of wind in sublimation, both in low-wind conditions where
turbulence is crucial, and in higher-wind conditions when blowing snow factors
in. The SOS field campaign is embedded within a larger DOE-sponsored campaign
called the Surface Atmosphere Integrated Field Laboratory (SAIL) which will
provide remote sensing measurements from radars and lidars. SOS will contribute
four flux towers (NCAR Integrated Surface Flux Systems, ISFS) for turbulence and
latent heat flux measurements, along with a number of other instruments that
will provide snow depth, density, and water content, soil and snowpack
temperatures, and blowing snow characteristics. Three key science questions will
be addressed: What governs the characteristics of the near-surface boundary
layer over snow in complex terrain, and how these characteristics evolve through
time? Over a winter season, how frequently do different boundary layer regimes
occur, how much snow sublimation occurs during each, and how does this affect
the total seasonal mass and energy balance? What measurement and analysis
strategies are most robust for quantifying snow sublimation in a mountain
valley?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.