* 2139221
* EAGER: Pathway to Commercialization at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Grant Warner, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) exert an outsized influence
on the production of Black STEM majors, relative to Predominantly White
Institutions (PWIs), yet they often lack the financial resources and
infrastructure needed to support technology commercialization. Development of
technology transfer resources at HBCUs could directly impact a significant
proportion of African American scientists and engineers, and the African
American tech-entrepreneurial pipeline. This project seeks to explore the
technology and technology transfer infrastructure at a subset of HBCUs with
Computer Science and Engineering Departments. It will investigate PWIs with
consortium models in their approach to technology transfer offices in an effort
to understand the feasibility of HBCUs to establish similar consortium models.
Further, it will identify best practices among consortium models that hold the
most promise for the HBCU environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Pathways to Commercialization for HBCUs project seeks to explore the technology
and technology transfer infrastructure at a subset of ABET-accredited HBCUs and
CISE-funded HBCUs. The project will investigate PWIs with consortium models in
their approach to technology transfer offices in an effort to understand the
feasibility of HBCUs to establish similar consortium models. Customer discovery
will be conducted to identify both assets and pain points from technology
commercialization administrators and faculty at the participating HBCUs.
Additional discovery will be conducted with PWIs that have some elements of
their TTO functions centralized. The work will be guided by the following
research questions: 1) What is the current capacity of HBCUs to perform
technology transfer; 2) To what extent do HBCUs view technology
commercialization as a business opportunity; 3) What are the differences in
faculty incentives for technology commercialization at research intensive
research institutions vs HBCUs; and 4) Can a subset of potential shared
activities be identified to improve technology commercialization at HBCUs? The
goal of the customer discovery is to answer those questions. In particular, the
project aims to identify best practices among consortium models that hold the
most promise for the HBCU environment. A virtual convening will be held to
discuss findings from the customer discovery, conduct design thinking sessions,
and adopt a set of recommendations for implementing best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.