* 2139451
* Metasurface Photodetectors for Computational Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lei Tian, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 457,500.00

Traditional image sensors used in photography and microscopy can only visualize
the intensity distribution of the incident light, whereas all information
related to the local direction of light propagation and phase profile is lost in
the image acquisition process. To address this limitation, the proposed research
will develop a new class of image sensors based on nanophotonics technology,
where only light incident along a predetermined, geometrically tunable set of
directions can be detected. When combined with computational imaging techniques,
this distinctive behavior can be exploited to enable a wide range of advanced
imaging functionalities. Specific examples include the ability to produce
focused images of three-dimensional scenes in a single shot, to image otherwise
invisible transparent phase objects, and to automatically detect the edges of an
object. These capabilities are ideally suited to a multitude of challenging and
technologically significant applications â€“ for example label-free imaging of
transparent biological cells, surveillance and navigation under degraded
conditions (e.g., rain, fog, and underwater), and image recognition for computer
vision. The proposed activities will also promote multidisciplinary education
through the training of graduate and undergraduate students in relevant areas at
the intersection of optical physics, device engineering, and data science, and
through related curriculum development efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed devices consist of standard photodetectors coated with specially
designed plasmonic metasurfaces (i.e., ordered two-dimensional arrays of
different metallic nanoparticles) that can selectively transmit or reflect
incident light depending on its direction of propagation. The work plan includes
the electromagnetic design, nanofabrication, and testing of prototype devices,
and the demonstration of their imaging capabilities through computational
studies based on the measured device characteristics and through proof-of-
principle imaging experiments. Metasurfaces of increasing complexity will be
developed with angular response tailored to meet specific applications and
capable of providing polarization-engineered and broadband achromatic operation.
Advanced computational imaging techniques will be employed to demonstrate the
proposed imaging functionalities, from lightfield acquisition to phase contrast
imaging and optical-domain spatial filtering. This research will advance the
science and technology of metasurfaces in a novel fashion, by exploring their
direct integration within active optoelectronic devices. Furthermore, it will
highlight and exploit the great potential of combining the extreme design
flexibility and size miniaturization of metasurface flat optics with the
enhanced information processing capabilities of computational imaging. The
resulting devices are promising for a significant technological and societal
impact through their many applications in areas of high relevance and
timeliness, ranging from the life sciences to computer vision and autonomous
navigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.