* 2139916
* D-Region Ionosphere Inferred Maps of Electron-density (DRIIME)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Morris Cohen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 01/31/2025
* USD 598,956.00

The award to Georgia Tech University would support an initiative to establish a
long-term ionospheric plasma spatial mapping capability for the altitudes of
60-90 km with Very Low Frequency (VLF, 3-30 kHz, 33-333 μs period) radio
receivers. While spatial maps of the upper atmosphere plasma distribution for
altitudes above 250 km have been obtained through remote sensing using GPS
measurements of total electron content, no such capability currently exists for
this lower ionospheric plasma region. VLF remote sensing has long been viewed as
the most promising technique for remote sensing in this region, but several
factors have made it very difficult to go from VLF measurements to ionospheric
maps. However, two recent advances in ionospheric diagnostics have now enabled
this mapping to be achieved. This award would address three key goals for the
work: the formulation of a unified map determination method using a fusion of
two VLF remote sensing advances, quantification of the temporal and spatial
resolution achieved, and validation through checking for internal self-
consistency combined with comparison with results of external HF absorption
analysis. These maps would be analyzed and the raw and processed data products
made public expanding the possible scientific impact to other fields. The
research supported by this award would represent progress toward achieving an
accurate model of HF absorption useful for the aviation industry. As part of
this award broader educational outreach, a set of tutorials that would enable
scientists in related fields to understand and use the public datasets would be
developed and made available as part of the public release of data. Summer
undergraduate interns from underrepresented groups would participate in this
award research effort using an established Georgia Tech program designed to
achieve diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VLF signals reflect
efficiently from this plasma region (known as the D-region) but also VLF signals
detected at a distance from a source change as ionospheric conditions change.
While this principle has been known for decades, translating measurements to
plasma density estimates is more difficult. There are two major sources of VLF
waves that can be used for this form of remote sensing: VLF transmitters and
radio atmospherics (sferics) emitted by global lightning. Two major advances,
one for each type of VLF source, solve many of these problems. The award
research plan would merge VLF transmitters and sferics in a single technique. A
novel way of validating VLF remote sensing results with independent measurements
would be introduced. This development would avoid a longstanding hurdle for VLF
remote sensing, which is the lack of direct measurements of plasma content for
comparisons with results. The new capability would allow direct observations of
not only the ambient ionospheric conditions including diurnal and seasonal
changes, but several types of ionospheric disturbances like Early VLF events and
effects relating to atmospheric gravity and acoustic
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.