* 2139310
* Collaborative Research: RUI: A Phylogenomic Study of a Hyper-Diverse Flowering Plant Lineage, Subfamily Lamioideae (Lamiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* TILOTTAMA ROY, Missouri Western State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2025
* USD 393,461.00

Understanding the evolutionary processes that lead to speciation remains a
fundamental challenge in biology. As the sixth largest flowering plant family,
the mint family (Lamiaceae) is exceptionally important ecologically,
ethnobotanically, and floristically. Within the mint family, the second largest
subfamily, the lamioid mints (Lamioideae), serves as an excellent model for
exploring global patterns of plant diversification and evolutionary radiation,
or a rapid increase in the number of species in a clade. This research will use
high throughput DNA sequencing technologies to build a robust understanding of
evolutionary relationships in the lamioid mints. The findings from this project
will be of broad value to systematists, evolutionary biologists, and ecologists
by helping close gaps in our fundamental understanding of how plants diversify,
including the evolution of early flowering plants and colonization of newly
formed habitats, such as volcanic islands. Information gathered from this
project will also improve our knowledge of the comparative biology of lamioid
mints, guide new product discovery, and aid in the development of conservation
measures for endangered species. This project incorporates extensive
opportunities for education and career training at multiple levels, including
high school teachers, undergraduate students, a postdoctoral researcher, and an
early-career female faculty. The project team will offer public seminars about
lamioid mints, highlighting their research findings and broader implications. An
important component of this project is to train and mentor undergraduate
students, and twelve undergraduate students from Missouri Western State
University will become actively involved in various aspects of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lamioid mints, which have been categorized
into 13 tribes, have a near cosmopolitan distribution, with most taxa found in
the Old World and only two lineages having colonized the New World and Hawaiian
Islands. Despite this widespread distribution and diversity, a solid
phylogenomic framework of the lamioid mints, from which patterns of
diversification and links to shifts in distribution, ecology, and genome
dynamics can be explored, is still lacking. This project will utilize next-
generation sequencing approaches involving targeted enrichment, transcriptomics,
and broad taxonomic sampling from field and herbaria across the US to build a
robust phylogenetic platform of the lamioid mints. The following major goals
will be accomplished: 1) Circumscribe the major clades of Lamioideae and their
interrelationships and make necessary taxonomic changes, including determining
the placement of the two tribes comprising New World members, Stachydeae and
Synandreae, and the basal tribes, Gomphostemmateae and Pogostemoneae; 2)
Estimate the timing of key evolutionary events and rates of diversification; 3)
Link diversifications in Lamioideae, particularly within Stachydeae and
Synandreae, with shifts in biogeography, whole genome and gene duplication, and
character trait evolution to identify possible key innovations and apparent
repeated evolution of morphological characters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.