* 2139034
* ERI: Towards Intelligent, Cost-Efficient, and Adaptive Techniques to Enable Biomedical Hardware-Assisted Cybersecurity
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Hossein Sayadi, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2024
* USD 195,305.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades, cybersecurity has
been at the forefront of global attention as a serious threat to society,
particularly the nation's information technology infrastructure. Medical
electronic devices cover a spectrum of equipment implementations, ranging from
large diagnostic imaging machines to small mobile devices that patients carry
with them. The digitized nature of modern computing platforms used in healthcare
systems and their increased connectivity to computer networks have led into the
growth of cybersecurity vulnerabilities making such systems a unique target for
sophisticated cyber-attacks. The proposed project aims at developing effective
and adaptive solutions for emerging healthcare cybersecurity challenges for
securing biomedical computing platforms against potential malicious cyber-
attacks. In addition, it will result in integrated engineering research projects
and educational materials to mentor and train undergraduate and graduate
students in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)
for security analysis and biomedical hardware-assisted cybersecurity specially
from Under-Represented Minorities (URM). The proposed engineering research and
educational activities are planned to provide students from diverse engineering
backgrounds such as computer engineering, computer science, and biomedical
engineering majors with the necessary knowledge and skills to be competitive in
the demanding job market where highly specialized hardware designers, AI/ML
engineers, data scientists, and cybersecurity specialist are needed to develop
new efficient methods for securing modern computing systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, integrity of data being processed in
computing systems has been safeguarded at the software level with the assumption
that the underlying hardware is secure against potential attacks. However,
biomedical devices have some unique features such as specific security
requirements, implementation cost and design trade-offs characteristics, and
limited resources and computational power that undermine their security
protocols. In addition, strict regulations make it difficult to conduct basic
software updates on medical computers and adopting off-the-shelf Anti-Virus (AV)
protection is also insufficient for preventing emerging cyber-attacks such as
malware. To overcome the performance overhead and inefficiency of conventional
software-based solutions, the security in modern biomedical devices should be
delegated to the underlying hardware, building a bottom-up solution for securing
computing devices rather than treating it as an afterthought. In this project,
we will leverage effective AI/ML techniques to develop accurate, low-cost, and
adaptive techniques and build a multi-tiered intelligent framework for hardware-
assisted cybersecurity in emerging biomedical devices. We will utilize the
patterns of low-level hardware features captured by microprocessors’ hardware
components in biomedical devices to build novel intelligent techniques for
recognizing and classifying emerging cyber-attacks (e.g., malware, side-channel
attacks, stealthy attacks, zero-day attacks, etc.) with high accuracy and low
computational overheads. The proposed research project targets five major
objectives: 1) Comprehensive data collection, benchmarking, and feature analysis
of emerging hardware-driven cyber-attacks in biomedical devices’ processors, 2)
Developing various standard and advanced machine learning techniques for
intelligent hardware-assisted cybersecurity countermeasures using the hardware-
related features, 3) Exploring hardware implementation results and on-device
trade-off analysis of the intelligent hardware-assisted countermeasures, 4)
Developing a reinforcement learning-based decision-maker for adaptive selection
of the accurate and cost-efficient detector to facilitate online detection of
the cyber-attacks, and 5) Developing a system-level ontology-based cybersecurity
analysis framework for an effective automated knowledge reasoning in IoMT
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.