* 2139200
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Long Term Adoption of Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 28,520.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to examine the
adoption of domesticates in the US Southwest. Despite recent advances in the
understanding of the relatively large farming communities that prehistorically
inhabited the region and the pre-agricultural hunter-gatherer communities that
preceded them, little is known about the transitional farming-foraging economies
that separate the two. When did maize and squash first appear and how rapidly
were they incorporated in foraging economies? How did the adoption of
cultivation practices affect forager mobility patterns? What kind of small-scale
cultivation strategies were utilized by these peoples? Questions like these are
important not only to archaeologists in the Southwest, but to researchers and
nonprofessionals across the globe who are interested in the myriad ways people
adapted to life in arid-semiarid environments. The project will aid the Bureau
of Land Management in discovering and managing cultural resources in a remote
wilderness area. Further, the project will benefit regional stakeholders who
will benefit from understanding the kinds of cultural resources present within
the wilderness and their continued protection. Resources from this project will
also be used to provide two graduate student assistants with valuable hands-on
training in excavation, survey methods, and data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize a multi-scalar
approach grounded in human behavioral ecology to address the question. This
project will advance research regarding the adoption of agriculture in two ways:
1) through the spatial analysis of relevant Archaic site locations and their
implications for farmer-forager mobility and patch choice, and 2) the generation
of a sub-regional paleoethnobotanical dataset from the BLM-managed Fishhooks
Wilderness Area. Previous research within this wilderness recovered maize and
squash remains; radiocarbon dating identified this location as one of the oldest
maize-bearing sites in the Southwest and the only site to demonstrate that the
introduction of maize and squash to the Southwest occurred either in tandem or
with only a minor lag between the two. Data derived from archaeological survey
of the greater Fishhooks Wilderness area as well as limited excavations at two
dry caves throughout the wilderness will be used as a means to answer questions
regarding the location of habitation and storage sites, the ubiquity of maize
and squash cultivation during this time, potential field areas, and changes in
agricultural practice over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.