* 2139857
* Function and Mechanism of Coat Protein Complex I in RNA Silencing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Xiuren Zhang, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2025
* USD 900,000.00

This project focuses on the role of Coat protein complex I (COPI) in
transporting a group of enzymes to the right places inside plant cells to
perform regulatory functions, including degradation of mRNA and inhibition of
protein synthesis. By enhancing understanding of the mechanisms of gene
silencing, this project can enhance biotechnological approaches to improve
agricultural crops. This project will also incorporate research experiences into
a Genetics course to strengthen the teaching of genomics to undergraduates. The
project also provides hands-on training for high school students in genetics and
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this project is to elucidate how
COPI contributes to miRNA-mediated RNA silencing. miRNAs are a group of small
noncoding regulatory RNAs that suppress expression of endogenous genes and
invasive RNAs. miRNAs are loaded into Argonaute proteins to form RNA-induced
silencing complexes (mi-RISC) that in return destroy target RNAs. Although key
components and auxiliary partners of mi-RISC have been identified and studied,
many new regulatory layers or factors are still being recovered; and the precise
mechanisms remain to be exploited. Using a novel genetic screening approach, the
PI has identified a new gene, α2-COP that encodes a subunit of COPI, as a new
player in the miRNA pathway. The central hypothesis is that COPI is responsible
for delivering components of mi-RISC and/or P-bodies to their functional sites
to impact RNA silencing. The PI will apply a series of genetic, cell biological
and biochemical approaches to test this hypothesis. Functional and mechanistic
analyses of COPI will not only reveal new regulatory layers and mechanisms of
RNA silencing, but also enable us to improve the efficacy of RNAi
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.