* 2139416
* EAGER: All-Optical Recording of Neural Activity by Excitonic Photoluminescence in 2D Optoelectronic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Ertugrul Cubukcu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding the functions of brain circuits and how information is processed
in the brain are instrumental for the development of effective treatments for
neurological disorders such as epilepsy and Alzheimer’s disease. Recording of
brain activity on very fast time scales with cellular level details is the “Holy
Grail” for deciphering how the brain operates. Electrical recording is the
state-of-the-art for detection of fast brain activity. However, it is invasive
for the brain tissue and lacks the required cellular level detail over large
areas. Here, as an alternative, the research team proposes to explore voltage
sensitive light emission from an emerging class of ultrathin semiconducting
materials. This transformative approach can potentially offer recording of very
fast brain activity with cellular detail utilizing an optical microscope. If
successful, the proposed work will help maintain the leadership of the US in
neuroscience research. Over the course of the proposed work, doctoral and
undergraduate students will be trained on this technology. Furthermore, the
results will be disseminated at national and international conferences. High
school students from underrepresented groups and their families will be engaged
through UCSD Science and Engineering with the Family programs. The project will
also provide research internship opportunities for undergraduate students
through the “Summer Internship" program at
UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the functions of brain circuits and
investigating information processing in the brain requires recording neural
activity with high spatial and temporal resolution across large areas. Although
electrophysiology has been the most widely used tool in neuroscience, it does
not offer the spatial resolution and scalability to decipher information
processing in distributed networks of the brain. This proposal presents a
transformative technology dubbed nanosheet voltage imaging for all-optical
large-scale monitoring of electrical activity of neuron populations. The primary
focus of the proposed research will be the comprehensive investigation of
voltage sensitivity of quantum-confined photoluminescence in emerging low
dimensional semiconductor materials. Radiative emission lifetime of several
picoseconds in these direct bandgap semiconductors, potentially enable optical
detection of neural activity with an extraordinary temporal resolution while
maintaining diffraction limited spatial resolution. If successful, this study
will lay the groundwork for a radically new electrophysiology tool without the
invasiveness of electrodes or electrical wires, by employing the noninvasiveness
and practicality of optical imaging, to directly image voltages generated by
single neurons and neuronal microcircuits at multiple spatial and temporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.