* 2139767
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms Underlying Circatidal Rhythms in Parhyale Hawaiensis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Joshua Rosenthal, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 627,543.00

The tides profoundly impact the behavior and physiology of marine organisms. In
response, many species have evolved internal timers called circatidal clocks to
anticipate tidal changes. These clocks control when animals living near the
coastline forage, rest and reproduce, for example. Understanding the mechanisms
underlying circatidal clocks has proven challenging because of the lack of model
organisms that are amenable to gene-level manipulations. Parhyale hawaiensis is
a coastal crustacean in which such manipulations are possible. We have
established protocols to synchronize and observe circatidal behavioral rhythms
in Parhyale. We are thus well-positioned to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms
underlying circatidal timing. Our first goal is to elucidate the fundamental
properties of circatidal clocks. In particular, we aim to reveal how Parhyale
uses cues, such as water levels and turbulence, to synchronize its behavior with
tides. Our second objective is to identify the genes that control the circatidal
clock, and to determine which physiological processes are under its control. Our
work should thus provide a much-improved understanding of how animals cope with
the challenges associated with ever-changing water levels at the coastline. In
this work, we will involve undergraduate underrepresented minority (URM)
students through the “Biological Discovery in Woods Hole” REU program (NSF DBI
1659604). We will also engage high school URM students in Worcester through the
creation of a “Chronobiology club” that will expose them to research in
biological timing. Finally, we will introduce students at the Puerto Rico Center
for Environmental Neuroscience to methods of gene editing in non-standard
research organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intertidal organisms use circatidal
clocks to adapt their physiology and behavior to rhythmic tidal changes, in a
similar fashion that circadian clocks allow organisms to anticipate daily
environmental oscillations. Although the existence of circatidal clocks has long
been established, little is known about how they operate. By contrast, the
circadian clock is well understood and can therefore serve as a model for
hypotheses regarding how the circatidal clock is constructed and functions.
Parhyale hawaiensis is an intertidal crustacean amenable to genetic
manipulations. We have developed methods to entrain Parhyale’s circatidal
rhythms to artificial tides and observe circatidal swimming behavior. We aim to
identify the environmental cues that entrain circatidal behavior and determine
whether the Parhyale’s circatidal clock entrains to different natural tidal
patterns. We also aim to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
circatidal rhythms. We will use CRISPR/Cas9-guided genome editing to determine
whether core circadian clock genes also generate circatidal rhythms. We will
profile gene expression across the tidal cycle to identify core circatidal genes
and genes regulating organ-specific physiology. Our work should decisively
advance our understanding of circatidal clocks, from their interactions with
environmental inputs to the molecular mechanisms that generate them. URM
students participating in the NSF-supported “Biological Discovery in Woods Hole”
program will be involved in this work. A “Chronobiology club” will be created to
expose high school URM students in Worcester to research in biological timing.
Finally, students at the Puerto Rico Center for Environmental Neuroscience will
be introduced to gene editing in non-standard research
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.