* 2139232
* CPS: Small: Cybersickness Mitigation and Test Suite Development
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lisa Rebenitsch, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 482,254.00

This project seeks to develop low-interference mitigation options for
cybersickness; that is motion sickness like symptoms in response to virtual
reality use. With several new virtual reality (VR) systems such as the Oculus
rift, Google VR, and HTC Vive now available to the general population with
increased usage in education and training, the need for cybersickness mitigation
options has dramatically increased. The main purposes of the research are to
develop a test suite to allow for rapid testing of these new cyberphysical
systems, and to explore a potential set of low interference cybersickness
mitigation options. Currently, there are very few effective mitigation options
and most of these options are intrusive (e.g., severely limiting duration or
motion-sickness medication) which can make VR training and education
applications unusable. This project pursues to low-interference methods of by
exploring color overlays, contrast, and realism. Color because human eyes
respond differently to different colors. Contrast because human eyes respond
differently to high versus low contrasts objects. Lastly, realism due to highly
realistic or very low realistic VR applications in the past noting less
cybersickness than average. The longer-term goal will be the in the development
of a cybersickness model so that individual users can use to determine if, and
how many, mitigation options would be needed for a particular cyberphysical
system application and headset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
seeks to develop low-interference mitigation options for cybersickness and a
standardized test suite for new cyberphysical systems for later ease of testing
and comparisons. Cybersickness is defined here as motion sickness-like symptoms
occurring in individuals as they interact with video displays. Current estimates
indicate, on average, that there is a mere 15 minutes of safe usage before
cybersickness starts to occur in population groups, and in as little as 30
seconds for some users. To be effective in training and education, the systems
must not make users ill. Several aspects of the research involve the
identification of possible mitigation options that will not interfere with the
primary purpose of an application. Therefore, the objectives of the research are
1) to develop a test suite to allow for rapid testing of new VR systems and
methods to provide consistency in the results, 2) to analyze a possible set of
low-interference mitigation options (specifically, components of realism), and
3) to integrate the results into a method to quickly predict levels
cybersickness. Currently, there are very few effective mitigation options and
most of these options are intrusive (e.g., severely limiting duration of use or
motion-sickness medication). Past research suggests realism may be a strong
factor, but the “why” and “what” factors of this research are currently unknown.
Since realism has less restriction of content, experiments are designed to
identify objective components of realism that affect cybersickness and include
hue, blur, contrast, and stabilizing components. The results of these studies,
such as the realism mitigation options, can be used directly in the creation of
new applications for sensitive users. The test suite will allow for a means to
test new cybersickness features in a consistent manner. The long-term goal of
the predictive models can be used to advise individual users on appropriate use
of VR, rather than generic warnings. The methods involved are building a test
environment and examining the effect different realism features to determine
their effect on cybersickness. The test environment will be built by reviewing
past publications for interaction and current VR application environments to
ensure a wide set of environment types can be considered. The mitigation
experiment will be run in parallel and following this development to create of
“plug-in” ability to then test the mitigation options of color, contrast, and
realism. Each of these mitigation experiments will be run in a with-in subject
design if possible. The results of all three experiments will be analyzed to
filter the components of realism that affect cybersickness. The results of all
experiments with be merged with past studies of cybersickness to further develop
a predictive model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.