* 2139044
* OPP-PRF: Investigating the Effects of Late Holocene Climate Change on Polar Bears
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Lillian Parker, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 323,156.00

Polar bears evolved to thrive in the harsh Arctic environment. Because they
depend on sea ice to travel and to hunt seals, past climatic changes that
altered sea ice likely affected population size and distribution. This project
investigates the effects of climate change – from approximately 5000 years ago
to the present – on polar bears in the Bering Sea region. Polar bear remains
have been identified from a 4700-year-old archaeological site on Unalaska
Island, Alaska. These remains are approximately 200 miles south of where polar
bears have been found in the recent past. By studying these remains, and
comparing them to modern-day specimens, this research will advance understanding
of the effects of historic climate cooling and present-day climate warming on
polar bears. The presence of polar bear remains also has implications for the
Native Unangan people. To explore the relationship between Unangan ancestors and
polar bears, this project will provide training and mentorship to students and
enhance the professional development of an early career Arctic scientist.
Results from this study will be shared with the community in Dutch Harbor,
Alaska, and through conference presentations and peer-reviewed
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that late
Holocene climate change resulted in demographic, genomic, and epigenomic changes
in Bering Sea polar bears. The PI uses a multidisciplinary approach, combining
zooarchaeological, paleogenomic and paleoepigenetic data from Neoglacial bear
remains excavated from an archaeological site on Unalaska Island. First,
morphometric and genomic DNA sequence data will be used to confirm that the
remains are from polar bears and to determine the number of individuals
represented in the assemblage. Then, genomic and epigenomic data from the
Unalaskan bears will be compared to data from modern-day Bering Sea polar bears
and brown bears from the Alaska Peninsula to determine 1) if polar bears and
brown bears interbred in the Neoglacial Period, and 2) to assess demographic and
adaptive responses of polar bear populations to Neoglacial cooling and present-
day climate warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.