* 2139849
* Southeast Control Conference 2021: A Networking and Brainstorming Opportunity for the Regional DCSD Community; Blacksburg, Virginia; November 29-30, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Andrea L'Afflitto, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 16,053.00

The goal of the Southeast Control Conference (SECC), which is at its second
edition, is to provide an intellectually stimulating environment where student
and researchers in the areas of dynamics, control, sensing, and diagnostics can
present their research to one another, exchange some of the latest cutting edge
research ideas, and build their professional networks. The SECC will be open to
participants working in the southeast of the continental US to strengthen a
regional network and incentivize rapid exchange of research novelties. Special
emphasis will be given to the active recruiting of participants from
traditionally underrepresented minorities in engineering and historically black
colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The Southeast is home to a number of
productive research groups in dynamics, control, and systems theory and,
although most of these groups are geographically close to one another, they
rarely interact outside a few international conferences, and the depth of
interactions at these international conferences is limited due to a large number
of attendees and to competing obligations. Most of the topics addressed at SECC
fall within the purview of NSF's Dynamics, Control and Systems Diagnostics
program, and, by supporting this conference for the first time, NSF will help
this innovative new conference to become better established in its first few
years of existence by relieving some of the fundraising burdens and enabling the
organizers to focus on building sustained awareness and interest in the event,
demonstrating the value of the event, and establishing easily replicated
procedures for organizing future edition of the SECC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SECC 2021 will be structured over one and a half days and will alternate oral
presentation sessions and poster presentations with multiple breaks, offering
tours of the Virginia Tech campus, and a social banquet. This organization will
maximize the attendees’ opportunities to exchange research ideas and network. A
guest speaker, possibly a program manager in a relevant federal funding agency,
and possibly with a diverse background, will present about their research
portfolio and will serve as a potential role model for younger attendees.
Speakers will be selected based on the relevance, depth, and breadth of a one-
page abstract evaluated by the Program Chairs. As part of the abstract
submission process, the candidate speakers’ demographics will be recorded to
maximize the opportunities of speakers from diverse research groups and
institutions to intervene. A post-conference survey sent to all attendees will
allow the Conference organizers to assess the effectiveness of SECC in reaching
its goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.