* 2139438
* Professional Experiences for Students in Plasma Science: Student Travel Support for 2021 and 2022 Gaseous Electronics Conferences
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kunning Xu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support student participation in the 74th Annual Gaseous
Electronics Conference (GEC) to be held October 4 - 8, 2021 in Huntsville,
Alabama and the 75th GEC to be held in late 2022 in Sendai, Japan. The GEC has a
three quarter century history in pursuit of the foundational physical and
chemical processes occurring in partially ionized, collisional plasmas,
encompassing the interactions between atoms, molecules, charged particles,
photons, waves, and fields. The GEC has a strong tradition of encouraging and
promoting student participation. The attendance at research conferences is an
important educational experience for students that cannot be replicated at their
home institutions. The GEC provides opportunities for students to expand their
networks both domestically and internationally, to learn about the most cutting
edge research and discoveries, and to develop their professional communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC is a conference that welcomes student
participation and introduces them to the global professional community where
they can envision themselves developing their careers. The GEC program is
organized with breaks mid-morning and mid-afternoon, as a way of facilitating
conversation among participants. At the 2021 and 2022 GEC, intentional steps are
being taken to create a more inclusive conference atmosphere for those from
groups not well represented at the conference. These steps include a
reconsideration of the GEC experience to add a commitment to diversity and
inclusivity to its reputation as a premier venue for gaseous electronics and
plasma research. Although demographic changes in research communities have
slower time constants than might be desirable, the student participation enabled
by this award has the potential for long term impact on the diversity of the
future GEC community. This approach includes introduction of several tested
professional development and social events intended to appeal to early career
attendees such as student research competition, including students from
underrepresented groups. Questions added to the post-conference survey will help
to assess need for, interest in and effectiveness of the added events, and
responses will be used to guide planning for subsequent future
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.