* 2139331
* NSFGEO-NERC: Earthquake nucleation versus episodic slow slip: what controls the mode of fault slip?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nadia Lapusta, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 369,925.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes are
typically generated by rapid slip – or dynamic rupture – on pre-existing
tectonic faults. The faults are loaded by tectonic plate motions. Other forms of
fault slip occur as well, including episodic slow slip events (SSEs). In that
case, fault slip spontaneously accelerates but never reaches rapid earthquake
slip speeds. Episodic SSEs can release the same amount of strain energy as
earthquakes, but over days to weeks rather than seconds to minutes. SSEs are
vital to understand as they relieve the stress buildup on faults and reduce
seismic hazard. Yet they also transfer stress from one part of the fault to
another, which can promote the nucleation and propagation of large destructive
earthquakes. To date, the mechanisms underlying SSEs is not well understood. It
is unclear what mechanisms slow down some slip instabilities (no earthquakes)
yet allow others to turn into dynamic rupture (earthquakes). Here, an
international team of scientists from the US and the UK explores the mechanisms
underlying SSEs. The researchers use a combination of state-of-the-art
laboratory experiments and numerical modeling. The modeling allows notably to
extrapolate laboratory results, obtained on small specimens, to the scale of
large tectonic faults. The project outcomes, which include physics-based
simulations, improve earthquake hazard assessment in natural and induced
seismicity. The project also provides support and training in an
interdisciplinary context to several students and early career scientists. These
include one graduate student and one postdoctoral associate at the California
Institute of Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the team tests three key
hypotheses that may explain the stabilization of accelerating fault slip into
episodic SSEs, rather than earthquake ruptures: 1) evolving rate dependence of
friction, from velocity weakening to velocity strengthening, stabilizes the
slip; 2) dilatant strengthening due to pore fluid effects stabilizes the slip;
3) spatial variations in fault properties contribute to determining the mode of
fault slip. Key deliverables are constraints on the range of conditions and
physics under which episodic slow slip, fault creep, or earthquakes can occur.
The improved understanding of earthquake physics ultimately improves seismic
hazard forecasting. The UK investigators conduct laboratory experiments for rock
materials and fault conditions highly relevant to SSEs and earthquake
nucleation, yet largely unexplored. They also carry out some numerical modeling
of the experiments. The US investigators conduct additional detailed modeling of
the experiments, to improve the constitutive laws governing fault slip. They
also conduct numerical simulations of fault models governed by the improved
friction laws to determine the implications of the experimental results for
large-scale natural faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.