* 2139663
* Collaborative Research: Novel Integration of Direct Measurements with Numerical Models for Real-time Estimation and Forecasting of Streamflow Response to Cyclical Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Ehab Meselhe, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 259,328.00

Continuous monitoring of natural rivers supports socio-economic needs related to
water resources management and forecasting and provides benchmark data for
scientific investigations. The current protocols for continuously monitoring
streamflows are based on approaches that fail to accurately capture the short-
time effects of flood wave propagation and the seasonal impacts of changes to
stream bank vegetation. While decades of substantial advancements in
instrumentation technologies have dramatically transformed our in-situ
measurement capabilities, this progress has not been mirrored by advancements in
streamflow monitoring protocols. The outcomes of the proposed research will fill
this gap by offering critical support for water science and management and by
adding reliability to predictive models used to issue flood warnings required to
protect communities and critical infrastructures. Increasing the accuracy of
streamflow measurements in real time and improving the reliability of forecast
models will have direct positive impacts on the wellbeing and safety of the
public at a time when flooding continues to be a major threat to communities.
The research outcomes will include rapid tools derived with artificial
intelligence techniques that supplement existing forecasting capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines inferences from
experimental, data-driven (i.e., machine learning) and physically-based
numerical investigations to enable adoption of a reach-scale monitoring method
(rather than cross-sectional) and real time tracking of changes to all flow
variables induced by unsteady flows and riparian vegetation growth. A
heterogeneous routing approach complemented by extensive data analysis will
allow the extraction of interdependencies among flow variables produced by
subtle features of the hysteretic behavior associated with the above-mentioned
cyclical processes. Generalization of the inferences for a wide range of flow
and site conditions will cost-effectively improve the protocols for predictive
streamflow relationships using only in-situ acquired data, without making
recourse to modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.