* 2139317
* Flexible Nonlinear Plasmonic Metasurfaces with Multiresonant Composite Enhancement
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Wei Zhou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,097.00

Non-technical Description: Plasmonic metasurfaces are two-dimensional
nanoantenna arrays that can control the propagation of light. They are
ultrathin, easy to fabricate and feature superior nonlinear optical properties
compared with bulky materials. For example, such nanomaterials can be used
convert coherent light from one color to another. This process is important for
emerging applications in quantum communications, computing, and sensing. This
project focuses on the design, fabrication, and characterization of plasmonic
metasurfaces that can concentrate light over a broad color range and efficiently
convert coherent light between different colors. The PI will also develop a
scalable, low-cost approach to create flexible ultrathin nanomaterials with a
biocompatible microporous structure for biosensing and imaging. The project will
advance STEM education through an engaging undergraduate photonics course that
connects photonics and nanotechnology to real-world applications. The PI will
promote educational diversity by actively participating in local K-12 STEM
events and recruit underrepresented students to the research team. The
scientific outcomes of this project will be disseminated to a broad audience
through creative exhibits in the science festival and outreach activities for
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Simultaneous
nanolocalized enhancement of excitation and emission transitions in nonlinear
processes remains a challenge in nanophotonics research but can offer many
applications in coherent light conversion, imaging, sensing, quantum optics, and
spectroscopy. To address this challenge, the research team proposes to develop a
new type of ultrathin nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces, consisting of periodic
metal-dielectric nanoantenna nanomaterials, to enhance nonlinear coherent light
conversion processes, including second harmonic generation (SHG) and third
harmonic generation (THG). The research objectives include: (1) Elucidating the
structure-property relationships in engineering multiresonant optical properties
of nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces; (2) Determining SHG and THG responses from
nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces with multiresonant composite enhancement; (3)
Developing a scalable, low-cost nanofabrication approach to integrating
ultrathin nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces with biocompatible flexible polymeric
meshes. This research can advance fundamental knowledge in nonlinear
nanophotonics by revealing the relationship between geometry-material-resonance
characteristics in plasmonic metasurfaces and their nonlinear light conversion
performance. This project can generate practical insights into rational design
and scalable nanofabrication methods to create flexible plasmonic metasurface
meshes for bio-interfaced nonlinear optical sensing and imaging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.