* 2139106
* Fourth International Conference on Quantitative Ethnography (ICQE22)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* David Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

ECR's Building Capacity for STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) solicitation
supports projects that build individuals' capacity to carry out high quality
STEM education research that will enhance the nation's STEM education enterprise
and broaden the pool of researchers that can conduct fundamental research in
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, ECR:
BCSER supports activities that enable early and mid-career researchers to
acquire the requisite expertise and skills to conduct rigorous fundamental
research in STEM education. ECR: BCSER seeks to fund research career development
activities on topics that are relevant to qualitative and quantitative research
methods and design, including the collection and analysis of new qualitative or
quantitative data, secondary analyses using extant datasets, or meta-
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference, to be held at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison campus, will build the capacity of NSF-supported communities
to benefit from the highly promising research methodology of quantitative
ethnography (QE). This training workshop for young scholars, embedded in
conference, supports the goals of the ECR program by developing a community of
early career researchers to carefully use quantitative ethnography in the
conduct of basic STEM education research. These scholars will be prepared to
examine and empirically test new theory consistent with the central goals of the
ECR program. The funding will support: a) attendance and training at an
international conference on QE for doctoral and early career researchers to be
held in the U.S., b) a technical immersion preconference workshop that several
of participating researchers would lead for these young scholars, and c) a
broader slate of symposium speakers who represent NSF supported disciplines that
QE methods can benefit significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the conference arises both from the appeal or promise of QE across
numerous fields. The proposed activities are organized around broadening the
impact of QEâ€™s intellectual merit across new disciplines. The project maintains
a consistent emphasis on furnishing next-generation researchers with conceptual
and software tools and methodology to address important current and future
questions across the spectrum of fields NSF supports in social sciences, basic
STEM education research, and the learning sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.