* 2139659
* 3D bionic network as a closed-loop interface for bidirectional communication with cells and tissues
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wubin Bai, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2025
* USD 391,301.00

Enabling real-time optimization in biomedical systems could revolutionize the
existing medical technology today, allowing medicine to be more personalized and
therapeutics to be more precise. Particularly, such real-time optimization is
promising to enable advanced proactive treatment for stroke, cardiovascular
diseases, neurological disorders, and others, with enhanced efficacy, reduced
risks/toxicity, and sustaining effects over a long period. Recent advancements
in bioelectronics achieved the tissue-like mechanics and miniaturized
architectures to form an intimate interface with skin or internal organs, for
enhanced biosensing; However, the unidirectional pathway of communications at
the biotic-abiotic interface limits the device adaptability and time-dynamic
optimization. Grand challenges remain in the development of an intimate
electronic interface to communicate bidirectionally with biological living
systems at multiscale and in a benign fashion. This proposal aims to study
physical and biological communications at the biotic-abiotic interface and
understand fundamental mechanisms that enable heterogeneous integration of
multi-materials systems for bidirectional communications with cells and tissues.
These proposed projects will enable a systematic understanding of the
integration schemes, structural designs, materials mechanics, electronics
fabrication, and interfacing compatibility to advance personalized healthcare
with smart sensing and dynamic optimization. The proposed research pathway will
lead to the design and develop a 3D bionic network as a communication portal to
deepen our understanding of brain development and disease pathology, and to
equip medicine with unconventional intelligence. The innovative efforts in 3D
structural design and hybrid construction of functional materials will form an
engineering foundation for creating cell-favored modalities of communications,
which will open up new opportunities in both fundamental research in biology and
clinical medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time knowledge of metabolic and
physiological variations associated with critical diseases is essential in
providing target-specific, timely, and effective therapeutic treatments. Sensing
local changes in tissue mechanics, pH, and electrophysiology can serve as the
feedback basis to optimize, dynamically, pharmacological delivery schedules,
surgical intervention procedures, and recovery/rehabilitation protocols.
However, existing biomedical systems often separate sensing from
stimulation/treatment both spatially and temporally, thus leading to a delayed
response to emergence of adverse events, missed opportunities for therapeutic
interventions, and potential risks of side effects. This proposal aims to
develop and design a bionic electronic network that relies on bio-inspired
design approaches to enable cell-favored modalities of closed-loop
communications with the goal to blur the barrier at the biotic-abiotic interface
and ensure communication stability, sensitivity, and accuracy. Developing a
multi-modality platform that integrates biosensing and stimulation at
microscale, with high performance and robust operational characteristics can
form a closed-loop interfacing network that enables holistic integration and
communications with the biological counterpart. The bionic electronic network
could be configured as an electronic implant with enhanced biocompatibility and
advanced sensing capabilities, including biofluidic pressure, microenvironment
temperature, electrophysiology, tissue deformation, and others. The envisioned
systems aim to orchestrate sensing and stimulation in a natural and undisruptive
fashion to potentially deepen the understanding of wound healing, monitor
cardiovascular physiology, modulate the cellular metabolism, and eventually
innovate proactive treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.