* 2139458
* I-Corps: Automated Software Security Vulnerability and Patch Management
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Qinghua Li, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to decrease
the vulnerability and improve the patch management practices in the electric
power sector as well as many other critical infrastructure sectors such as oil
and natural gas, healthcare, and manufacturing. The project may bring automation
and optimization to cybersecurity operations that now often rely heavily on
manual processes. The project will enhance the cybersecurity of the nation's
critical infrastructures by performing more timely and more effective risk
assessment and vulnerability mitigation. Through automated analysis and
decision-making, the technology also seeks to reduce the cost associated with
cybersecurity operations, addressing a pain point faced by many organizations in
critical infrastructure sectors. The technology is particularly beneficial to
small- and medium-sized organizations that often have limited cybersecurity
personnel and resources to keep pace with the large number of potential
cybersecurity vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
explore the feasibility of commercializing an automated vulnerability and patch
management technology that leverages recent advances in artificial intelligence
to automate and optimize vulnerability analysis and decision-making. This
technology's novelty includes: 1) a method for identifying the vulnerabilities
applicable to given assets in an organization; 2) methods for assessing the risk
of vulnerabilities; 3) a method to predict and recommend risk-aware remediation
actions for vulnerabilities; 4) a method to identify potential strategies for
mitigating vulnerabilities when patching is unavailable; and 5) a method for
optimal scheduling of vulnerability mitigation actions to minimize security
risks. The research addresses several key limitations of current solutions and
practice, such as the high cost, long delay, and high risk rooted in manual
operations. The project also addresses coarse granularity of risk assessment and
the largely unguided or poorly guided mitigation action scheduling. Preliminary
research results show that the technology may reduce the remediation decision-
making time of the current practice from weeks or months to
seconds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.