* 2139615
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototyping Internet of Things (IoT) Sensing Platform for Infrastructure Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Vishal Saravade, WAVE LOGIX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project to enable the
efficient collection, organization, maintenance, and analysis of a significant
volume of reliable scientific data regarding the strength of varieties of
concrete mixes from across the country and the world. It is envisions that such
technology may improve the quality and safety of critical civil infrastructure,
accelerate construction schedules, help optimize the performance and efficiency
of construction contractors and engineers, and reduce environmental costs
associated with excess cement usage. With the approval of the 2021
Infrastructure Bill, the U.S. will make the single largest investment in
repairing and reconstructing the nation’s bridges and major roadways since the
construction of the Interstate Highway System in the 1950s. Current concrete
strength test methods are cumbersome, costly, timeinefficient, prone to error
and environmentally unfriendly. Development and commercialization of a reliable,
cost-effective, user-friendly Internet of Things (IoT)-based electromechanical
impedance sensing system that directly measures, in real-time, in-place concrete
strength without reliance on the destructive testing of concrete samples has the
potential to improve the civil infrastructure industry by providing reliable
data analytics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at determining the strength of in-place
concrete, in real time, using a piezoelectric sensor and electromechanical
impedance (EMI) analysis. Destructive compressive strength testing (American
Society for Testing Materials (ASTM C39) and maturity testing (ASTM C1074)) are
the two primary methods used to determine strength development of concrete;
however, both methods rely upon the creation and destruction of concrete samples
which is inefficient and unreliable as well as harmful to the environment (both
due to the concrete waste caused by sampling and the excess cement usage driven
by the tendency of concrete samples to show low strength). The proposed research
will test a variety of concrete mixes for strength over various time points. The
proposed technology requires no concrete sampling or destruction, compared to
both destructive compressive strength testing and maturity testing. Successful
completion of this program may result in development of a prototype of a
piezoelectric concrete strength sensor and customized datalogger capable of
automatic data acquisition, processing, and transmission and a customized
database to directly communicate in-place concrete strength data to contractors
via a secured cloud server and highly intuitive graphical user
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.