* 2139617
* I-Corps:  Combinatorial phage display for the development of specific, single target biopesticides against invasive plant pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Daniel Schachtman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
establishment of a process to develop and rapidly create environmentally
friendly biological fungicides to solve worldwide problems related to fungal
plant pathogens. These pathogens can threaten agricultural crops worldwide.
Bacterial and fungal pathogens are diverse and evolve natural resistance to both
pesticides and resistance genes incorporated into crops by plant breeders.
Because of the widespread occurrence of fungal diseases on crop plants and the
negative effects of fungicides on a range of organisms, there is a need to
develop more environmentally friendly approaches to controlling fungal plant
pathogens. Agricultural industries worldwide have problems with fungal diseases
which reduce yield, lead to the destruction of crops, and result in substantial
lost revenue. This project aims to establish a platform to develop and rapidly
deploy biological fungicides to reduce the impact that fungal pathogens have on
agricultural crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will develop the
use of combinatorial phage display for the rapid screening, development, and
deployment of specific, single target biopesticides against new and invasive
plant pathogens.  This innovation was demonstrated to be a powerful tool for
selecting peptides with an affinity to many different types of biological
materials including small molecules and whole cells. It is anticipated that
using phage display will rapidly identify peptides that are effective at
interfering with pathogen function. Previous work indicates that roughly 50% of
peptides selected with this method bind strongly to a specific plant pathogen
and have a negative impact on pathogen virulence. The project will use
artificial intelligence-based computational approaches to optimize peptide
design and efficacy. It is anticipated that the proposed biopesticides will not
persist in the environment and will be unlikely to be toxic to humans or other
organisms because of their specificity to  the targeted
 pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.