* 2139898
* CAREER: Designing Quorum Sensing Modulators for Lactobacillus plantarum to Probe Interspecies and Host-Microbe Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Michael Bertucci, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2026
* USD 472,790.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Michael A. Bertucci of Moravian College is studying chemical
signals that mediate cell-cell communication in bacteria present within the
human body. These commensal bacteria do not cause infection. However, an
imbalance in the presence or types of these bacteria has been linked to
gastrointestinal disorders, gynecological disorders, and a greater
susceptibility to infectious bacteria. Dr. Bertucciâ€™s work focuses on a subset
of these commensal microbes, known as lactic-acid bacteria, that regulate
colony-wide communication through small peptides that serve as signals of
bacterial density. The anticipated outcomes of this investigation include a
novel method for synthesizing these peptides, the development of a library of
peptide probes capable of enhancing or silencing lactic-acid bacteria cell-cell
communication, and a greater understanding of how these communication pathways
influence the positive health effects elicited by these bacteria. As a part of
this interdisciplinary research program, planned education activities include a
new course-based research experience and first-year research mentorship program
at Moravian College, a primarily undergraduate institution that serves a
significant population of first-generation and Pell-eligible students.
Additional educational goals include leveraging social media to increase
scientific engagement and literacy and establishing a science education training
program for graduate and post-doctoral students seeking careers at teaching-
focused institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
synthesize and evaluate peptide-based modulators for the ubiquitous density-
dependent chemical communication process known as bacterial quorum sensing (QS).
The model system for this investigation is Lactobacillus plantarum (L.
plantarum), a species with documented probiotic properties and a QS pathway
controlled by a cyclic peptide (LamD). The stated objective will be accomplished
by first studying the factors affecting peptide cyclization to develop a novel
method for the synthesis of peptide thiolactones. Then, derivatives of native
thiolactone LamD will be synthesized to conduct a series of systematic
structure-activity scans in engineered L. plantarum mutants incapable of
producing LamD. By harnessing this data, potent QS agonists and antagonists will
be developed and employed to modulate QS in co-culture experiments to
characterize the influence of QS on interspecies, intergenus, and host-microbe
interactions. Completion of the described research objectives has the potential
to advance understanding of the chemical basis for intercellular signaling in
commensal bacteria, including how this signaling dictates ecological changes in
mixed microbial populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.