* 2139265
* A Conference on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion in Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Caren Cooper, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 74,947.00

This project will draft a framework to guide citizen science projects in
addressing issues of equity, diversity, and inclusion (EDI). Citizen science,
sometimes called community science, involves volunteers who use science research
procedures to collect valid scientific data for research projects and who often
learn much about science in the process. These projects contribute directly to
scientific research and often collect data of direct relevance to many
communities. Although there are millions of citizen science volunteers, only a
small proportion come from marginalized communities. The project will host a
series of six, half-day virtual (online) workshops with scholars and
practitioners with deep understanding of the participatory sciences and issues
related to EDI. Workshop participants will discuss topics relevant to preparing
a framework to provide guidance for integrating support EDI practices in citizen
science. The project will disseminate the framework and workshop recommendations
through publications for researchers and practitioners, a new website that will
serve as a hub for relevant resources and EDI professional development,
blogposts, and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on EDI
issues in institution-led, large-scale, citizen science projects. The project
will organize workshops addressing issues relating to: (1) designing
multipurpose projects that can be useful for empowering communities with data
addressing community needs, providing researchers a large and robust data set,
and providing learners with opportunities to develop a deeper understanding of
research; (2) developing diverse leadership and engaging marginalized
communities in framing research priorities; and (3) supporting strategies across
citizen science projects to address barriers to participation, identity
professional development needs, and create inclusive models that foster trust,
create supportive networks, and build capacity for EDI in citizen science. The
workshop will include approximately 20 participants, including researchers,
project leaders and practitioners, with a majority of workshop participants
belonging to groups underrepresented in science, such as Black, Hispanic, and
Indigenous people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches
to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d)
engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.