* 2139383
* CAREER: Understanding the Corrosion Fatigue Behavior of Additively Processed Metals through an Integrated Experimental and Computational Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Yao Fu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2026
* USD 626,548.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will focus on determining
the mechanisms governing the corrosion fatigue behavior of additively
manufactured metals, especially due to the influence of unique microstructural
features and residual stress introduced during processing. Additive
manufacturing has gained wide attention in recent years because it can be used
to produce geometrically and compositionally complex parts, as well as provide
on-demand production and repair capability. Its potential to manufacture true
load-bearing parts, however, is not yet fully realized due to several issues. In
particular, the complexity of the resultant microstructural features makes it
difficult to distinguish their respective effects on fracture and fatigue
performance. This project will answer two relevant question with focus on
corrosive environments: 1) How does the fatigue behavior of additively processed
alloys differ from that of their conventional counterparts under normal and
corrosive environments, respectively? and 2) How does the microstructure
contribute to the observed differences in behavior? Insights gained from the
award will guide the design and manufacture of additively manufactured parts and
prolong their service life by limiting the causes of fatigue failure in
corrosive environments. Thus, the research will not only promote the progress of
science but will also advance national prosperity and welfare by reducing the
tremendous financial losses related to corrosion damage. In addition, this award
will encourage women in engineering by launching a “Women in Flight” club and
perform outreach to high school science teachers and students through creative
audiovisual learning modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique microstructure
formed in additively manufactured metals merit critical investigation into its
effect on environmentally-assisted fatigue behavior. This project will employ a
combined computational and experimental approach to: 1) evaluate the macroscopic
fatigue properties of conventional and additively manufactured alloys in air and
corrosive environment using high-cycle fatigue testing; 2) elucidate effects of
microscopic features and defects on the local passivity and corrosion properties
using electrochemical microcell and adaptive Kinetic Monte Carlo modeling
techniques, and 3) reveal the mechanism and the influence of individual
microstructure features and their interaction by developing a microstructure-
sensitive multiphysics computational framework based on phase field and crystal
plasticity modeling. The features that will be considered are sub-grain
dislocation networks, solidification texture, porosity, and chemical
heterogeneity, as well as residual stress. It is expected that he
experimentally-validated modeling framework will introduce a new capability to
advance the mechanistic understanding of deformation and failure of additively
manufactured alloys in corrosive environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.