* 2139124
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Training the Next Generation of Cybersecurity Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Sujeet Shenoi, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,822,386.00

The United States needs highly skilled cybersecurity professionals to secure the
cyberspace that envelops modern society. The shortage of elite cyber
professionals is especially problematic in federal, state, and local government
organizations that serve the American people. This NSF CyberCorps® project seeks
to prepare scientists, engineers, and attorneys to make tangible cyber-defense
and cyber-operations contributions in the public sector that will benefit
society. Funding for this project will add four additional cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students to an existing CyberCorps® project at the
awardee institution (University of Tulsa). The project's components, including
academic, research, outreach, internships, professional development, and service
activities, are designed to have broad and lasting impacts. The project team
will also strengthen and expand efforts to engage members of groups that are
underrepresented in their participation in the cybersecurity field, non-
traditional students, and veterans; and make arrangements to accommodate
community college graduates. Tulsa Cyber Corps students will collaborate on
real-world projects with embedded agency personnel to gain practical experience
and enhance internship and job placement. Sustained student mentoring and
involvement in service learning and outreach activities will strengthen student
motivation and leadership skills, promoting career advancement and retention in
the public sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers multiple technical
and interdisciplinary tracks, each characterized by a focused yet flexible
program of study. The “MacGyver Track” imparts cyber-operations skills geared
toward the intelligence community. Other tracks prepare students for research
and operations. The interdisciplinary J.D. Track combines law classes with six
systems and cyber-defense and cyber-operations courses. The novelty of the Tulsa
program stems from its application of the “Teaching Hospital” paradigm to
prepare students to enter and thrive in the public sector. The paradigm
integrates highly specialized cyber-defense and cyber-operations courses, hands-
on learning, research and capstone projects, service learning, and outreach
activities. Students gain unique expertise and make a difference by developing
solutions to real problems in concert with embedded law enforcement and national
security personnel and by helping secure critical infrastructure assets ranging
from electric power grids and wind farms to aircraft and voting systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or continuing
scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber
Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation,
scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal,
state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration as their
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.