* 2139480
* SBIR Phase II:  Mechanized clothing to enhance productivity and low back health in the logistics industry
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Matthew Yandell, HEROWEAR, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 998,660.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase II project is to enhance
the scientific and technological understanding of designing lift-assist exosuits
(mechanized clothing), an assistive technology that has the potential to impact
society by reducing the fatigue, back injury risk, and back pain of delivery
drivers. For employers, the exosuit creates the potential for reduced employee
turnover and medical costs. The proposed exosuit has potential commercial impact
as the first and only lift-assist exosuit for delivery workers, a ubiquitous and
growing job sector that cuts across nearly all commercial markets. This project
could additionally impact the economic competitiveness of the United States by
increasing the available workforce and reducing the cost of healthcare for
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to address key design challenges associated with
assistive technologies that provide lift-assistance for delivery drivers.
Surmounting this technical hurdle relies on two key features: (1) the ability to
turn assistance on/off when carrying an object, and (2) the ability to sit
comfortably for long periods of time while driving. The research objectives of
the Phase II project are to: 1) add a new mode-switching capability, 2)
integrate a unique method of disengaging assistance that maximizes comfort
during sitting, 3) create a novel leg sleeve to maximize comfort when the
exosuit is not assisting, and 4) carry out a field study to validate exosuit
performance in real-world conditions. This project will combine technical
requirements and user stories with a series of rapid design iterations. Using
this approach, multiple prototypes will be designed, built, and tested with
delivery drivers to assess real-world performance and user acceptance. This
project is projected to result in a commercially viable exosuit prototype that
fits the daily needs of delivery drivers, as well as objective and subjective
evidence of its efficacy in real-world scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.