* 2139925
* Collaborative Research: Identifying a Neural Basis for Other-Oriented Decisions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Abigail Marsh, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 749,977.00

Abstract - Identifying a neural basis for other-oriented
decisions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2139925&lt;br/&gt;Abigail A.
Marsh&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do the seeds of
altruism sprout and flourish in a seemingly selfish world? The goal of this
research project is to identify pathways in the brain that support altruism,
both in the laboratory and in the real world. Altruistic behaviors are those
aimed at improving the welfare of others, without regard for any individual
benefits. They range from holding open a door, to making charitable gifts, to
donating a kidney. Surveys suggest that many people believe humans are
fundamentally selfish and incapable of true altruism. Such beliefs reduce trust
between people, can harm the well-being of the people who hold them, and damage
the social fabric of a community. However, several contrary lines of evidence
suggest that altruism is ubiquitous and deeply rooted in our biology. One is the
existence of real-world extraordinary altruists, such as kidney donors who
donate kidneys to benefit anonymous strangers. In addition, a brain circuit has
recently been discovered in animals that is dedicated to calculating the value
of choices for others. This research project aims to test the hypothesis that a
comparable brain circuit exists in humans, and that activity in this circuit may
help explain altruistic choices in the laboratory, as well as real-world
altruistic behavior. This project has strong outreach and plans for
dissemination of scientific findings to the public and the media. The
researchers provide neuroscience research experiences and mentoring for students
from underrepresented backgrounds and support their aspirations for STEM
careers. The project encourages community altruism, including organ donation
through the National Marrow Donor Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand
the neural mechanisms underlying altruism, the researchers combine behavioral
studies and whole brain neuroimaging (using fMRI – functional magnetic resonance
imaging) in a wide and diverse set of participants, ranging along the “caring
continuum” from altruistic kidney donors to typical adults, to adults who
exhibit antisocial, selfish real-world behaviors. Surveys of life experiences
are collected to identify formative, developmental events that may shape later
altruistic behavior. The variety of subjects in the study enable the researchers
to search for differences in patterns of brain activity in altruists compared to
antisocial and selfish adults. Neuroimaging measures activity in the
hypothesized corticolimbic brain circuit (that includes the amygdala and the
anterior cingulate cortex) and in the rest of the brain. To discover whether
altruism can be enhanced, researchers test whether two brief laboratory
interventions can increase altruistic behavior in typical adults. These
interventions are combined with functional brain imaging so that the neural
mechanisms by which these interventions shape altruistic behavior can be
identified. Researchers also collect blood samples from all study participants
to indirectly measure how variations in the activity of the neurohormone
oxytocin correspond to real-world and laboratory altruism. Oxytocin is a
neurohormone that has been associated with trust and prosocial behavior, but its
effects have not yet been measured in real-world altruists, nor previously
correlated with brain activation in the circuit under investigation. This
research promises to improve understanding of the ancient neural circuits
underlying generosity and altruism, and challenge misconceptions about the human
capacity for altruism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.