* 2139136
* Capacity Building for Research at Minority Serving Institutions (CyBR-MSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 375,017.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs) serve a high proportion of students from underrepresented minority
groups, increasing workforce readiness and contributing to increased
representation of these underserved groups in post-baccalaureate pathways.
However, only a small fraction of federal funding for science and engineering
research provided to institutions of higher education is distributed to MSIs.
Addressing this need, the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will
conduct a program to increase the participation and competitiveness of Minority-
Serving Institutions (MSIs) for NSFâ€™s Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) core programs (e.g., research funding in artificial
intelligence, cyber-physical systems, and cybersecurity). The Capacity Building
for Research at Minority-Serving Institutions (CyBR-MSI) program uses a
constructivist theoretical framework and builds on the lessons learned from a
pilot proposal development workshop held in early 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the CyBR-MSI program is threefold: to (1) help participants identify
and co-create research ideas for NSF CISE core programs; (2) form and develop
teams among researchers from MSIs; and (3) establish the groundwork for strong
grant proposals. The program includes: (1) a three-day Networking, Ideation
&amp; Team-building Workshop (NITW) in which researchers will form teams and
collectively develop teamwork competencies; (2) a five-week Proposal Development
Workshop (PDW) that will provide research teams with instruction, writing labs,
and expert feedback on the development of key proposal components; (3) a
Mentoring Program (MP) that will give each research team experienced coaching;
and (4) a Mini-Grant Program (MGP) that will offer seed funding for research
projects. These components will provide robust scaffolding to MSI researchers to
develop competencies of team performance and proposal competitiveness through
facilitated ideation, team building, instruction, practice, review, and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.