* 2139558
* Rapid cycling of magma compositions in continental arc systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 465,972.00

This project aims to characterize timescales associated with changes in the
chemical composition of volcanoes that erupt on the edges of continents where
one tectonic plate dives beneath another (i.e., subduction zones). Understanding
timescales for chemical changes will provide insights into magma systems that
feed volcanic eruptions. This project will focus on the question of whether the
chemistry of volcanic systems in subduction zones can change on timescales less
than 100,000 years. In order to answer this question, this project will
investigate a sequence of volcanic ash derived from volcanoes that erupted along
the west coast of the US over 65 million years ago and was deposited in west
Texas over a 7-million-year period. Major goals of the project include creating
a high-resolution record of volcanic composition to better understand how and
why volcanism changes over time. In addition to filling important gaps in
current understanding about volcanoes and magmatic systems, this project will
also have implications for understanding the generation of strategic natural
resources that will be critical for the energy transition to from hydrocarbons
to a more renewable energy base. In particular, insights into copper and lithium
deposits may arise from this project. Part of this project will also involve
developing a course on the science, economics, and policy of natural resources,
which will help educate earth scientists on the natural resources necessary for
the energy transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental arc volcanism generates
a wide diversity of magma compositions, but the tempos of compositional
variation are unclear. Understanding how the average composition of arc magmas
varies in space and time may provide insights into the physics of the
transcrustal magmatic system in arc settings. This project focuses on the
fundamental question of whether the composition of a magmatic arc can
systematically change on timescales of less than 10-100 kyr. A high-resolution
record of ash that has been altered into bentonite will enable reconstruction of
a detailed history of arc composition. Four major goals will contribute to
answering this question. The first goal is to examine diagenetic signals in
bentonites in order to assess elemental mobility during bentonite formation. The
second goal involves reconstructing ash protolith compositions from the altered
bentonites in order to create a record of arc composition over time. A third
goal is to analyze volcanic minerals for additional petrogenetic signals to
inform about magmatic processes. Results from these first three goals will
enable models of how magmatic flux, erosion, tectonism, and crustal thickness
influence timescales and processes of transcrustal magma and heat transfer.
Methods will include using μXRF for compositional mapping of bentonites, ICPMS
for trace element analyses of bentonites, and EPMA analyses of volcanic mineral
compositions. In addition to addressing the fundamental question, this project
will also have implications for understanding natural resources such as Li and
Cu, for understanding surface and depositional processes, and for understanding
the biogeochemical and environmental impacts of volcanic ash. Broader societal
impacts will include student participation in a project to improve the
accessibility of urban parks and development of a course on critical mineral
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.