* 2139848
* Atmospheric Chemistry of Methylated Selenium Compounds and Physicochemical Properties of the Resulting Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Don Collins, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2025
* USD 667,306.00

This project involves the study of the fate and distribution of atmospheric
selenium (Se). An environmental chamber will be used to quantify the formation
of secondary organic aerosol from selenium (Se)-containing organic compounds and
determine the major gas and aerosol products generated using a suite of online
and offline instrumentation. The results obtained from this project will improve
the understanding of how long-term exposure to organic Se compounds, especially
in areas with Se-rich soils and sediments such as agricultural valleys in the
western US, might negatively influence public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic studies of gas and aqueous phase
oxidation of several methylated Se compounds will be conducted under variable
nitrogen oxide levels using various oxidants (OH, NO3 and O3) and oxidation time
scales. The objectives of this research are to develop an improved understanding
of secondary aerosol formation from gas and aqueous phase oxidation of selected
methylated Se species and improve knowledge about the chemical and microphysical
properties of the resulting aerosols that control the impacts on human health
and environmental chemistry. The hypotheses include the following: (1)
Photooxidation and nitrate radical oxidation of the selected organoselenium
compounds lead to significant secondary aerosol formation and the formation
yields are NOx-dependent; The yield of the nitrate oxidation pathway is expected
to be like that of photooxidation in the presence of high NOx; (2) Long
oxidation times lead to significant fragmentation of the products and,
therefore, a reduction in secondary aerosol mass; and (3) Aqueous phase
oxidation of methylated Se intermediate oxidation products under low NOx
conditions leads to formation of Se-containing secondary aerosol species and a
higher concentration of hydroperoxides, which results in the increased
production of reactive oxygen species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort involves
the training and mentoring of several graduate and undergraduate students and
includes outreach and educational activities at local high schools and middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.