* 2140988
* I-Corps:  Chlorine-Free Water Disinfection System
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Xing Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
better approaches for water disinfection. For the last century, chlorine
disinfection has improved human health in developed nations worldwide by
reducing waterborne diseases like typhoid, cholera, and dysentery. More
recently, there has been increased scrutiny on chlorine's contribution to
potentially harmful disinfection by-products (DBPs). This project develops a
more accessible, sustainable, and safe method to disinfect drinking water. The
proposed technology is both energy-efficient and chlorine-free, and can be used
for short-term outdoor activities like camping or hiking, emergency response
after disasters such as earthquakes or hurricanes, as well as point-of-use (POU)
treatment systems for hospitals, remote areas, and developing communities. The
technology can also be integrated into POU systems like water bottles, faucets,
tabletop pitchers, shower heads, and even swimming pools. The approach can be
potentially retrofitted directly into existing pipelines to provide
antimicrobial benefits over the entire distribution system while also reducing
the residual chlorine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a
chlorine-free disinfection technology that synergistically uses a locally-
enhanced electric field and the natural biocidal effects of copper to kill
pathogens in drinking water. This approach enables high microbial inactivation
with low copper doses and low electrical energy consumption. The underpinning
mechanism exploits the lightning rod effect by applying a low voltage to
electrodes with coaxial configurations and/or nanowire-modified surfaces. This
enhanced electric field is capable of not only inactivating pathogens directly
upon contact but also increasing the permeability of cell membranes for
microbial copper uptake, resulting in more effective
inactivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.