* 2140127
* Understanding and Manipulating Mechanics-Based Collagen Synthesis to Advance Functional Biomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Ronald June, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2025
* USD 477,046.00

This award will study the mechanics of collagen. Collagen is a key structural
protein in living organisms. It is essential to the function of soft tissues and
load-bearing organs. Collagen is sensitive to mechanical loads. Even microscopic
damage can significantly undermine health or lead to disease. For example, the
commercial collagen market will soon exceed $6B annually as people seek
supplements and treatments for anti-aging and health of joints, skin, bone, and
muscle. The ability to reconstruct native collagen or to engineer collagen with
functional specifications would fulfill unmet needs across a range of
applications. Demand is enormous, but the knowledge required to meet it remains
limited. Our objective is to determine, for the first time, how mechanical
loading prompts cells to produce the building blocks of collagen (precursors) as
well as to produce collagen itself. The project will provide fundamental new
insight into how cells convert mechanical stimuli into biological responses.
This new knowledge will advance production of collagen and transform tissue
engineering, providing practical design principles for using mechanical loading
(e.g. compression) to drive the production of collagen in a laboratory setting.
This work will enable novel therapies for collagen-related morbidities and
advance clinical treatment for patients with soft-tissue injuries, disease, and
deformities, thus advancing the national health. A comprehensive outreach plan
will disseminate results to both scientists and to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to (1) establish
the roles of mechanical strains and stresses in driving metabolic production of
the amino acid precursors that precede production of collagen and (2) establish
and validate design principles for load-induced production of collagen to unlock
fundamental understanding and functional tissue engineering. The application of
precise, cyclic mechanical loadings to cell-seeded agarose specimens will
achieve homogeneous stimulation from distinct principal strains, and separately,
stresses. Combining these experiments with metabolomic flux and statistical
analyses will establish relationships between principal strains and production
of precursors. Computational modeling will establish relationships between
principal stresses and metabolomic responses. This work will measure production
of type VI collagen under different applied strains/stresses to quantify and
validate design principles that enable the in vitro synthesis of collagen with
specified mechanical properties. The significance of this knowledge is twofold:
it will (1) contribute original, foundational knowledge on the relationships
between mechanical stimuli and collagen production; and (2) provide tools for
tissue engineers to produce advanced cell-based materials for functional
replication of soft tissues. By establishing how specific stresses and strains
drive mechanotransduction, this work will transform a range of fields and
translational applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.