* 2140010
* EAGER:Large-Scale Behavior and Collective Effects in Concentrated Bacterial Suspensions in Mucus
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Motility and self-organization of active self-propelled particles in anisotropic
and viscoelastic media is an active area of interdisciplinary research.
Understanding the interaction between bacteria and mucus is key to developing
better ways to fight the pathogen invasion at mucosal surfaces. Bacteria-mucus
interaction is important to a general class of complex fluids exhibiting
viscoelastic behavior and long memory effects, both biological and synthetic. By
a combination of experiments and theoretical modeling the PIs will explore a
fundamentally new area of bacteria-mucus interaction: what is the role of
collective effects appearing at higher bacterial concentrations and how the
viscoelasticity and memory of the suspending medium control the emerging
collective patterns. The research will stimulate the transformative changes in
experimental techniques and predictive mathematical tools for bacteria-mucus
interaction and, more generally, microswimmers in complex biological fluids. The
work is expected to trigger transformative understanding of how the bacteria and
other motile microorganisms swim in complex biological fluids. It has multiple
implications for the prevention of many bacteria-born illnesses, treatment of
infertility, and developing better ways to fight the pathogen invasion at
mucosal surfaces. The open-source computational algorithms will be made
available to the broad scientific and engineering communities and can be run on
a GPU-enabled desktop computer. Through this research the PIs will provide
interdisciplinary training and education of students and postdocs who will learn
theoretical techniques in applied mathematics and computational physics, as well
as experimental techniques employed in biological physics and engineering.
Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be hosted and public
outreach programs will be initiated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mucus is a
viscoelastic gel coating the surfaces of cells and tissues in animal organ
tracts exposed to the external environment. It serves as frontline protection
against invasion and colonization of tissues by pathogens such as bacteria and
viruses. In this project the PIs will significantly expand and deepen our
knowledge of the emergence of large-scale behavior and collective effects in
concentrated bacterial suspensions in mucus. The PIs will explore how mucus
viscoelasticity, anisotropy, and long-term memory affect the properties of
collective behavior and its response to imposed shear flow. To further advance
the understanding, they will extend the computational model of active liquid
crystals to the case of the anisotropic viscoelastic nematogenic medium with
memory. This synergy of experimental and theoretical approaches will advance
understanding of out-of-equilibrium collective
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.