* 2140996
* PFI-TT:  Rapid, portable antibody-based detection of meat species content in food samples
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/29/2024
* USD 265,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be to enable practical in-situ
detection of meat species content in food samples. Assessing meat content is
important for compliance, customer demands regarding food purity, and religious
beliefs forbidding the consumption of certain meats. The proposed technology
consists of a simple and portable test usable outside a laboratory setting by
users with little training. The proposed test will enable rapid, quantitative
detection of small percentages of many types of meat in food. The assay uses
changes in light reflection when relevant proteins bind to antibodies designed
to recognize them. Because antibodies detect many types of molecules such as
allergens, viral pathogens and neurotoxins, this technology can be extended to
screening needs in food allergens, medical diagnostics, defense, and public
safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop substrates
functionalized with detection antibodies and a portable optical reader to
interpret results. The operating principle is that chemical binding of small
amounts of target molecules to antibodies immobilized on silicon substantially
increases the reflectivity of the silicon substrate when probed in a specialized
geometry. The project identifies practical approaches to immobilizing
appropriate antibodies on the substrate so that they retain their function,
develops simple protocols to extract proteins from meat samples, and makes a
portable prototype that measures small changes in reflectivity when the
substrate is exposed to those samples. Importantly, the project will develop a
protocol that inhibits indiscriminate adhesion of molecules that are not of
interest. In addition, the project will quantify the relationship between the
increase in reflectivity and the tested meat species. The project will test the
prototype reader, substrates and protocol to evaluate efficacy and
simplicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.