* 2140141
* Capturing the impact of realistic multicomponent fuels in high-pressure spray combustion simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Somesh Roy, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2025
* USD 318,990.00

Soot is one of the most harmful pollutants generated during combustion, as it is
associated with cancer, lung disease, and vascular disease, and contributes to
climate change. Understanding the fundamental processes that lead to soot
formation in gasoline, diesel, and jet engines is necessary for reducing soot
emissions. Liquid transportation fuels are composed of hundreds of chemical
species, and it is known that certain species have an outsized effect on soot
formation. By creating a state-of-the-art combustion simulation that accounts
for the complexities of multicomponent fuel droplets in high-pressure engine
environments, this project will generate fundamental knowledge of the impact of
realistic fuel composition on soot formation. This will advance the field beyond
current understanding, which is based on oversimplified representations of fuel
composition, and will benefit society by contributing to the design of cleaner
engines that improve public health and reduce environmental damage. The project
will educate and train young engineers and researchers by incorporating the
modeling tools, concepts, and findings into undergraduate and graduate courses
and by supporting mentoring for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
mechanism by which liquid transportation fuels, which are composed of hundreds
of species, generate soot in high-pressure engine environments. The approach is
to create a state-of-the-art simulation tool for spray combustion that
incorporates a novel, accurate, efficient, and flexible model for multicomponent
droplet vaporization. In contrast to the prevailing surrogate approach, which
represents a complex fuel using several discrete species, the proposed method
employs a continuous thermodynamic framework for the liquid fuel droplets and
then computes an adaptive surrogate vaporization flux composed of a few discrete
species. The open-source solver will also include advanced models for
turbulence-chemistry interactions and turbulence-radiation interactions.
Following validation, the simulation will be used to evaluate the hypothesis
that spatial variations in aromatic concentrations caused by preferential
vaporization play a key role in soot inception. The combination of high-fidelity
models will be used to improve fundamental understanding of the impact of real
multicomponent fuels on soot formation in high-pressure spray combustion. In the
future, the simulation tool can be used to study the impacts of conventional and
alternative fuels on phenomena like lean blowout, auto-ignition, and the
emission of other pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.