* 2140190
* Collaborative Research: Does Cytonuclear Coevolution Drive Reproductive Isolation? Dissecting the Architecture of Genetic Incompatibility Across a Species Range
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Karen Barnard-Kubow, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2025
* USD 378,051.00

The natural world exhibits a vast array of biodiversity which ensures the
stability of ecosystems, the services they provide, and has intrinsic aesthetic
value. Individual species are critical elements of this biodiversity and
understanding how new species form is key to ensuring maintenance of diversity.
Interactions between the nuclear genome and organelle (mitochondria and
chloroplast) genomes underlie key processes including respiration and
photosynthesis. These interactions are an underappreciated and yet potentially
powerful driver of the earliest stages of speciation. The planned research will
investigate the contribution of intergenomic interactions to incompatibility
between populations of a species. The research will use state-of-the art
techniques to identify the genomic basis of incompatibility between the nuclear
and organelle genomes and determine the ability of such incompatibility to
maintain genetic divergence and facilitate speciation in a contact zone. The
project will also introduce undergraduate students and high-school and community
college teachers to core ideas about species formation and evolution through
hands-on experience with the newest genomic sequencing technologies in a novel
course-based lab module and workshop. Finally, the project will provide training
at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between cytoplasmic and nuclear gene
products are expected to drive intergenomic coevolution, leading to the
potential for genetic incompatibility and reproductive isolation between
populations with divergent cytoplasmic genomes. While such cytonuclear
incompatibility (CNI) has been posited to be among the earliest reproductive
barriers to develop during speciation, our understanding of the dynamics of CNI
at the early stages of speciation remains limited, particularly for plastid-
driven speciation. The research will examine the dynamics of plastid driven CNI
in Campanula americana, creating a powerful set of genomic resources,
characterizing variation in the genetic architecture of CNI across lineages, and
leveraging a natural contact zone to evaluate whether exposure to selection
alters the genetic architecture of CNI relative to allopatry. Together, these
data will provide insight into the evolutionary dynamics of plastid-nuclear
incompatibility and how these dynamics may drive the early stages of
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.