* 2140786
* CAREER: Search for Odd-Parity Superconductivity through Proximate Polar Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* John Harter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2026
* USD 281,555.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports experimental
research on a special type of superconductivity called odd-parity
superconductivity. Odd-parity superconductivity is an extremely rare and unusual
phase of matter that is highly interesting from a fundamental science
perspective. There are limited known real examples of this phase in nature,
however, finding new materials that are odd-parity superconductors is crucial
for progress in the field. Perhaps the most exciting prospect of odd-parity
superconductivity is the possibility of finding a topological superconducting
phase. Such a phase is predicted to have applications in future quantum
information technologies. Positive results of this project will confirm
longstanding theoretical ideas and may have far-reaching consequences for
quantum technology development. Just as the advent of the computer age is
strongly tied to the harnessing of silicon to build transistor circuitry, the
development of quantum computers will require a robust material platform that
can overcome quantum decoherence. Odd-parity superconductors may be the key to
achieving this goal. This project integrates research with education and
outreach. It provides for mentoring undergraduate and graduate students, and
includes science outreach in the local community, with a special emphasis on
broadening the participation of groups that are traditionally underrepresented
in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project experimentally tests the hypothesis that odd-parity
superconductivity is likely to emerge in proximity to fluctuations of a
coexistent polar order parameter. This hypothesis is motivated by recent
theoretical work showing enhanced odd-parity Cooper pairing in materials with
both strong spin-orbit coupling and fluctuating inversion symmetry breaking
order. Intrinsic odd-parity superconducting phases like this are important
because they comprise one of the few known routes to realizing topological
superconductivity, which has potential applications in quantum information
science and the quest to build a quantum computer. To achieve these goals, this
project involves developing novel experimental tools to establish the existence
of spontaneous proximate polar phases in native superconductors, suppress the
polar order parameter to enhance quantum critical fluctuations, and study the
effects of the polar fluctuations on the superconducting pairing symmetry.
Ultimately, this project will yield ways to reliably detect and characterize
odd-parity superconducting phases that emerge in proximity to coexistent polar
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.