* 2140283
* Workshop: Human-Technology Interface Series - Pathways to Products for Lifelong Learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Carolyn Rose, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 99,998.00

This award leverages new fundamental understanding of human cognition and the
extraordinary capabilities of current technology to support our Nation's
capacity to nurture lifelong learning, advance economic competitiveness, and
provide meaningful paths for careers subject to industrial transformation. This
workshop convenes experts in all elements of education at the human-technology
interface (HTI) to address topics including: regional, socioeconomic,
demographic, and other disparities in technology access and associated
solutions; capabilities to address learning difficulties, variability in
learning modalities, cognition development, and other needs driving customized
education; opportunities for convergent research at the interface of
neuroscience, education, and remote technology; industrial workforce development
needs, transformations, and partnerships; and associated translational pathways
for new solutions. This project advances our understanding of the landscape for
next-generation leadership of the Nation's educational
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances understanding in several
technical disciplines, including: cognition variation by learning modality and
associated assessment; transferability and generalizability of processes with
varying levels of technology engagement; adaptive testing (customized automated
evaluation processes); and scalability. In addition to synthesizing current
research in technologies and cognition, the workshop will explore promising
practices in cohort formulation, implementation, and assessment; experiential
education and integrated learning; inclusion, belonging, and other social
processes driving educational outcomes; and other elements of holistic education
to identify best practices toward translation at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.