* 2140415
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  Second Language Speech Production: Formulation of Objective Speech Intelligibility Measures and Learner-Specific Feedback
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2023
* John H. L. Hansen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2023
* USD 160,965.00

This Early-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project focuses on
exploring and developing a novel operational collection of speech, language and
perception-based measures to objectively assess speech intelligibility for
second language (L2) speech production, as well as providing effective learner-
specific feedback. With the rise of English as an international language,
intelligibility-based successful communication has been emphasized over native-
like accents. However, L2 teachers often raise concerns about learners’ slow or
stagnant pronunciation progress. Several primary reasons for this problem may
include difficulties in perceptually discerning changes in learners’ speech and
interpreting learners’ speech patterns without any learner-specific
intelligibility assessment profile. Today, teachers have no systematic way to
assess each student’s speech changes, nor can students monitor and track
feedback related to their pronunciation learning progression. Therefore, an
exploratory and transformative method is introduced for measuring speech
intelligibility that provides both teachers and learners with objective and
individualized feedback. This exploratory project is proposed for EAGER funding
in order to establish a baseline working framework for operational objective
measure creation, and proof-of-concept assessment feedback for teachers and
learners. This approach will help teachers gauge learners’ intelligibility
levels and allow learners to self-regulate their learning progress incrementally
over time. The long-term innovation is expected to benefit skilled US
professionals from non-English speaking countries, who work in various STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields. Additionally, this
interdisciplinary project provides various opportunities for hands-on training
and experience for both graduate and undergraduate students in the fields of
language education, applied linguistics, computer engineering, and speech
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores an idea to assess
intelligibility in speech communications based on multiple individual speech
measures for non-native speakers. The ideas are currently in their very early
stages of development, and a large portion of the research ideas are untested.
In order to establish the ground truth of potential individual speech production
intelligibility measures, the implementation and feasibility of this
intelligibility feedback approach must be validated with evidence. By employing
advanced Automatic Speech Recognition-based accent classification technology
based on machine learning, the team of researchers plan to provide learners with
measured speech property information through operational and a discriminating
set of objective speech intelligibility measures. The current innovation builds
on language skill acquisition theory with a functional analytic-linguistic
approach, arguing that explicit and metalinguistic feedback plays a pivotal role
in moving learners forward in their L2 development. The vision is enabled by on-
going research on auditory-based neurogram and spectrogram orthogonal polynomial
measures that predict speech intelligibility, employing the learners’
unconstrained speech utterances. The project will contribute to the scientific
knowledge of what constitutes L2 intelligible speech, understanding how
individualized objective speech intelligibility feedback affects L2 speech
development, and creating a foundational collection of speech/auditory/signal
processing measures as well as ASR/DNN driven measures that assess a speaker’s
intelligibility and identify efficient ways of implementing this technology in
L2 learning contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.