* 2140523
* PFI-TT: Vibration Energy Harvesting to Meet Power Demands for the Electric Grid and Remote Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Kiran D'Souza, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project can help society move toward a future of
clean energy and more reliable systems. The focus of this project is to develop
a more efficient method of extracting energy from a variety of sources at wider
range of frequencies. These devices will have a large impact on ocean wave
energy harvesters along the US coastline, a substantial source of potential
green energy. Traditional approaches to wave-based energy harvesting have
narrower operating conditions, while the energy harvesters developed in this
project will have capability to produce higher energy with lower costs due to
broader capabilities. This PFI-TT project also lends itself to powering remote
sensors in situations where batteries or powerlines are not easily installed,
such as for civil infrastructure like bridges. The societal benefit is more
energy availability, cheaper energy costs, all while decreasing the dependence
on fossil fuels. Commercially, lowering the cost of ocean wave energy harvesters
can be a disruptive force in the energy sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to develop a frequency-tunable energy harvester that can
operate at resonance over a wider frequency range compared to more conventional
solutions. Operating at resonance enables more energy harvesting, which benefits
sensing and power generation applications. The proposed project will first
experimentally validate the computational model using a stationary table-top
rig. During this validation, a basic, unoptimized prototype will be developed
for sensing applications for self-powered sensors and the harvesting of energy
in ocean waves. This project will optimize the prototype independently for each
application. The outcome for the sensing application will be a scalable
harvester capable of powering remote sensors, while the outcome of the power
generator harvester is a wave energy converter design suited for specific US
coastal region conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.