* 2140664
* CAREER: Heat Semigroups and Strichartz Estimates on Fractals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Patricia Alonso Ruiz, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 246,856.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to study the Schrödinger equation on
fractals. In 1925, the physicist Erwin Schrödinger introduced an equation
describing the behavior of quantum particles in terms of waves. The Schrödinger
equation is usually studied under the assumption that the particle moves in an
idealized, smooth environment. However, natural phenomena often occur in non-
smooth settings such as highly porous media (for example, sponges or filters) or
intricately branching structures (for example, large networks). Some of these
features can be replicated using mathematical models called fractals. This
project addresses the significant mathematical challenges posed in these non-
smooth settings. The project will lay mathematical groundwork to study widely
open questions, such as the behavior of electrons in a fractal environment. The
educational component of the project seeks to bring topics such as fractals and
probability to the attention of students as well as pre-service and in-service
teachers. The project emphasizes service to the local Hispanic community and
outreach to under-served secondary schools in Texas. The use of visually
appealing models such as fractals will attract the attention of the broader
public to the mathematical aspects of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to produce mathematical tools
to study the Schrödinger equation in fractal settings. The results obtained will
contribute new knowledge to the fields of analysis and probability on fractals
and will serve, for instance, in the mathematical modeling of quantum particles
traveling in a percolating system. New techniques at the crossroads of
probability, potential theory, functional analysis, and partial differential
equations will be developed to construct suitable heat-semigroup based function
spaces, to prove novel estimates for products of eigenfunctions, and to derive
non-trivial dispersive (Strichartz) estimates of solutions to the linear
Schrödinger equation on fractals. The project will also analyze the effects of
random initial data on the existence and regularity of solutions, and will
explore possible notions of quantum probability and quantum dynamics on
fractals. The educational component seeks to integrate research and education at
graduate and undergraduate levels. A new sustainable seminar course involving
graduate students, undergraduate students, and pre-service and in-service
teachers will result in innovative teaching materials on the subjects of
probability and fractals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.