* 2140775
* CAREER: Information-Theoretic Approach to Turbulence: Causality, Modeling &amp; Control
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Adrian Lozano Duran, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 392,505.00

Many flows of engineering interest are dominated by the presence of turbulence,
which is the chaotic and multiscale motion of fluids. To date, real-world
turbulence limits our ability to fully understand, model, and control complex
systems. The lack of a rigorous framework to evaluate cause-and-effect
interactions in turbulence is a cross-cutting concept at the core of discovery.
The goal of the present proposal is to advance the field of turbulence research
by reformulating the problems of causality, modeling, and control using
information theory or the science of message communication. In this new
framework, turbulence is envisioned as a sequence of bits, and its dynamics is
characterized by the transfer of bits among flow variables. The theoretical
foundations of this project will provide a new perspective to tackle problems in
turbulence research ranging from aircraft aerodynamics to geophysical and
planetary flows. The project will also leverage transformative programs to
promote diversity and inclusion in engineering, including the participation in
annual summer research programs and undergraduate research opportunities to
engage women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to formulate the problems of causality, modeling, and control
for turbulent flows using information theory. The central quantity of the
formulation is the Shannon entropy, which measures the amount of information in
the states of the system. Within this framework, causality in a turbulent flow
can be quantified by the information flux among the variables of interest.
Reduced-order modeling is posed as a problem on the conservation of information,
in which models aim at preserving the maximum amount of information from the
original system. Similarly, control theory can be cast in information-theoretic
terms by envisioning the tandem sensor-actuator as a device reducing the unknown
information of the state to be controlled. This new formulation will be
exploited to advance three outstanding problems in turbulent flows: (i)
causality of the energy transfer in the turbulent cascade, (ii) subgrid-scale
modeling for large-eddy simulation, and (iii) suppression of turbulent
separation bubbles with active flow control. The cases of study range from
canonical flat plate turbulence to complex flows such as realistic aircraft
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.