* 2140346
* CNS Core: Small: Enabling Real-time, Scalable and Secure Collaborative Intelligence on the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 499,861.00

With the proliferation of embedded systems, multicore computing devices enable
the recent trend of moving computation from the centralized cloud to distributed
edge platforms. This trend yields new products and services across smart
infrastructures in smart cities. However, as real-time workloads are executed at
the edge computing platforms, the performance bottleneck is transferred from the
edge-cloud communication to on-chip communication. The system’s real-time
performance faces new system-architectural challenges for the Network-On-Chip
(NoC), which are scalability and security. These challenges are hinged with
dynamic data distributions across different users. This project aims to design a
real-time and scalable NoC for implementing real-time collaborative learning
algorithms. The key strategy is to orchestrate a system-architecture and
algorithm co-design to explore the new design space on the edge computing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To cope with the research challenges, a
comprehensive architecture will be developed to address these multifaceted
problems through a hardware and software co-design, which consists of three key
thrusts: (i) designing an interconnect, which will eliminate non-predictability
barrier on the NoC; (ii) establishing a scalable virtualized transaction
environment for the collaborative learning system to guarantee that all the
real-time transaction tasks can complete at the right time; (iii) implementing a
real-time and secure multi-target tracking system on the edge platform in light
of the newly proposed architecture. The proposed research will be evaluated
using the physical platform Equinox, with indoor and outdoor studies beyond
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will open a new dimension of
research and educational opportunities. In particular, the success of the
project will provide a hardware/software package that can enhance the real-time
collaborative computing on the edge. The resulted interconnect and Equinox are
ready-to-use platforms that will allow experts/researchers to easily examine
their research designs regarding collaborative learning and real-time edge
computing, thereby sealing the gap between different research fields.
Educational efforts will be devoted to (i) curriculum design for the
undergraduate and graduate program, (ii) summer camp development for middle and
high school students, and teachers, (iii) broadening participation in computing
and engineering, at the Wayne State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data,
codes, simulators, and platforms developed in this project will be made
available publicly throughout the duration of the project and for at least five
years after the end of the project. The project repository will be available on
Wayne State University website (http://zheng.eng.wayne.edu/index.html) and the
website of the CAR Lab (https://www.thecarlab.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.