* 2140483
* Workshop on Leadership: Increasing Leaders from Historically Under-Represented Groups
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2022
* USD 135,177.00

In this increasing complex world, STEM leaders must have a broader education
than science, technology, and engineering to be successful in addressing the
leadership challenges required to solve the technological challenges facing the
world. Rising leaders need to have a grounding in the social and behavioral
sciences and an appreciation for the cultural, economic, political, and
educational differences of the people and communities who will use and/or be
affected by the STEM approaches they will be developing. Additionally,
addressing the underrepresentation of marginalized groups in leadership
positions within the US STEM enterprise is vital to ensuring that the nation has
a robust and diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
proposal will deliver a three-day workshop to document and learn from a
multidecadal perspective the following: 1) characteristics of leaders from
underrepresented groups in STEM, 2) transformative efforts that increased
representation of diverse STEM leaders across various institutions (academia,
public sector, non-profit sector, and private sector), 3) innovative diversity
and inclusion perspectives from current leaders, 4) effective/emerging
strategies regarding the development of next-generation leaders from
underrepresented groups, and 5) approaches for the integration of STEM with
social sciences to facilitate processes for a diversity of early and mid-career
scientists and engineers to gain leadership
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the number of leaders from
underrepresented groups (URGs) has increased modestly over time, this increase
has lagged the increase of individuals from URGs in STEM workplaces, which
themselves do not yet reflect the demographics of the Nation. This workshop has
the potential of affecting various types of institutions that have lagged in
utilizing fully the repository of national talent by involving policy makers at
the highest level as well as strong leaders who can speak not only to the value
of diversity but can also articulate the work and the processes behind their
stories of success, thereby illuminating possible paths
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.