* 2140157
* Collaborative Research: Salmon Stewardship: Mapping a Cultural Keystone and Building Genomics Capacity for Alaska Native Peoples
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Adam Dunstan, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2027
* USD 168,159.00

This community-based project combines Indigenous knowledge with the genomic
study of three species of salmon on the Kenai Peninsula. Investigators will
generate long-read de novo genomes from salmon remains recovered from
archaeological contexts and compare them to genomes of present-day salmon from
the same location. Analyses will explore the genomic architecture and
evolutionary history of these populations over two thousand years. The genomic
work is complemented by anthropological research with Kenaitze Elders, which
will document Indigenous ecological knowledge of salmon. This project integrates
scientific and Indigenous knowledge to reconstruct the dynamic links between
salmon and the Kenaitze people since pre-contact
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project capitalizes on recent advances in
models and methods for analysis of ancient DNA and responds to Alaska Native
research and education priorities. Tribal members, students, and post-doctoral
fellows will collaborate in the analysis of salmon genomes, while tribal
perspectives on salmon and salmon use will be documented through archival
research, interviews, surveys, and focus groups. Broader impacts of this work
include building local genomics research capacity, training of students and
post-doctoral fellows, and enhanced understanding of the interdependence of
Indigenous lives and salmon, a cultural keystone for many Alaska Native
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.