* 2140473
* EAGER: SaTC: Investigation of misinformation beliefs expressed and spread online
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Jonas Kaplan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 195,213.00

Recent years have seen a dramatic increase in the widespread propagation of
misinformation and the presence of active campaigns of malevolent persuasion via
social cyberattacks. These trends threaten the integrity of public discourse,
and pose significant challenges to productive information sharing. This program
of research tests whether and how moral beliefs play a role in this process.
Specifically, the goal of the project is to understand how some misinformation
campaigns assert influence by tapping into their target audiences core values,
and how this process can be monitored and prevented. We test morality as a
potentially special case of ideological belief that may have a unique role in
online persuasion. Overall, by examining social and cognitive processes
influenced by modern social cyberattacks that target core values of their
audience, this project has the potential to greatly increase our ability to
predict and build resilience against future attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project’s hypothesis arises from research showing that once an issue is framed
as moral, it may become a non-negotiable imperative that merits acting upon
regardless of the consequences. Our project is organized into two aims in
service of this overall goal: 1) To investigate the social and cognitive
mechanisms of moral and utilitarian message framing. In this aim, we test the
persuasiveness of different types of message framing, both utilitarian and
deontological, to test whether messages that are framed to resonate with the
moral values of their target audiences exert special influence; 2) To examine
how apparent social network information shapes responses to shared moral and
utilitarian content. Given that adversaries often exert influence by
manipulating social structures, we examine how information such as senders’
apparent social network characteristics shapes responses to messages and whether
perception of moral as opposed to utilitarian beliefs of a social group is
particularly impactful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.