* 2140647
* Co-Constructing Faculty Critical Consciousness In Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Joel Mejia, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2026
* USD 119,324.00

The overall goals of this project are twofold: to advance understanding of the
system of privileges and advantages in engineering education and to create a
professional development program to help engineering faculty develop the skills
to critically question social, cultural, historical, and political effects of
this privilege in engineering. Engineering education is built on a system that
historically privileges and normalizes the values, beliefs, experiences, and
perspectives of particular identities that guide the work of the field. While
there has been substantial research into the masculinity of engineering, there
has been limited research about the role of privilege in engineering. This
project will generate new knowledge by focusing on three research questions: (1)
How and in what ways does systemic racism manifest in engineering education? (2)
What strategies can be used to effectively help engineering faculty develop
their critical consciousness? and (3) How and in what ways does the growth of
critical consciousness support faculty to identify and challenge the systemic
barriers preventing racial equity in engineering? The research will support
engineering faculty to interrogate the associated systemic barriers preventing
racial equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This four-year project will examine guided,
reflective journaling of faculty experiences in engineering and field notes from
observations of the researchers' own professional engineering settings (e.g.
faculty meetings, classroom observations). These artifacts will serve as the
baseline for creating the faculty development program during Year 2. During
Years 3-4, the program will be implemented and revised with two cohorts of 16
engineering faculty each, in a recursive co-construction of critical
consciousness and scripts of race and racial identity. This project will result
in the creation of immersive experiences for engineering faculty that serve as a
vehicle for the development of critical consciousness, which is the foundation
to enact changes that will address racial inequity in engineering and provide a
model that supports practices to challenge privilege in engineering spaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded by the Racial Equity
in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports projects
that promote racial equity in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education and workforce development through research and practice.
Awarded projects center the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the
individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by the inequities
caused by systemic racism in STEM fields. This program aligns with NSF’s core
value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from across
the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.