* 2140223
* Collaborative Research: Bio-Inspired Impact-Resistant Phononic Sutural Gabions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yaning Li, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2025
* USD 356,560.00

Sutures in biological systems play an important role in resisting high impact
and hazardous vibrations. Examples of these sutures can be found in woodpecker
beaks and plant seedcoats. At a much larger scale, certain engineered seawalls
using gabions resist impact from breaking waves and control erosion. Inspired by
biological sutures and engineering gabions, a new family of composite materials
named ‘sutural gabions’ are researched in this project. Compared to traditional
materials, the new designs are expected to significantly mitigate adverse
effects from impact and vibrations. This new family of composite material
designs is expected to have broad applications in the next generation of shock-
proof materials. These could be employed in applications ranging from built
infrastructure to biomedical materials. As a result, the new knowledge generated
from this project will advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. By
integrating mechanics, materials science, and additive manufacturing, this
project will also provide training opportunities to diverse groups of students.
The researched outreach efforts will also provide hand-on activities relating to
engineering, sciences, and arts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on
revealing the fundamental mechanics behind the superior dynamic properties of
biological sutures and engineered gabions. This will be accomplished by
developing a comprehensive framework providing impact-resistant phononic sutural
gabions. Fully integrated approaches will be employed, including nonlinear
finite element simulations, advanced multi-material 3D printing, and mechanical
experiments via electrodynamic shaker, drop tower, and split-Hopkinson pressure
bars. The project will generate new knowledge to expedite research in designing
innovative structural materials with unconventional mechanical properties. By
bridging mechanics and materials, the project will promote two research avenues:
one focusing on protective multi-phase composites, and the other centering on
soft phononic multi-functional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.