* 2140261
* CAREER: Tuning Perovskite Nanocrystals with Transition Metal to Enable Selective Photocatalytic Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Yong Yan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2027
* USD 696,251.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Yong Yan of San Diego State
University is investigating solar cell materials as catalysts that use solar
energy to produce valuable organic chemicals. Nature efficiently stores solar
energy in the form of chemical bonds, leading to formation of complex organic
compounds via photosynthesis. Key to this natural process is a catalytic system
that is efficient both in capturing light and in promoting chemical
transformations of interest. Synthetic catalysts that efficiently capture and
store renewable solar energy in the form of valuable chemicals remains a
significant challenge. This project will focus on materials known as metal
halide perovskites, which are the most efficient and economical solar cell
materials currently available. The project will examine closely the merits of
perovskite materials to facilitate both efficient light capture and selective
chemical transformations in a manner that mimics natural photosynthesis. Dr. Yan
will engage in outreach programs to eoncourage financially-challenged and under-
represented undergraduate students to pursue graduate studies in the
interdisciplinary fields of energy, environment and ehemistry. At San Diego
State University, Dr. Yan also plans to incorporate perovskite solar cell
materials synthesis into the undergraduate chemistry program, with the aim of
cultivating early-stage student interest in renewable and sustainable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Yong Yan of San Diego State University will study
the scope and limitations of metal halide perovskites (i.e. APbBr3 where A = Cs,
methylammonium etc.) to serve as solar energy-powered photocatalysts for highly
selective organic transformations. The light-induced charge-separation and
charge-transfer efficiency of perovskites seen in modern photovoltaics, should
also benefit their use in photocatalysis. The newly designed perovskite system
being investigated here is readily tunable with transition metal ions via A-site
exchange, leading to active transition metal sites on the perovskite surface. Of
course, decades of research show that transition metal catalysis plays a
remarkable role in highly selective chemical bond formation. The research being
undertaken here seeks to merge widely applicable transition metal catalysis with
perovskite photocatalysis to develop unique combined nanocrystalline catalytic
systems and potentially open exciting new realms in highly selective catalytic
organic synthesis. High school student interns will be taught to synthesize some
of the perovskite nanocrystals and undergraduate students enrolled in an
inorganic chemistry course at San Diego State University will be guided in the
synthesis of tunable perovskite photocatalysts providing valuable hands-on
exposure to state-of-the-art solar energy-harvesting materials as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.