* 2140289
* Creating an Industry Recognized Energy Storage Certification Credential
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kenneth Walz, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 744,987.00

Renewable Energy is one of the fastest growing industries in the U.S. and the
Department of Labor has found that solar and wind technicians are the two
fastest growing occupations in the nation. The U.S. Energy Information
Administration has projected that 81% of all new electrical capacity installed
in 2021 will be from renewable resources, primarily in the forms of solar, wind,
and battery energy storage systems. The lattermost technology is especially
important, because most community college energy technology programs do not
currently address energy storage, and there are no commonly accepted standards
of education or training for technicians working with this technology. In this
project, the ATE CREATE Energy Center is partnering with the Midwest Renewable
Energy Association (MREA) and the North American Board of Certified Energy
Practitioners (NABCEP) to create a new industry recognized Energy Storage
Certification credential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon the
draft Job Task Analysis previously developed by CREATE and MREA and will apply
it as the framework to develop and launch a new Certification in Energy Storage
Technology. The process will involve a comprehensive industry survey to validate
a Job Task Analysis specific to the energy storage sector, organization of a
committee of energy storage subject matter experts to develop certification
criteria and to write questions for a comprehensive certification exam, and
psychometric data analysis to ensure the rigor and accuracy of exam questions
and cutoff scores. The proposed Energy Storage Certification will be ANSI
accredited and will become the uniform standards of practice for the residential
and small commercial renewable energy industry. This will also form the backbone
for curricula to be developed by CREATE, MREA and other education providers to
prepare students to earn the new Energy Storage Certification, which will be
administered by NABCEP. This project will introduce two new industry
organizations and two new industry based Co-PIs to the NSF ATE Community, thus
strengthening the connection between academia and industry to provide a skilled
technical workforce for the energy sector. In addition the project team will
develop energy storage certification exams in both English and Spanish, making
an important contribution to advance equity in the clean energy sector. Although
the proposed Energy Storage Certification developed in this project will target
the residential and commercial solar sectors, many aspects of the Job Task
Analysis and the industry standards that are identified in the certification
will also be relevant to electric vehicles. It is possible that this effort
could lead to a parallel future certification initiative for the transportation
sector. By creating a skilled and credentialed workforce, this project may help
to facilitate an easier marketplace entry for U.S. firms working on future
storage technologies such as lithium polymer batteries, metal-air batteries,
flow batteries and fuel cells. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.