* 2140950
* Implementation and Evaluation of the ARIS Broader Impacts Toolkit
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Janice McDonnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,866.00

This project is designed to implement and evaluate a broader impacts toolkit
aimed at advancing the understanding of mechanisms to develop effective broader
impacts statements. The investigators will partner with ten universities to
pilot test a suite of tools developed by the NSF-funded Advancing Research
Impact Society (ARIS) Center (OIA-1810732). Case study research will be
conducted on different uses of the ARIS Toolkit. The ARIS Toolkit includes a)
Broader Impacts Wizard, b) Broader Impacts Statement Checklist c) Guiding
principles for Effective Broader Impacts statements, and d) Broader Impacts
Evaluation Rubric. This research will explore local implementation, usefulness,
and impact on Broader Impacts development within institutions of higher
education, including institutions within Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdictions. In addition to the intellectual
merit of research on the impact of tools on researchers' ability to articulate
meaningful broader impacts, broader impacts of the project should include: 1)
greater capacity for Broader Impacts across institutions and individuals 2) a
user-tested ARIS Toolkit for effective development and evaluation of Broader
Impact statements and 3) a dedicated journal issue summarizing ARIS Toolkit
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves using an integrated suite of
practices (e.g. professional development model, online accessible tools) to
create a model program and resources that will help researchers and university
administrators better understand and address the Broader Impacts criterion.
University partners will participate in designing, implementing, and
disseminating among their peers the ARIS Toolkit and share the ways in which
these tools can be applied and adapted to address the Broader Impacts criterion.
Professional development and training materials will be designed that help
Broader Impact professionals and researchers connect their university resources
to their communities through the use of online tools and a model training
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.