* 2140549
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: High-throughput, Autonomous Real-time Monitoring of Tissue Mechanical Property Change via Impedimetric Sensor Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shayn Peirce-Cottler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 125,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support research
to improve engineered tissues. Engineered tissues have become important
platforms for the development of therapeutics for many diseases and disorders.
They hold particular promise for improving wound healing. Cells sense and
respond their environment. How they sense their environment effects how they
form tissues. How a cell's local environment affects it's behavior during wound
healing is still not well understood. There have been substantial strides that
have been made in the use of engineered tissues for disease modeling and drug
development. However, simultaneously monitoring cellular behavior and tissue
properties remains a challenge, and limits further advances. This project will
create autonomous tissue culture monitoring platforms that enable real-time
monitoring of multi-scale cellular behavior and tissue properties. If
successful, scalable and high-throughput methods for autonomous monitoring of
engineered tissues will be realized. This could have profound and broad
socioeconomic benefits in terms of public health and drug discovery. The project
will engage students through research experiences for undergraduates in data
acquisition for autonomous life sciences research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to advance the ability to simultaneously quantify the
dynamic multi-scale attributes of engineered tissues in real time. The central
approach is to establish the feasibility of a novel autonomous sensor-based
experimental platform for dynamically quantifying bulk extracellular matrix
(ECM) mechanical properties, multi-cellular anatomical structures, cell
phenotypes, and gene and protein expression during wound healing processes using
sensor-integrated 3D cell culture models. The work involves the following
research objectives: 1) to utilize a cantilever sensor-integrated well plate
format for autonomous monitoring of a fibroblast-Schwann cell 3D co-culture
model treated with exogenous transforming growth factor (TGF-Î²) to invoke a
wound healing response, and 2) to compare real-time changes in bulk ECM
mechanical properties with temporal changes in gene and protein expression
levels in 3D co-culture models. This work will yield the first quantitative
description of the dynamic relationship between real-time ECM mechanical changes
and cell behaviors in tissues undergoing wound healing. The project also
provides research experiences for undergraduate students in data acquisition for
autonomous tissue characterization and bioprocess
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.