* 2140448
* I-Corps:  Reclaiming, separating, recycling, and repurposing fluorocarbon-based  refrigerants
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Mark Shiflett, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology for reclaiming, separating, recycling, and
repurposing hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerants. Today, only a small fraction
of refrigerants are reclaimed for re-use. Most fluorinated refrigerants have
high global warming potential; By weight, they are orders of magnitude more
potent than carbon dioxide in increasing global warming. The refrigerant
industry tries to recover as much HFC as economically practical for re-use but
they are challenged by the an array of mixtures of refrigerants that are not
possible to separate. The result is that less than 10% of refrigerant is
reclaimed and millions of kilograms of HFCs must be replaced in the U.S.
annually. The proposed technology is designed to separate hydrofluorocarbon
(HFC) refrigerant mixtures so components may be recycled. The market potential
is valued at over $1 billion while preventing the release of HFCs would be
equivalent to removing over 175 million metric tons of carbon dioxde (or
emissions from 50 million cars) in one year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of energy-efficient processes to separate
hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) mixtures so that the components may be recycled and
repurposed into environmentally safe products. The proposed technology is based
on ionic liquids, porous media, and membranes for the separation of HFC
refrigerant mixtures. The integrated strategy of materials discovery and
experimental measurements are tightly coupled with process modeling. Ionic
liquids are being developed to separate HFC mixtures based on differences in gas
solubility. Process simulations have been used to design an extractive
distillation process that is under construction using an ionic liquids. The
pilot-scale extractive distillation will provide proof-of-concept demonstration
of the pressure/temperature swing adsorption system and a hollow-fiber membrane
separation module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.