* 2140999
* SCC: Smart Water Crowdsensing: Examining How Innovative Data Analytics and Citizen Science Can Ensure Safe Drinking Water in Rural Versus Suburban Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Dong Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,031,665.00

Monitoring drinking water contamination is vitally important to inform consumers
about water safety, identify source water problems, and facilitate discussion of
public health and the environment of our drinking water. The overall goal of
this project is to develop a framework for reliable and timely detection of
drinking water contamination to build sustainable and connected communities. It
focuses on communities that use private wells for drinking water without the
benefit of a central utility to monitor water quality. It engages the community
to participate, leveraging advances in data analytics, exploring the
technological and social dimensions to answer a public health question: Is the
drinking water in the community safe?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances
the role of public participatory scientific research, also referred to as
citizen science, in data gathering. It develops new inference models using
approaches from machine learning and statistics to improve accuracy,
reliability, trustworthiness and value of the data, gathered through public
participation. It improves understanding of key socio-demographic factors that
influence public participation and data quality in contrasting community types.
It demonstrates the potential role of citizen science in eliciting changes in
behavior, and how that influences programmatic and regulatory practices, e.g.,
in this study of groundwater quality for healthy and sustainable communities.
This framework, known as the Smart Water Crowdsensing (SWC) framework, developed
by this project for communities in Indiana studying water quality, should serve
as an exemplar for communities nationwide seeking community public participation
in studying local public health questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.