* 2140427
* Collaborative Research: Alternative leaf water use strategies in hot environments
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Kevin Hultine, Desert Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2026
* USD 643,306.00

Heat waves are impairing global forest productivity, ecosystem biodiversity and
crop yields. In hot environments where leaf functioning is vulnerable to high
temperatures, plants must cool leaves to avoid heat damage. This cooling might
occur even when plants cannot photosynthesize, which is counter to the commonly
understood benefit to plants of using water. However, the prevalence of these
alternative water use strategies remains unknown, despite the important
implications they have for understanding local, regional and global carbon and
water cycles. This project will quantify alternative water use behavior across a
broad range of species to determine whether this prioritization of cooling over
photosynthesis is common. In turn, results will improve efforts to model
vegetation responses to heat waves and identify species that are potentially
best suited to cope with heat stress. The project will contribute to the
training of early career scientists, graduate students, and undergraduate
students in modern plant and environmental science research. Public outreach
will focus on developing an outdoor exhibit for the Desert Botanical Garden, a
public facility that receives approximately 500K visitors per year. The
bilingual display will demonstrate to visitors the physiological and societal
costs of heat waves on plants and the ways in which plants regulate their
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Episodic heat waves that are increasing in
duration, frequency and intensity will likely amplify plant thermal stress and
mortality. Therefore, plants occurring in hot environments must cool leaves
below a critical threshold that can result in permanent leaf damage. Contrary to
stomatal regulation models, transpiration can achieve this cooling independent
of changes in photosynthesis when conditions are thermally stressful. Recent
studies have reported such alternative water use strategies in several species,
which then do not maximize carbon gain for a fixed level of stomatal conductance
or hydraulic risk. This project combines tightly controlled leaf gas exchange
measurements with experimental manipulation of environments, and a hierarchical
modeling framework in order to (1) determine the prevalence of alternative water
use strategies across a diverse set of species, (2) determine the traits that
best predict this behavior, (3) develop optimality theory to predict under what
environmental conditions this behavior should occur, and (4) validate
predictions along a broad desert â€“ montane elevation gradient. Results will
advance theory for stomatal regulation, a core topic in the fields of plant
ecology and Earth system modeling. It will also provide one of the largest and
most standardized datasets for plant responses to extreme environmental
conditions, yielding a data resource of high value to other investigators. These
findings can then be used to directly inform a revised representation of plant
water use in Earth System Models. This representation will ultimately yield more
useful predictions under climate change scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.