* 2140374
* NSF-DFG Echem: CAS: Electrochemical Pyrrolidone Synthesis: An Integrated Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of the Electrochemical Amination of Levulinic Acid (ElectroPyr)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Philippe Sautet, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 350,011.00

Today's chemical, energy, and transportation industry is increasingly confronted
with a depletion of fossil resources. In addition, anthropogenic climate change
is strongly related to utilization of fossil oil, gas, and coal. For later
generations, it is of major importance to valorize renewable carbon sources for
industrial applications and avoid further increase of CO2 emissions. Biomass
presents a promising renewable carbon source bearing the potential to create
closed carbon cycles, with net zero CO2 emissions. With funding from the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Professor Philippe Sautet of the University of
California-Los Angeles, in collaboration with German colleagues at the RWTH-
Aachen, is developing bio-based routes to fine chemicals. Renewable energy
sources (solar, wind, etc.) already generate an excess of electricity and the
electrochemical conversion of renewable raw materials into fine chemicals or
fuel additives is one way of making sensible use of this excess. The chosen
reactant, levulinic acid, is one of the twelve most promising platform chemicals
identified by the US Department of Energy. The project focuses on its
electrochemical transformation into pyrrolidones, important intermediates for
pharmaceutical products, solvents, and polymers. In general, electrochemistry
enables milder reaction conditions compared to chemocatalysis and provides the
potential to integrate renewable electrical energy into chemical value chains.
In the case of the proposed pyrrolidone synthesis, high hydrogen pressure can be
avoided, and aqueous electrolytes are projected to facilitate an integration
along the bio-refinery value chain. In addition to the broader socioeconomic
impacts of the research outcomes on a sustainable economy and on climate, the
international collaboration between the US and German research teams will
provide the students involved in the research with a unique cultural and
educational experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims for an integrated
experimental and theoretical investigation of the electrochemical amination of
levulinic acid to produce pyrrolidones. The Sautet group will focus on first-
principle simulations of the electrocatalytic surface reaction aiming for a
comprehensive mechanistic understanding. The RWTH-Aachen group will
experimentally investigate the transformation with emphasis on the influence of
electrocatalyst and process parameters. The project will likely improve
fundamental understanding of the mechanism of electrochemical amination. It will
also provide key insights into the factors controlling catalytic surface
reactivity of the electrocatalyst. Finally, major process parameters will be
explored experimentally. The major objective of this study is for the
collaborative team to conduct a detailed mechanistic investigation. For this
purpose, the reaction, which can be divided into three sub-steps, will be
considered separately. First, the imine formation on model substrates, then the
electrocatalytic hydrogenation to the amine and finally the condensation to the
pyrrolidone will be investigated both computationally and experimentally. The
proposed reaction pathway will be examined by detailed mechanistic studies and
will be further investigated by comparison with model substrates. Acetone, for
example, is a suitable model compound for the first and second reaction steps.
However, deeper experimental insights will be given by variation of the chain
length as well as expansion of the functional groups present in the
corresponding model substrates. Moreover, all experimental investigations will
be accompanied by an optimization of the electrode material and the reaction
conditions. A computational screening of different electrocatalysts will be
performed, based on kinetic modelling and scaling
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was funded under the NSF-DFG Lead
Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)
opportunity NSF 20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.