* 2140826
* Representing and learning stress: Grammatical constraints and neural networks
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Joseph Pater, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 09/30/2025
* USD 386,226.00

Languages are systems of remarkable complexity, and linguists and computer
scientists have devoted considerable effort to the development of methods for
representing those complex systems, as well as computational methods for
learning the system of a given language. This effort is driven by the desires to
better understand human cognition, and to build better language technologies.
This project draws on the theories and methods of both linguistics and computer
science to study the learning of word stress, the pattern of relative prominence
of the syllables in a word. The stress systems of the world's languages are
relatively well described, and there are competing linguistic theories of how
they are represented. This project applies learning methods from computer
science to find new evidence to distinguish the competing linguistic theories.
It also examines systems of language representation that have been developed in
computer science and have received relatively little attention by linguists
(neural networks). The research will engage undergraduate and graduate
linguistics students at a public university. Linguistics has a much higher
proportion of female students than computer science, and this project aims to
address gender imbalance in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a linguistic
perspective, learning stress involves learning hidden structure, parts of the
representation that are not present in the observed data and that must be
inferred by the learner. A given pattern of prominence over syllables is often
consistent with multiple prosodic representations. The approach to hidden
structure learning used in this project applies the general technique of
Expectation Maximization, which in pilot work achieved good results on a
standard test set. Intriguingly, many of the languages that this learner failed
on in the test set are ones that are in fact cross-linguistically unattested.
This project expands the set of tested languages to include more of the range of
systems found cross-linguistically, and further explores the possibility that
typological gaps have learning explanations. It compares hypotheses about the
constraints responsible for stress placement by comparing how well they support
the learning of attested systems, and whether they can help explain typological
gaps. Pilot work also found indications that a neural network could learn
generalizable representations of the data; the project is further testing this
method. All of the software developed in this project is being made freely
available, as is a database of the stress systems of the worldâ€™s
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.