* 2140897
* Learning science concepts through metaphor comprehension, production, and conversation: Behavioral, neural and artificial intelligence measures
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Tzu yin Lai, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 352,787.00

Science teachers often use metaphors to teach science concepts. This project
investigates how metaphoric learning works in the mind and in the brain, how
such learning effects compare when using expert-created, self-generated, or
artificial intelligence guided metaphors, and whether and how metaphoric
learning improves memory retention of the learned concepts. This research will
advance our understanding of how people learn more effectively, and how
individual differences affect the learning process. The findings from this study
will inform interventions to enhance learning and education throughout the
lifespan, and its inclusion of high school students from Latinx and other
backgrounds will broaden participation and training of diverse students from
underrepresented minorities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will address the above mentioned questions with behavioral measures, artificial
intelligence, brainwave (EEG), and brain imaging (fMRI) techniques. Study 1 will
use behavioral paradigms to assess the effect of metaphoric reasoning on the
learning and retention of science concepts over several days. Study 2 will
contrast passive vs active learning of metaphor (expert-taught vs computer-aided
self-generation), where semantic associates will be provided by artificial
intelligence. Both study 1 and 2 assess learning outcomes with multi-faceted
pre- and post- tests on student knowledge of target concepts (e.g., molecule)
and test retention of learned knowledge by comparing concepts learned
immediately before measurement vs. a day prior. Study 3 and 4 test hypotheses
about the cognitive-neural mechanisms underlying concept learning, comparing the
neural representations of science concepts before and after metaphoric and
literal instructions using fMRI (Study 3) and in real-time tutor-student
conversation using EEG (Study 4). Both study 3 and 4 will conduct cross-level
analyses between neural and behavioral data. Alongside these four studies, the
project will educate learners in research methodology through an EEG boot camp
for university students, and training of high-school students to conduct
research through seven visits that end with a science fair
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.