* 2140232
* RAPID: Fire-mediated natural experiment on top-down versus bottom-up forces on a vertebrate community
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Taal Levi, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2023
* USD 134,969.00

One of the most longstanding questions in ecology is the degree to which food
availability and predation determine the identity and abundance of animals in
ecological communities. When food resources are transferred into ecosystems it
is especially difficult to determine the effect of predation on local prey
species abundance. Predator abundance may increase, leading to decreased local
prey density, or predators may specialize on imported resources and have little
effect on local prey density. In the Pantanal wetlands of Brazil jaguars
specialize on imported aquatic prey and have the most picivorous diet of any
terrestrial obligate carnivore. Moreover, in this unusual Pantanal food web
jaguars, the apex predator, are by far the most abundant terrestrial mammal
species. However, it is unclear if the low density of large herbivores is due to
low available food resources (bottom-up control) or predation especially by the
abundant jaguars (top-down control). Catastrophic wildfires in September 2020
removed canopy vegetation from about 30% of the Pantanal and about 50% of the
PI’s previously established study sites at Taiama, a protected area in the
Pantanal. Canopy removal stimulates a flush of nutritious early seral
vegetation. By comparing mammalian herbivore abundance in burned and unburned
areas, and before and after the fire, the PI will be able to determine if this
food web is controlled by top-down or bottom-up forces. This project lies at the
heart of the land-use/climate change nexus in the Mato Grosso region of Brazil,
the world's largest soy and bovine beef exporter. Understanding the dynamics of
this system is critical as fires in the Pantanal are widely predicted to become
more frequent and increasingly severe due to both climate change and large-scale
cropland encroachment. In addition, this work will contribute to the education
of a graduate student and further an ongoing collaboration between US and
Brazilian scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a before–after-
control–impact (BACI) design to ask whether (1) jaguars specializing on aquatic
prey have reduced predation pressure on terrestrial species, or (2) whether
aquatic subsidies to jaguars lead to increased predation that suppresses
mammalian herbivore populations. Comparison of 4-years of pre-fire data to post-
fire data (before-after impact), as well as unburnt and burnt areas (control-
impact) within the reserve, will allow the PI to determine if the food web in
which the jaguar is the apex carnivore is mediated by top-down or bottom-up
forces. The PIs will quantify vegetation regeneration, terrestrial and aquatic
prey species abundance, and jaguar density and diet for one year starting in
September 2021 (one year after the fires). Fast regenerative growth is typical
in this region making the timing of the proposed study
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.