* 2140378
* Collaborative Research: Accelerating Synthetic Biology Discovery &amp; Exploration through Knowledge Integration
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Chris Myers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 111,471.00

The scientific challenge for this project is to accelerate discovery and
exploration of the synthetic biology design space. In particular, many parts
used in synthetic biology come from or are initially tested in a simple
bacteria, E. coli, but many potential applications in energy, agriculture,
materials, and health require either different bacteria or higher level
organisms (yeast for example). Currently, researchers use a trial-and-error
approach because they cannot find reliable information about prior experiments
with a given part of interest. This process simply cannot scale. Therefore, to
achieve scale, a wide range of data must be harnessed to allow confidence to be
determined about the likelihood of success. The quantity of data and the
exponential increase in the publications generated by this field is creating a
tipping point, but this data is not readily accessible to practitioners. To
address this challenge, our multidisciplinary team of biological engineers,
machine learning experts, data scientists, library scientists, and social
scientists will build a knowledge system integrating disparate data and
publication repositories in order to deliver effective and efficient access to
collectively available information; doing so will enable expedited, knowledge-
based synthetic biology design research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop an open and integrated synthetic biology knowledge system (SBKS) that
leverages existing data repositories and publications to create a single
interface that transforms the way researchers access this information. Access to
up-to-date information in multiple, heterogeneous sources will be provided via a
federated approach. New methods based on machine learning will be developed to
automatically generate ontology annotations in order to create connections
between data in various repositories and information extracted from
publications. Provenance for each entity in SBKS will be tracked, and it will be
utilized by new methods that are developed to assess bias and assign confidence
scores to knowledge returned for each entity. An intuitive, natural-language-
based interface and visualization functionality will be implemented for users to
easily access and explore SBKS contents. Additionally, as ethics is necessarily
a part of synthetic biology research, data from text sources related to ethical
concerns in synthetic biology will also be incorporated to inform researchers
about ethical debates relevant to their search queries. Finally, to test the
SBKS API, a new genetic design tool, Kimera, will be developed that leverages
the knowledge in SBKS to produce better designs. The proposed SBKS will
accelerate discovery and innovation by enabling researchers to learn from
others' past experiences and to maximize the productivity of valuable
experimental time on testing designs that have a higher likelihood of working
when transformed to a new organism. This research thus provides the potential
for transformative research outcomes in the field of synthetic biology by
leveraging data science to improve the field's epistemic culture. For more
information please see https://synbioks.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the National Science Foundation's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea activity, and is jointly supported by the HDR and the
Division of Biological Infrastructure within the NSF Directorate of Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.