* 2140482
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the missing record of late Proterozoic tectonism along the western margin of Laurentia using deep-time thermochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Devon Orme, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 150,388.00

Studies of sedimentary rocks provide geoscientists a record of Earth’s history,
including the appearance and evolution of life, the growth and demise of
mountains, and how the climate has changed. However, natural processes driven by
plate tectonics mean that this sedimentary record is inherently incomplete. At
different times during Earth’s history, some regions experienced sediment
deposition, which buries and therefore heats up rocks, while other regions
experienced erosion, which both removes portions of the rock record and cools
off the rocks that persist by bringing them closer to Earth’s surface. This
study will use the geochemical signatures of rock heating and cooling that
occurs during deposition and erosion to understand the geologic histories of
areas where no sedimentary rocks remain. Specifically, the study will
investigate the ancient record of supercontinent breakup, a process that drives
changes in sea level, global climate, and topography. This project will provide
support for three early-career researchers at different universities, including
two women, and build new relationships among the collaborating research groups.
Three graduate and nine undergraduate students from different universities will
be engaged in collaborative, hypothesis-driven research and learn a range of
field, laboratory, and science communication methods. The researchers will also
collaborate with the Idaho Museum of Natural History to create a mobile museum
exhibit that will highlight the ancient history of the charismatic mountain
ranges in the study area and visit museums that serve rural communities in the
Rocky Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unconformities, which are abundant in the
rock record, are traditionally viewed as unfillable gaps in the rock record of
Earth’s history. However, the thermal imprint of sedimentary cover on the
basement rocks that underlie many unconformities provides a rich archive of the
otherwise inaccessible parts of a continent’s tectonic history. This record is
now accessible due to recent conceptual and analytical advances in low-
temperature thermochronology. The primary objective of this study is to
contribute to these advances by targeting a critical gap in knowledge about
Laurentian tectonics, the breakup of supercontinent Rodinia, while establishing
an approach to deep-time thermochronology that can document Precambrian tectonic
activity in regions that also experienced significant Phanerozoic mountain
building. This study will sample along a 700-kilometer-long segment of western
Laurentia’s rifted margin, targeting basement rocks directly below the Great
Unconformity and using four chronometers to produce holistic tectonothermal
histories to fill a billion-year gap in the rock record. This study will
demonstrate how deep time thermochronology can provide a new perspective on the
geometry and tectonic evolution of western Laurentia’s rifted margin, where much
or all of the sedimentary record of Neoproterozoic tectonism is missing. This
capability will be tested by (1) establishing a clear link between extant
Neoproterozoic sedimentary rocks and Neoproterozoic tectonothermal events in the
Uinta Mountains, (2) documenting the Proterozoic thermal histories of basement
blocks with no overlying Neoproterozoic strata in the Teton Range and
southwestern Montana, and (3) quantifying intra-mountain range variability of
Proterozoic thermal histories to evaluate the sampling spatial resolution
necessary for extracting meaningful tectonic information from the deep-time
thermochronologic record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.