* 2140580
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of severe drought on tropical forest post-disturbance recovery
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Maria Uriarte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,005,184.00

The frequency and severity of drought in tropical forests is expected to
increase in the next decade. Further, the intensity of hurricanes is also
anticipated to rise with a warming climate. Hurricanes damage the forest
structure, increasing understory light and temperature. Tree species that
respond to increased light conditions are also particularly sensitive to water
stress. As a result, forests recovering from hurricanes may be susceptible to
drought. This project studies the recovery process in a tropical forest in
Puerto Rico, including the impacts of water stress on re-growing trees. The
researchers are conducting a rainfall manipulation experiment in a forest that
is recovering from Hurricane Maria (2017). The project is helping characterize
and predict forest resilience to climate change. Results are being shared with
scientists and managers working in the U.S. Forest Service. Nine early career
scientists are gaining valuable experience in ecological research. A series of
webinars are also communicating results with the public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is conducting a large-scale partial rainfall exclusion
experiment in the Luquillo Experimental Forest in Puerto Rico. Additional data
is being collected from the nearby 16-ha mapped Luquillo Forest Dynamics Plot.
These data include long-term demographic information collected after the passage
of Hurricane Maria (2017) and two other hurricanes. This information is adding
to the understanding of the ecophysiological responses of trees to the joint
impacts of drought and hurricane damage. The project is characterizing post-
hurricane recovery under variable rainfall conditions. By including and
improving representation of tree hydraulics and the effects of hurricane damage
on water and carbon dynamics in the Ecosystem Demography model, the research is
advancing assessment of the impacts of various climate change scenarios on tree
species composition and carbon dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
partially supported by the Integrative Ecological Physiology program in
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.