* 2140921
* Inspiring Networks and Sustainability of Postsecondary Inclusivity and Racial Equity with the Computing Alliance of HSIs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Anne-Marie Nunez, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2023
* USD 880,459.00

The Inspiring Networks and Sustainability of Postsecondary Inclusivity and
Racial Equity (INSPIRE) project will address the significant problem of
sustaining equity-centered student success practices that attempt to mitigate
systemic inequities within the STEM and STEM education enterprise. Studies of
organizational sustainability of such practices are rare, particularly in
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) and other Minority-Serving Institutions.
Also, few such initiatives have been sustained significantly over time. The
Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI), a 16-year-old
consortium of 40 HSI computer science departments and other partners dedicated
to improving racial equity, is one rare long-lasting initiative in this arena.
Studying this consortium provides the opportunity to inform organizational
change and adaptive strategies to mitigate often long-standing institutional
practices that have led to inequitable participation in the computing field.
INSPIRE’s goals are to (1) strengthen understanding of equity-centered student
success strategies to mitigate systemic inequities in the computing enterprise,
(2) support organizational sustainability of equity-centered student success
strategies in HSIs, and (3) extend a transferable model of equity-centered
student success in computing to other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to achieve three primary outcomes. First, to advance research on
equity-centered student success practices that mitigate institutional racism and
advance racial equity in computing. Second, to create a platform to elevate and
give voice to student-, staff-, faculty-, and administrator-developed practical
approaches to integrate and sustain these strategies. Finally, to develop a
transferable and culturally sustaining model of organizational transformation.
The project’s scope includes mixed methods quantitative and qualitative research
with CAHSI computing departments. The INSPIRE team will also strive to build
capacity in these computing departments to sustain organizational change toward
racial equity. The approach will include quantitative surveys, qualitative
interviews, and in-depth qualitative case studies of four CAHSI departments. The
case studies will involve interviews and observations to study how key
stakeholders encounter challenges and opportunities to implementing and
sustaining equity-centered practices. These stakeholders include faculty,
administrators, staff, and students. The project team will share data and
generate feedback to build departments’ capacity to sustain equity-oriented
organizational change during these activities. One expected result is an
enhanced understanding of equity-centered student success strategies and the
organizational conditions that hinder or enhance the adoption and sustainability
of these strategies. Another is a model of computing student success to mitigate
institutional racism in computing and STEM at all institutions. The INSPIRE team
will disseminate research and professional development through webinars,
publications, presentations, and interactive workshops. Dissemination will focus
on inclusive and equitable departmental practices, such as community-building
and intersectional approaches to learning and research, that can be directly
applied to raise minoritized students’ computing success. Dissemination efforts
will address audiences in multiple roles, including students, staff, faculty,
and administrators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate. Institutions may include those with significant percentages of
low-income undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.