* 2140471
* A Workshop to Synthesize Findings from Education Research Conducted During the Pandemic: Emerging Lessons From COVID-19
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Judith Fusco, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,922.00

This project will host a workshop in order to identify and synthesize research
findings from NSF awards that addressed the unanticipated effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic on STEM teaching and learning. The interruptions from the
pandemic had dramatic, widespread effects in education. Across the nation,
teachers, students, parents, staff, and school administrators experienced
extended school closures and a rapid and unexpected shift to virtual
instruction. Although long-term consequences are unknown, early observations
revealed deeper disparities in access and opportunity for many students of
color. These inequities extend beyond STEM education and include challenges to
student’s mental health and wellbeing. In spring 2020, NSF invited researchers
to submit educational research proposals in response to this national crisis.
Each award has its own dissemination and plans for broader impacts, yet the
public is underserved by separate reports published in many different venues. To
enable stakeholders to find and discern the most important insights, our
research team will aggregate and organize major findings across these projects
via a workshop, synthesize key findings, identify unresolved issues, and
communicate overall insights to broader audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
synthesize findings, Digital Promise will organize and convene a workshop with
NSF awardees who conducted research on the educational impacts of the pandemic.
Workshop attendees will participate in answering four questions: (1) What are
the major themes and topics across the different NSF awards? (2) How were
imperatives to address emerging inequities related to STEM education addressed
in research plans and findings? (3) Within each topic or theme, what are the
major findings, insights and recommendations for teaching and learning in STEM?
(4) Across awardees, what was learned about doing RAPID research during a
pandemic, and what are recommendations for improvement when subsequent needs for
RAPID research in education arise? Data sources for the synthesis will be
collected from project artifacts (e.g., reports, journal articles, practitioner
resources, etc.), pre/post-workshop surveys, and workshop outputs from workshop
presentations, panel discussions, and small group discussions. Interviews with a
subset of workshop attendees will provide insight into what was learned about
conducting research during a global pandemic. Data will be codified,
categorized, and coded using established qualitative methods. Digital Promise’s
broad network of partners and collaborators will achieve broad dissemination and
outreach to education stakeholders at both the K-12 and postsecondary levels.
This project is jointly funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, the Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) program, the EHR Core
Research (ECR:Core) program, and the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.