* 2140788
* PFI-TT: Enabling Advanced High-Resolution Full-Color Displays with New Color Conversion Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lih Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable augmented- and virtual-
reality (AR/VR) technologies with high visual quality at lower costs. AR/VR
technologies connect people with the digital world through immersive
experiences, and present unbounded applications in many industries. However,
these technologies face many obstacles, such as limitations in optical clarity
and resolution. The display industry is in urgent need of new innovation that
can achieve much higher resolutions than what existing technologies deliver. To
this end, the industry is actively investing in micro-LED technology, where the
pixel size nears an order of magnitude reduction from the current state of the
art. Better resolution is desirable across the entire display industry, ranging
from smartphones/watches to large panel displays, but micro-LEDs will benefit
consumers most by transforming AR/VR. However, the manufacturing process of
micro-LED displays is extremely time consuming and labor intensive, which leads
to prohibitive costs, yields, and production times. The proposed technology is
expected to profoundly reduce the cost of next generation displays for AR/VR and
transition micro-LED displays from research to market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project advances a technology that will propel micro-LEDs through the
manufacturing obstacles into mainstream displays. The technology combines a
micro-patterning method and innovative light-emitting material, compatible with
existing semiconductor manufacturing, and promises to significantly reduce the
number of key steps in micro-LED manufacturing. Conventional micro-LED array
fabrication requires processing each color of LED, blue, green, and red, on
individual semiconductor wafers. These LEDs must then be separated and assembled
on a display substrate through the manual and error-prone pick-and-place
process. The proposed micro-color converter requires the creation of only a
single blue micro-LED array, with no need to manage individual pieces. Color
converters absorb light of higher energy and emit lower-energy light, and
through patterning, select blue pixels can become green or red. The color
converter utilizes metal-halide perovskite semiconductors, a cost-effective,
solution-processible light-emitting material with outstanding optical
properties. Like other organic materials, one significant challenge with
perovskites is their incompatibility with standard photolithographic micro-
patterning processes. The proposed technology bridges this gap by enabling
micro-patterning of perovskites with many of the same photolithography tools
already in production, while protecting the layers during fabrication thus
maintaining the materialâ€™s high optical quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.