* 2140033
* CBET-EPSRC: Analysis and Optical Control of Surfactant Effects for Increased Lubrication of Liquid Flows in the Cassie State.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Marc Hodes, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 385,000.00

Engineered superhydrophobic surfaces possess properties similar to those of
naturally occurring superhydrophobic surfaces such as the lotus leaf. For
example, they provide lubrication such that droplets roll off of them rather
than adhere to them and are thus "self-cleaning." Flows of water over
superhydrophobic surfaces promise to benefit various technologies, such as lab-
on-chip and thermal management of electronics via microchannel cooling, because
of the lubrication they may provide. However, such lubrication has been severely
hindered, or even eliminated, due to the presence of trace amounts of surfactant
molecules in the water. The proposed NSF - UKRI Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council collaborative project seeks to exploit surfactants to
enhance rather than hinder lubrication. To accomplish this goal,
photosurfactants will be added to water and light will be used to manipulate
their distributions in the water. This will produce a chromocapillary stress to
pump water in preferred directions that can overwhelm the deleterious effects of
background surfactants. The liquid-vapor interfaces (menisci) that form on
superhydrophobic surfaces are ideal vehicles to exploit such chromocapillary
stresses. Results of the project will benefit a variety of microfluidic
technologies and could provide guidance for methods of propulsion of underwater
objects. The project will be carried out in collaboration with applied
mathematicians at Imperial College London who possess complimentary and
essential skills that are synergistic with those of the mechanical engineers on
the US side of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust models will be
developed to predict the behavior of flows over superhydrophobic surfaces in the
presence of chromocapillary stresses imposed by the strategic irradiation of
menisci with light of various wavelengths in photosurfactant-containing water.
The modeling will couple the species equations of the surfactant, both on the
meniscus and in the bulk water, and the associated chemical kinetics to the
hydrodynamic problem using analytical methods and in-house numerical codes. A
major component of the work will be experimental validation of the models using
micro particle image velocimetry to measure velocity profiles in flows of water
through superhydrophobic microchannels. Shapes of menisci and flow resistance of
the microchannels will be computed and measured. The result will be
experimentally-validated models for the apparent slip length, the parameter that
quantifies lubrication in the presence of chromocapillary stress. Results from
the project will advance the general state of modeling of flows over
superhydrophobic surfaces by capturing the effects of micelle formation at
sufficiently-high surfactant concentrations, another means to enhance
lubrication. Finally, the use of chromocapillary stresses to propel and steer
superhydrophobic objects submerged in water will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.