* 2140373
* Microstructural Damage Progression in Repetitive Head Trauma
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Kenneth Monson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2025
* USD 635,534.00

This work will study repetitive mild traumatic brain injury. This type of injury
is an important and dangerous type of head injury in which a person may be
exposed to several repeated minor head impacts. Individually, these minor
impacts are unlikely to cause serious injury. However, each exposure may cause
minor tissue damage that accumulates. Over time, this increases the risk of
serious brain injury. The connection between the brain and the skull determines
how each impact affects the brain. This research will quantify how repeated head
impacts damage the brain/skull interface and evaluate how this damage increases
the risk of traumatic brain injury. Data and methods from this study will
provide guidance to improve detection of mild traumatic brain injury. These
results will also enhance prediction of those at risk of severe traumatic brain
injury. Ultimately, these results will contribute to return-to-work/play
guidelines. These data will also lead to a more accurate understanding of
repeated head trauma and improve design criteria for automobiles, helmets, and
other protective devices. This project will involve undergraduate researchers
and contribute to their professional development. Outreach to the general public
will also expand the reach of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
biomechanics of traumatic brain injury has historically focused on single head
impacts and has not considered cumulative damage, ignoring a potentially
critical component of individualized head injury risk. The objectives of this
research are to characterize progressive mechanical damage at the interface
between the brain and the skull and to evaluate how damage to this connection
affects progressive damage to the underlying brain tissue. To achieve this
objective, the research team will experimentally measure tissue damage
progression in response to repeated exposures in experiments on meninges and
blood vessels, and generate constitutive models that capture damage with each
exposure. A multiscale modeling approach will be used to efficiently incorporate
the microstructural constitutive formulations into a macroscale model of
traumatic brain injury. The constitutive formulations and computational
framework developed from this proposal will fill key knowledge gaps necessary to
understand progressive damage to the brain and other neural
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.