* 2140620
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Augmented 360 Video for Situation Awareness in Firefighting
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Zhisheng Yan, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Fire incidents have caused substantial injuries, illness, and death on both
firefighters and civilians. Poor communications between commanders in the
control center and firefighters working at emergency sites are frequently cited
as the determining factor in fatality and loss reports of firefighter
operations. Traditionally, remote commanders visualize emergency sites and lead
the operation using videos captured by helmet cameras of firefighters.
Unfortunately, these video systems suffer from a fundamental problem, i.e.,
commanders are only able to see a single view of the emergency site at a time.
This limitation restricts the situation awareness of commanders and leads to
productivity and safety issues such as miscommunication of locations and failure
to identify dangerous events. This project combines 360-degree videos and
augmented reality to enable remote commanders to achieve 360-degree situation
awareness of the entire emergency site in all viewing directions and enhance
firefighting productivity and safety. The 360-degree video viewing benefits
various emergency response communities in planning and training. Other research
outcomes, including open datasets and software, are widely disseminated through
publications, presentations, and websites to contribute to the computer science
and engineering communities. Educational activities including undergraduate
research as well as fire safety training for K-12 students are also planned to
enhance the impacts of this project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
design and develop augmented 360 video technology to enable remote commanders to
switch viewports within a 360-degree scene and visualize machine-detected events
of interest. It will investigate an augmented 360 video viewing system to enable
panoramic situation awareness for incident command in firefighter operations
through these steps: (1) to address commanders’ needs and requirements for
situation awareness in firefighter videos, interviews will be performed to
identify and categorize important objects and events in firefighter response and
their technology preferences; (2) to fill in the knowledge gap of how to enable
automatic machine detection of important events in firefighter videos, a view of
interest detection model will be designed detects target objects and events; and
(3) to provide panoramic situation awareness to commanders, an augmented 360
video viewing system for remote incident command will be developed and evaluated
through a field study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.