* 2140723
* PFI-TT: An artificial intelligence system for prediction of wind hazards in civil engineering applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Seymour Spence, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the creation of technology for
leveraging performance-based design to mitigate the massive economic loss and
societal disruption caused by damage to buildings and other structures from
extreme windstorms, e.g. hurricanes. Performance-based design represents a
paradigm shift that is recognized by the engineering community as the future of
the profession. To accelerate this fundamental shift for buildings subject to
extreme windstorms, this project will create a first-of-its-kind technology for
the implementation of performance-based wind design by leveraging recent
breakthroughs in computational modeling of inelastic dynamic systems and
uncertainty propagation, therefore resulting in tools that explicitly ensure (1)
enhanced resilience of buildings and other structures to future windstorms and
(2) the stakeholder need for cost effectiveness. This will create transformative
advances on the profession of civil and structural engineering through arming
the designers of buildings and other structures subject to extreme winds with a
means to implement advanced performance-based wind design in a new process. The
project will also train a postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate students in
innovation and entrepreneurship in civil engineering
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create prototype technology
for carrying out advanced performance-based wind design through the explicit
evaluation of building performance at all hazard intensities, including at
ultimate load levels where significant damage is expected, while systematically
treating uncertainty through reliability. The technology will provide, for the
first time, a tangible means for design engineers to evaluate the system-level
inelastic performance of buildings and other structures subject to extreme winds
through the limit states of dynamic shakedown and/or incipient collapse. This
will enable the assessment of building systems against failure due to
ratcheting, low cycle fatigue, and/or instantaneous plastic collapse, the
evaluation of which is recognized as key to achieving greater resilience against
extreme windstorms at reduced costs to stakeholders. By advancing stress
resultant plasticity and hybrid computing, uncertainty propagation schemes will
enable direct evaluation of reliability at the performance objectives of dynamic
shakedown and incipient collapse, metrics at the very core of advanced
performance-based wind design. To enable user interaction with the technology, a
comprehensive object-oriented interactive graphics interface will be developed
that possesses extensible and maintainable characteristics, therefore ensuring
the results of this project will endure well beyond its
conclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.