* 2140036
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical Communication for Multi-agent Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 416,729.00

Fish swimming in schools could exploit hydrodynamic interactions with neighbor-
induced flows. E coli bacteria secrete and push against a surrounding medium
using flagella to meander in swarms, and cardiac cells exert forces on their
elastic environments to influence cell migration. Each of these multi-agent
biological systems provides an example wherein a collective behavior emerges
from low-level interactions between similar bodies immersed in a common medium,
either fluid or elastic substrate. For example, fish in a school impart momentum
(information is transmitted) into their surrounding fluid (information flows)
and the neighboring fish feel resultant physical changes that may impact
locomotion (information is received). We term the mechanism for information
transfer through ambient media mechanical communication. Here, information flow
possesses dynamics of its own in the form of environment dynamics. However, it
is not clear how individual agents should control their movement to benefit from
this mechanical communication. This project will address this challenge through
a combination of theoretical analysis and benchtop experiments with mobile
robotic vehicles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on mechanical
communication for articulated robots that actively or passively change their
internal shape to simultaneously locomote and communicate. How individual agents
within such multi-agent systems tradeoff between locomotion and mechanical
communication is a prime motivator of the work. To address this tradeoff,
exchange of information will be separated into three key blocks: transmit,
receive, and locomote. In doing so, the work seeks to answer how does a system:
1) Locomote to transmit information? 2) Transmit information to induce
locomotion? 3) Locomote to receive information? 4) Receive information to induce
locomotion? A focus of this work is to understand how mechanical coupling and
non-locomoting information exchange impact these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.