* 2140575
* Collaborative Research: Function and form in the 'what' family of signs in American Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Erin Wilkinson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 03/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This collaborative project studies the relationship between usage and grammar in
American Sign Language (ASL) in a relatively new genre: ASL videos posted to
public spaces online. Understanding the contexts in which ASL signers tend to
use particular signs is critical to the linguistic description of ASL and to the
development of cognitive, psycholinguistic, and sociolinguistic theories of
human language, more generally. In addition to this, evaluating the
accessibility and availability of online videos requires that researchers
understand and respect the expectations of privacy that the people who have
posted them may have. Through systematic study of ASL usage in videos online,
the project also formalizes a pipeline for the mentoring and increased
participation of deaf and signing researchers in social science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for this project are 1) to contribute
to understanding of ASL grammar through the study of ASL signing from a variety
of individuals, 2) to establish a pipeline for transforming internet data into
reproducible research, and 3) to increase the participation of deaf linguists in
linguistic research on ASL. In the service of these goals, the project singles
out one class of grammatical constructions involving ASL signs that can be
translated as “what” in English (as in “What did you say?” or “That’s what they
told me.”). A fundamental question is how signers use these different signs in
ASL discourse: Do particular signs consistently appear with particular
grammatical functions, such as forming a direct or indirect question, or is
there variation in the use of these forms conditioned by the grammatical and
social context? The project addresses this question by collecting and annotating
a large sample of instances of these specific signs in context from a variety of
ASL videos online. These videos are primarily from aggregate-type websites such
as ASL news outlets, recordings of public lectures and messages, and commercial
videos. At the same time, the project seeks to identify the best practices for
working with online videos and making the resulting annotations accessible for
future research. This involves making not only the resulting annotations
available in a digital repository, but also contacting a subset of individuals
who post videos online to survey their perception and interest in this endeavor.
Finally, this is a deaf-led project; deaf Americans are the primary users of
ASL, yet deaf people often experience systemic barriers to pursuing research
careers. This project allows for collaboration between deaf and hearing
researchers to study the linguistic structure of ASL, providing accessible
environments for mentorship and research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.