* 2140785
* EAGER: A Holistic Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Transformer Framework with Meta-learning to Combat Opioid Epidemic
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 02/28/2022
* USD 150,000.00

The devastating and lethal opioid epidemic has largely been fueled with various
opioids in the United States. Unfortunately, driven by considerable profits,
opioid trafficking has co-evolved with modern technologies, such as, social
media platforms have been utilized for marketing and selling illicit drugs
including opioids, which has attracted increasing attention from both public
health agencies and law enforcement. As online opioid trafficking activities are
nimble and resilient, it calls for novel techniques to effectively detect opioid
trades to facilitate proactive response strategies. By advancing capabilities of
machine learning and data science, the goal of this project is to design and
develop a holistic framework to model and analyze dynamic multi-modal data to
fight against online opioid trafficking and, thus, help combat opioid epidemic.
This research will enable a conceptual framework for the federal and state
governments, public health agencies, law enforcement, and local communities to
develop proactive strategies to build up a drug-free world - one community at a
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By engaging novel disciplinary perspectives, this
exploratory, yet transformative, high risk-high payoff work will involve
radically different approaches for the development of an integrated framework to
combat online opioid trafficking. The research will have three key components.
First, the team will propose a novel heterogeneous temporal graph (HTG) to
comprehensively model and abstract multi-modal posts and relational information
over time on social media. Second, based on the constructed HTG, the research
team will develop an innovative graph transformer to learn user representations
for opioid trafficker detection. Third, to tackle the challenge of lack of
sufficient labeled data for model training, the team will further develop a new
meta-learning algorithm by joining unsupervised graph structure and small amount
of supervised training data to update the model. This will enable the model to
quickly adapt to a new task, such as identifying a new type of traded opioid and
its traffickers on social media, using only a few samples and training
iterations. The developed holistic framework for the detection of online opioid
trafficking activities will have significant impacts on addressing the critical
national opioid epidemic facing our society. The research will be beneficial to
data mining and machine learning communities, as well as multidisciplinary
domains such as public health, epidemiology, social and behavioral sciences. The
outcomes of this project will be made publicly accessible and broadly
distributed. The project will integrate research with education through novel
curriculum development, participation of underrepresented groups, and student
mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.