* 2140073
* CAREER: Mechanisms of the Impact of Gesture Observation on Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Laura Morett, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2027
* USD 683,498.00

Observing relevant hand gestures while listening to speech incorporates multiple
senses that enhance learning. However, gestures observed when listening to
speech vary in the extent to which they enhance learning, and it is currently
poorly understood why this is the case. This CAREER award examines how the
information conveyed via gesture and its relationship to speech affects the
learning of words from a novel second language differing in pronunciation and
meaning. By examining how the brain processes such words learned with gestures
differing in these ways, it will provide insight into why various types of
gestures affect learning differently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives of this CAREER award are to (1) determine how information conveyed
via gesture and its congruence with speech at learning affects subsequent
processing of learned content conveyed via speech; (2) characterize how
sensitivity to information conveyed via gesture and its congruence with speech
prior to learning affects the impact of gesture on learning and subsequent
processing of learned content conveyed via speech; and (3) identify how brain
regions subserving multimodal and language processing affect gesture-speech
integration and subsequent processing of learned content conveyed via speech.
The research approach achieves these objectives by examining how observing
gestures congruent and incongruent with non-native speech sounds and word
referents at learning affects subsequent processing of learned second language
(L2) words via accuracy and latency, event-related potentials (ERPs), and
transcranial direct stimulation (tDCS), which causally affects brain activity.
In doing so, it will contribute to the development of a theory of gesture’s
impact on learning applicable across diverse content areas specifying the neural
substrates of the cognitive mechanisms of gesture’s impact on learning. The
educational objectives of this CAREER award will integrate scaffolded inquiry-
based learning utilizing ERP research methods into the educational neuroscience
curriculum; engage students from diverse backgrounds students in the proposed
research and educational activities; and advance replication and translation of
findings in L2 pedagogical contexts. Together, these activities will help bridge
the gap between educational neuroscience research and pedagogical practice in
multiple educational contexts. This project is jointly funded by the Science of
Learning and Augmented Intelligence Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.