* 2140043
* 2021 Waterman Award
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Melanie Wood, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Melanie Matchett Wood, Professor of
Mathematics at Harvard University, as the 2021 Alan T. Waterman Award recipient:
For fundamental contributions at the interface of number theory, algebraic
geometry, topology, and probability including establishing deep results in the
subject of random matrices, advancing the field by proving, and occasionally
disproving, conjectures and widely believed statements. Some of Dr. Wood’s most
cited work, on random matrices, random graphs, and random sandpiles, will have
downstream applications in both physics and statistics. One focus of Dr. Wood’s
work has been to develop a nonabelian analogue of the Cohen-Lenstra heuristics,
in which class groups are replaced by Galois groups of nonabelian extensions of
a varying number field. Dr. Wood also developed a remarkable understanding of
quadratic forms with arbitrarily "strange" coefficients. Dr. Wood is one of the
world’s leaders in her field of mathematics and is at the top of her generation
in mathematics overall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wood has taken on a leadership
role in her profession, promoting greater participation by girls and women in
mathematics, for example through her work with high school programs, and
communicating the ubiquity of mathematics to a lay audience. At the age of 16,
Wood was the first female member of the U.S. international Math Olympiad team
and led the first U.S. team to participate in the international Girls’ Math
Olympiad contest for high school students. She has embraced her unique position
as a leader in mathematics to inspire others and to be a model for the next
generation. Dr. Wood has won numerous prizes and awards, including being the
first woman to win the Morgan Prize for the top undergraduate mathematics
research in North America and being the first American woman to be named a
Putnam Fellow. She received the AWM-Microsoft Research Prize in Algebra and
Number Theory. In addition, she was named a Clay Mathematics Institute Liftoff
Fellow, an Inaugural Fellow of the American Mathematical Society, a Sloan
Research Fellow, and a recipient of a Packard Fellowship for Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wood received her BS degree from Duke
University in 2003 and her PhD from Princeton University in 2009. She was an AIM
Fellow from 2009-2014 and named as a Clay Liftoff Fellow in 2009, holding these
at Stanford University, and in 2011 joined the faculty of the University of
Wisconsin as an Assistant Professor. She moved to the University of California
at Berkeley as a Professor in 2019 and since May of 2020 has been a Professor at
Harvard University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.