* 2140146
* VALORIZATION OF SOLID DIGESTATE THROUGH AUTOTHERMAL HYDROTHERMAL LIQUEFACTION
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 329,856.00

This project explores new ways to address the growing problem of wet wastes
ranging from animal manure produced on farms, to wastewater from processing
fruits and vegetables in the food industry. Wet wastes usually contain more
water than solid material wastes, preventing the normal transport and storage at
landfills or treatment by burning. Instead, biological processes are often
employed to treat wet wastes, but these processes are slow and often leave a
significant solid residue requiring special disposal. This project explores the
hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) process, a high-temperate, high-pressure process
that dissolves oxygen into the wet wastes, to convert this waste into liquid
fuel without requiring external energy sources to drive the process. By turning
waste into liquid fuel, the process both eliminates the waste and generates a
valuable product. If successful, this project will provide new ways to scale up
HTL processes to make them available for more common use, thereby strengthening
the Nationâ€™s energy security while reducing the amount of waste from agriculture
and other food industries. This project will also train postdoctoral researchers
graduate students to effectively mentor their own students in future engineering
efforts through the use of a tiered mentoring approach guided by the lead
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to intensify
hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) through directly coupled autothermal operation.
This operation will overcome the heat transfer bottleneck of providing energy to
the process and allow for scale-up to commercial use. Previous research at Iowa
State University demonstrated autothermal operation of a fast pyrolyzer by
admitting a small amount of air to the reactor. This increase in oxygen achieved
a three-fold increase in throughput compared to conventional (non-oxidative)
pyrolysis with minimal loss in bio-oil production. This study proposes a similar
autothermal operation of an HTL reactor, providing the enthalpy for the process
through partial oxidation of some of the low value aqueous phase products of
liquefaction. It is hypothesized that oxygen will preferentially dissolve in the
aqueous fraction of HTL products where it will readily react with dissolved
organics. In contrast, the more valuable biocrude, an emulsion suspended in the
aqueous fraction with far less exposure to the dissolved oxygen, will not
substantially oxidize. The approach to this project is to develop a calorimetric
HTL reactor that will allow energy flows as well as product composition to be
determined during HTL of solid digestate from anaerobic digestion of animal
manure. Experiments under both inert and oxidative environments will determine
the extent that the enthalpy for liquefaction can be provided by partial
oxidation of the less valuable products of liquefaction. The oxidation of
organic compounds in high temperature, high pressure aqueous environments has
been little studied outside wet oxidation of dissolved solids at atmospheric
conditions. If successful, this research will help remediate the approximately
565 teragrams of wet waste generated annually in the United States.
Additionally, the scientific and engineering principles implemented in this work
will serve as foundational research required for the process intensification of
HTL for a range of wet wastes including agricultural residue, food wastes,
municipality solid wastes, sewage sludge, and animal manure. A formal
postdoctoral researcher and graduate student mentoring structure, combined with
effective outreach to kindergarten through twelfth grade students, will help
inspire new and train future researchers in these engineering
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.