* 2140206
* EAGER: Characteristic Disruptions of the Marine Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Rothman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Earth's carbon cycle consists of processes that consume and produce carbon
dioxide. The geologic record shows that the balance between consumption and
production has undergone many disruptions lasting thousands of years or more.
This project focuses on disruptions that produce unusually high carbon dioxide
levels and global warming. Previous work has related these events to carbon that
is released from particular sources under the right climatic conditions.
However, recent work suggests these events occur in a typical way independent of
longer-term climatic trends. This project proposes that such characteristic
disruptions are natural consequences of mechanisms in the carbon cycle that are
always active. The project will quantify the evidence of such behavior in
records from marine sediments. It will also develop mathematical models to show
how such disruptions could arise. To bring this subject to a wide audience, the
project will hold public question-and-answer sessions on reddit.com's “IAmA”
“Ask me anything” website. It will also host a public screening of the 2019 HBO
documentary Ice on Fire, which features related themes. The project will also
produce new educational resources, support the training of a graduate student,
and publicize its work in the news media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
overall goal is to understand mechanisms responsible for disruption of the long-
term carbon cycle. The project hypothesizes that characteristic disruptions
occur via processes of nonlinear amplification. It proposes to detect signatures
of such processes in paleoclimate time series and to explain these observations
by construction of new models. Past work has emphasized the role of specific
sedimentary carbon reservoirs in generating certain individual events. Yet it
also indicates that more general pathways to disruption may have persisted
through different climate regimes. The project seeks to identify classes of such
persistent phenomena related to intrinsic nonlinear dynamics of the marine
carbon cycle. The project will construct mathematical models showing how this
could work and will seek evidence of their predictions in past fluctuations in
carbon-isotopic data. Such understanding will likely lead to new interpretations
of the role of specific stressors, such as enhanced volcanism or the release of
methane, as drivers of major warming events. Results will also provide insight
into the long-term risks of the human perturbation of the modern carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.