* 2140402
* Using Intensive Longitudinal Methods to Study Conversations as Dynamic Dyadic Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Denise Solomon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 11/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

One of the most consequential aspects of how people relate to one another
concerns their conversations. Back-and-forth exchanges can have many functions,
such as providing support or encouragement, disagreeing with others, deepening
connections, influencing others, or being influenced. Most people agree that
conversations matter, but they may fail to understand the critical features that
make conversations consequential. The analysis of how conversations unfold, and
which communication patterns matter most, had been underdeveloped. However,
research funded by the National Science Foundation developed the Dynamic Dyadic
Systems approach, which provides analytic tools for studying interpersonal
conversations and linking patterns of interaction to interpersonal outcomes.
This project significantly expands the usability of a Dynamic Dyadic Systems
approach by providing broad training through two conferences, the publication of
research examples, and the development of online and freely accessible
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first conference brings together
investigators from different fields who study topics that would benefit from new
methods for analyzing dyadic conversations. Using data from studies conducted by
these investigators, the conference expands the applicability of the Dynamic
Dyadic Systems approach by analyzing face-to-face and digital interactions
between strangers, co-workers, newlyweds, or parents and children. Projects from
the first conference provide the basis for publications showcasing how the
Dynamic Dyadic Systems approach can propel new discoveries about conversations.
The products of the first conference, including data sets, tutorials, and
reports, provide the materials for a second conference in which the novel
techniques are demonstrated and shared with a broader audience of scholars. The
project leverages a new approach to analyzing conversations by contributing
open-source tutorials, code for statistical modeling on freely available
software, and other resources, all of which are being made available online for
broad use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.