* 2140152
* Collaborative Research: RNA Processing in Trypanosome Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Jorge Cruz-Reyes, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2025
* USD 828,217.00

This project will study a distinctive mechanism of gene expression in ancient
single-celled parasites called trypanosomes. In most organisms, RNA is copied
from DNA and directs protein synthesis without changes in the code. However, in
trypanosomal mitochondria (the ‘powerhouse’ of cells), RNA is edited extensively
by addition or removal of specific nucleotides. In their complex life cycle,
trypanosomes alternate between two very different hosts: humans (and other
animals) and insects, which are the vectors of tranmission. The dramatically
different environments that the parasites face in humans and insects demand
rapid and large-scale metabolic and physiological changes, including in RNA
editing. The crucial question of how the RNA editing mechanism is precisely
regulated during parasite development remains unanswered and is the focus of
this research. The project will have broad educational impact by providing
interdisciplinary training opportunities for postdoctoral, graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, with a focus on groups traditionally
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on Trypanosoma brucei mRNA editing regulation and the key role of the
REH2C complex that controls editing fidelity in editosomes. The research can
shed new light on a question that has remained a mystery for decades: how is
mRNA editing differentially controlled across the T. brucei life-cycle?
Objective 1 will test the “partial-editing control” (PEC) model of exploiting
partial editing to differentially inhibit mRNA maturation in two developmental
forms of T. brucei. A recently developed pipeline for RNA-seq/bioinformatic
analysis of edited RNAs will be employed for this purpose. Objective 2 will
address the source of substrate specificity in editing, specifically to define
the role of a rare DEAH-box helicase cofactor and its individual zinc fingers in
the mechanism. Objective 3 will examine dynamic interactions of editing
components and remodeling by the REH2C complex by elucidating the general
organization of editosomes using genetic, biochemical (proximity labeling), and
chemical (crosslinking-mass spectrometry) approaches. Overall, these studies
will reveal new aspects of editing regulation in two life-cycle stages of the
parasite, including editing fidelity, substrate specificity determinants, and
editosome interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.