* 2140262
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Truman College ADVANCE Catalyst Participatory Action Research- Building a sense of "voice" among STEM faculty
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Leah Page, City Colleges of Chicago Harry S Truman College
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,762.00

This project will focus on faculty in STEM departments compared to non-STEM
departments and uncover any persistent negative perceptions of historically
marginalized groups, especially in the STEM departments. The project will
examine which female-identifying STEM faculty feel they have a voice in their
departments and research the significance of those perceptions in the context of
protected classes (e.g., race, religion) and positions in the institution. The
project seeks to answer who feels unheard, why that might be the case, and how
intersectional identities impact those experiences. This work is important to
Harry S Truman College because the college has been deeply engaged in equity
work since 2017, but the focus has always been on the student experience. This
has left little room for curiosity about faculty experience. And while Harry S.
Truman College offers the perspective of an already ethnically diverse college,
it nevertheless struggles with persistent and systematic inequity. Additionally,
the project will consider which interventions are most likely to increase a
sense of belonging or voice and pilot interventions as part of a 5-year STEM
Faculty Equity Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of focus groups,
individual interviews, and a survey, the project will answer three questions: 1)
who are the faculty that report feeling unheard, and why is this the case; 2)
how do intersectional identities impact their experiences on campus; and 3) what
immediate interventions could be piloted to increase sense of voice and
belonging? The project will use a mixed methods research approach to prepare a
foundational and intersectional report on faculty sense of belonging and voice.
The findings will propel future investigation into faculty inequities, known
barriers, and promising interventions. Harry S. Truman College wants to uncover
any significant disruption between the sense of belonging and voice of faculty
in traditionally privileged identities (i.e., white, male) and female-
identifying faculty intersected with additional underrepresented identities
(e.g., race, national origin, tenure status, etc.). The high-level objectives
for this project are to uncover critical inequities and address them with an
intersectional lens. The project will create artifacts for easy sharing of
information within the higher education community and the ADVANCE network,
including a diversity of identities among faculty. The project will privilege
experiences in STEM teaching that have traditionally been excluded and build
power on the margins by inviting these individuals to lead research and pilot
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.