* 2140927
* Collaborative Research: Human Behavior Within the Context of Long Term Environment Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jamie Clark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 44,745.00

In the face of the unprecedented climate change of the modern era, there is a
growing interest in understanding the ways in which climate change shaped, and
was shaped by, prehistoric human groups. This project will undertake research on
climate change, and the nature of human responses to that change, during the
Last Glacial Period. The Last Glacial is characterized by profound shifts in
climate, culminating in the Last Glacial Maximum during which sea levels dropped
to 130 m below the modern coastline. On a human scale, the phase witnessed
significant biological, cultural and technological changes. Within the region
studied, this includes the replacement of Neanderthals by modern humans and the
transition from Middle to Upper Paleolithic technologies and culture. The Last
Glacial also encompasses much of the Epipaleolithic, a period of key importance
to our understanding of the transition from foraging bands to sedentary farming
societies. There has been considerable debate about the role played by climate
change in these transitions, fueled in part by a lack of high resolution,
culturally linked environmental data. By combining high resolution paleoclimate
and zooarchaeological data, this project will provide insight into human-
environmental interactions during a key period in the later stages of human
development. The project will provide research opportunities for undergraduates
at a majority-minority institution, as well as supporting graduate student
training at a second university. Given the importance of deep-time perspectives
to current discussions about climate change, results will be disseminated to the
public via popular science articles and by public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With deposits spanning from the Middle
Paleolithic through the Epipaleolithic (~71-21,000 years ago), this research
examines caves that serves as an ideal natural laboratory for exploring
questions relating to human-environmental interaction in the strategic region
that facilitated inter-continental human and cultural exchanges. The project
will combine traditional zooarchaeological analysis with the isotopic analysis
of key prey species (gazelle and fallow deer) and plant waxes (n-alkanes)
deriving from archaeological sediments. The combined datasets will provide a
high-resolution reconstruction of paleoclimatic conditions. The data also
provide a unique opportunity to document shifts in human subsistence behavior
and landscape use throughout the Last Glacial. This will facilitate the
evaluation of hypotheses about behavioral differences between Neanderthals and
modern humans, while also providing new insights into the nature of human
responses to the Last Glacial Maximum, a particularly active and challenging
period of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.