* 2140489
* PFI-TT: Development of A New Class of Low-Power, Plasma-Based Wind Turbine Icing Protection Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 321,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to address a multi-billion dollar-
valued, renewable energy related problem via developing a new class of wind
turbine icing protection systems (WTIPS). Wind turbine icing represents the most
significant threat to turbine efficiency and structural integrity in cold
climates. With total installed wind power capacity approaching 1,000 GW globally
and 120 GW in USA alone, wind turbine icing is found to cause significant power
loss and additional maintenance &amp; operational costs, valued up to billions
of dollars on the fast-growing wind energy market. One notable example to
highlight the importance of wind turbine icing protection is the massive turbine
shutdown after a severe storm blasted Texas in February 2021. This project is
primarily intended to develop a novel WTIPS to ensure safer and more efficient
operation of wind turbines in cold climates. The primary educational outcome of
this program is to cultivate future entrepreneurial leaders that are capable of
leading strong and diverse teams toward societal impact through
commercialization. The program also includes various activities to ensure broad
participation of female students and those from under-represented minority (URM)
groups in the leadership development and entrepreneurial
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop novel,
plasma-based WTIPS that properly integrates Dielectric-Barrier-Discharge (DBD)
plasma actuation and “state-of-the-art” hydro-/ice-phobic coatings for effective
wind turbine icing protection. While DBD plasma actuators will be used to
actively repel ice accretion in the critical regions (e.g., near blade leading
edges), the hydro-/ice-phobic surfaces/coatings with ultra-low ice adhesion
strength will be leveraged to efficiently prevent ice accretion and water
runback over blade surfaces. A comprehensive icing tunnel testing campaign will
be conducted to examine the anti-/de-icing performance of DBD plasma actuations
under various icing conditions representative of wind turbine icing envelope.
The mechanical durability of the hydro-/ice-phobic coatings to resist mechanical
wearing due to “rain erosion” effects and performance degradation due to long-
time exposure to UV light emission will also be evaluated systematically. In
addition to conducting lab experiments, prototype development and field
experiments are also planned to improve the technology readiness level (TRL) of
the proposed plasma based WTIPS for accelerated technology commercialization.
The success of this project would lead to a new class of low-power, plasma-based
WTIPS to effectively repel ice accretion over turbine blade surfaces at much
lower power costs (i.e., &gt; 80% in energy saving) than the current WTIPS
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.