* 2140696
* Critical Conversations: Systemic and Agentic Empowerment of Black Ph.D. Students and their Faculty Advisors in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Denise Simmons, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,023,826.00

The main goal of this project is to understand how Black engineering doctoral
students and their faculty advisors (academic partners) develop a sense of
agency (the ability to perceive and enact change within one’s environment) and
how their agency changes over time to form a professional identity. In this
project, academic partners will help refine and co-develop materials,
procedures, and policies to mitigate racial inequities in their respective
disciplines in engineering. One of the focal points of this work will be to
explore agency and to investigate and uncover coping and advocacy strategies in
engineering. Additionally critical communication strategies and policy
strategies for instituting change and empowerment within engineering and
engineering education will also be addressed. A primary broader impact of this
project will be the amplification of Black student voices and agentic actions in
their continuing work to achieve equitable representation in engineering and
STEM fields. The project will support efforts by researchers, administrators,
and educators to help students of color broaden their participation in the
engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide
early stage and exploratory insights into engineering and STEM education by: (1)
contributing to an empirical understanding of structural and cultural supports
and systemic barriers in engineering, STEM, and higher education; (2) conducting
an evidence-based examination of the ways Black graduate student agency in
engineering education contributes to the dismantling of systemic inequities
within the enterprise of their fields of engineering; and (c) situating the
lessons, values, and habits students learn that are not explicitly taught
through the formal curriculum that oftentimes deters systemic changes from
occurring at the administrative level. This work is split into four phases
distributed throughout 4 years: (1) Reflection; (2) Action and Reflection; (3)
Impact; and (4) Action and Application. These phases are intended to create
opportunities for critical conversations to happen between the academic partners
and key academic leaders and stakeholders in engineering departments. Process
evaluation will address questions regarding project implementation and impact.
Along with scholarly manuscripts and presentations, public facing articles and
op-eds for mainstream press, professional development documents and curriculum
will be disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports
projects that promote racial equity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce development through research and
practice. Awarded projects center the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the
individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by the inequities
caused by systemic racism in STEM fields. This program aligns with NSF’s core
value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from across
the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.