* 2140413
* Advances in Data Science: Theory, Methods and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Moumita Karmakar, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 02/28/2023
* USD 18,605.00

Due to advancements in data acquisition techniques over the last two decades,
new types of exceedingly complex datasets have emerged and present tremendous
challenges that require synergy of interdisciplinary ideas for analysis and
decision making. As a result, the field of data-science is rapidly evolving as
an interdisciplinary field, where advances often result from combinations of
ideas from multiple disciplines. A convening of leading experts, early-career
researchers, and students from varied disciplines to exchange ideas is essential
for progress in this field. Texas A&amp;M University will host a two-day
conference on Advances in Data Science in February 2022. More information on the
conference can be found at https://stat.tamu.edu/advances-in-data-science-
conference/.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the conference is to
provide a much-needed platform for accelerating the depth and quality of
research on the foundations of data science through interdisciplinarity. The
conference will bring together researchers from three major disciplinary areas
(Statistics, Mathematics and Engineering) for presentation and dissemination of
their research, to engage in discussions and foster future collaborations. This
conference will involve women, minorities and young researchers across the
nation. The conference will present a tremendous opportunity for first
generation undergraduate students to be inspired and pursue careers in data-
science in both academia and industry. The conference will feature a number of
activities to engage the students and recognize their contributions through
awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.