* 2140527
* CAREER: A Nonlinear Model Reduction Framework for Oscillatory Systems and Associated Data-Driven Inference Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Dan Wilson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2027
* USD 599,017.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research that enables improved
understanding and control of collective neurological rhythms, for example
pathological synchronization of neurons contributing to the motor symptoms of
Parkinson’s disease, thereby promoting the progress of science, and advancing
the national health. Deep brain stimulation injects electrical pulses into the
brains of patients suffering from Parkinson’s to alleviate muscle tremors and
rigidity. Because of the large inputs required, standard theoretical tools for
predicting and analyzing the neuronal response are inadequate, since they assume
small deviations from the synchronized behavior. This project will overcome such
limitations by developing a new theoretical approach, suitable for complex and
high-dimensional systems with oscillatory dynamics even for large deviations
dominated by system nonlinearities. By combining this approach with machine-
learning techniques, it will be possible to derive relevant dynamical models
entirely from measurements, with potential applications to treating recovery
from jet lag or controlling the air flow around vehicles and aircraft. Through
close integration of research and education, this project will contribute to an
engineering and science curriculum of inquiry-based, hands-on learning
experiences for high school students attending outreach activities or specially
designed, multi-day immersive programs at Lone Oaks Farm, a STEM education
center in west Tennessee that serves large populations of underrepresented
students from under-resourced local communities. Completion of this project will
also yield a series of tutorial sessions, a set of online learning modules, and
a computational toolbox, each promoting the use of powerful mathematical
techniques for dynamical systems analysis to members of the larger research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to a theory of model reduction techniques for oscillatory high-
dimensional systems whose dynamics are dominated by system nonlinearities, with
particular emphasis on accuracy, analytical tractability, and suitability for
control design. It achieves this aim by augmenting traditional phase-based
reduction methods with a description of transversal dynamics in terms of
isostable coordinates, which characterize the slowest decaying modes of the
system Koopman operator. Adaptive updates to model parameters are then
introduced to bound the time evolution of the isostable coordinates and ensure
convergence of asymptotic expansions used in the model reduction.
Generalizations to non-periodic dynamics and, importantly, to data-driven model
identification in the absence of known underlying dynamical equations will be
explored in theoretical models and in applications to circadian cycles, neural
brain rhythms, and fluid flow systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.