* 2140500
* Arctic melt and summer temperature during past warm periods: a new ice core proxy
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Christo Buizert, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 529,842.00

Glacier ice melt in the Arctic has profound impacts on local communities,
ecosystems and infrastructure, and global sea level. Long-term records of past
ice melt help scientists better understand the processes that contribute to ice
melt, such as summer air temperatures and the concentration of soot and other
particles in the ice that absorb sunlight. In particular, past warm periods are
important to study because they provide potential analogs for our future
climate. One method to reconstruct past surface melt is through visual detection
of bubble-free layers. However, beyond approximately 5000 years, the melt layers
are no longer visible because the ice layers get strongly thinned by ice flow
and because the air bubbles dissolve into the ice crystals. This award supports
the development of a new technique to reconstruct past melt in Arctic ice cores
and the application of this technique to study past warm periods in Arctic ice
cores from Greenland and Alaska. The award supports a graduate student at Oregon
State University, contributing to the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) workforce. The researchers will develop lesson materials on ice
cores and climate change for middle and high school students from underserved
regions, host two STEM teacher workshops at OSU, and to support student clubs
across Oregon rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glacier ice cores preserve
a record of past surface melting that can be used for understanding past
variability in melt intensity in response to climate forcing - either natural or
anthropogenic. Researchers have traditionally reconstructed past surface melt in
ice cores using visual detection of bubble-free layers. Unfortunately, this
method does not work for old and/or deep ice, where melt layers can no longer be
visually identified. The investigator will apply a new ice core proxy for
surface melt intensity: the xenon/nitrogen ratio. In the absence of refrozen
meltwater, the xenon/nitrogen ratio in ice samples reflects the atmospheric
ratio. However, because of the high solubility of xenon, the xenon/nitrogen
ratio becomes strongly enriched in the presence of surface melt. The
investigator will use this proxy to address four important scientific questions:
(1) what is the timing and magnitude of the Holocene Thermal Maximum in the
Arctic; (2) what is the extent and magnitude of Greenland melt during the Last
Interglacial period; (3) what are the drivers of Arctic melt on long time
scales; and (4) how do current melt rates in the Arctic compare to the last
10,000 years. The investigator proposes measurements on the Renland and GISP2
ice cores (both from Greenland), and the Mt. Hunter ice core (from Alaska). The
xenon/nitrogen melt proxy will be calibrated to reconstruct local summer
temperature. The proposed work uses existing ice core samples and does not
involve Arctic fieldwork. The award supports a graduate student at Oregon State
University, contributing to the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) workforce. The researchers will develop lesson materials on ice
cores and climate change for middle and high school students from underserved
regions, host two STEM teacher workshops at OSU, and to support student clubs
across Oregon rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.