* 2140119
* Using seed-free plants to link diversity in stomatal function with ecological strategy
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Scott McAdam, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2025
* USD 604,229.00

Plants obtain carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through microscopic pores on
the leaves called stomata. When stomata open to obtain carbon dioxide, water is
lost to the atmosphere by evaporation. Due to the tradeoff between carbon gain
used for plant growth and water loss that might lead to dehydration, there are
many signals from the environment and plant that trigger stomatal opening and
closing. This award aims to investigate whether there is variation across fern
species in the responses of stomata to environmental conditions, and whether
this variation can be linked to ecological strategies and habitat preference.
This project will focus on ferns and lycophytes, ancient groups of plants that
have comparatively simple stomatal behavior, in which variation in stomatal
function is likely to have a large impact on plant growth and survival. The
results will increase understanding of how stomatal responses to the environment
evolved and how they could be manipulated in agricultural species to improve
plant water use and productivity. This project will also inform the public and
students on the dynamic nature of plants, to help raise awareness of how
responsive and alive these otherwise static features of the landscape are, as
well as provide research training to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate three key hypotheses using comparative
studies to characterize the natural diversity of stomatal function found in
seed-free plants. The first hypothesis proposes that eliminating the threat of
water limitation on survival through the evolution of an aquatic growth habit or
vegetative desiccation-tolerance, drives the evolution of novel stomatal
function, particularly in the regulation of stomatal closure. The second
proposes that the evolution of unique leaf hydraulic properties facilitates the
evolution of novel stomatal regulation. Finally, this project will test whether
there is coordinated evolution in stomatal regulation, leaf hydraulic traits and
ecological strategy across an ecological diverse fern family. This project will
draw upon a large living collection of diverse fern and lycophyte species and
field experiments to address these hypotheses, primarily through comparative
studies of stomatal and plant hydraulic physiology between closely related yet
ecologically dissimilar species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.