* 2140416
* Upgrade of the Raman Spectroscopy System at the High-Pressure Lab of Arizona State University
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Sang-Heon Shim, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2023
* USD 85,275.00

This award will fund the upgrade of the Raman spectroscopy system at the high-
pressure lab of Arizona State University (ASU). The upgrade includes a CCD
detector, a spectrograph, and a 3D sample positioning system. The new components
will not only enhance essential function of the system, vibrational
spectroscopy, but also add a new capability: 2D and 3D micro phase mapping of
the samples synthesized at high pressures and high temperatures. The upgrade
will therefore open new research projects for undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers at ASU, promoting the progress of
science. In particular, the enhanced capability of the system will allow us to
offer new research projects to undergraduate students, such as mantle
experimental petrology, volatiles storage in mantle minerals, and software-
hardware interfacing in scientific instrument. PI Shim has offered undergraduate
research program since 2003. In the program, the Raman system has played a
critical role and produced scientific articles first authored by undergraduate
students. The majority of the undergraduate students in the research program are
from minoritized groups and the upgrade will allow the PI to continue the
effort, supporting education and diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to upgrade the Raman system at the high-pressure lab at Arizona
State University for enabling diverse types of measurements for mineral physics
research. Micro-beam capability combined with transparency of diamond over a
wide range of electromagnetic wave makes the Raman technique suitable for
studying the extremely small sample inside diamond-anvil cell under high
pressure. The 2D scanning capability of the micro-Raman technique can provide
phase mapping for the samples synthesized at high pressures in multi-anvil
press. PI Shim has used Raman spectroscopy extensively and produced numerous
scientific results over the last 24 years, such as high-pressure behaviors of
lattice and OH vibrational modes in mantle silicates, modeling vibrational
density of state, stability of volatile-bearing minerals, structure of amorphous
phases at high pressures, high-temperature behavior of minerals, and magnetic
scattering. However, the key components of the existing system, CCD detector and
spectrograph, are outdated and the quality of the data suffers from their ages
(18 years). The upgrade will not only improve the quality of data from the Raman
system but also add a new capability to the system: accurate 2D or 3D phase
mapping. The new capability will be important for supporting expanding research
areas of the high-pressure group at ASU, such as hydrogen storage in the Earthâ€™s
interior, lower-mantle petrology, and synthesis of high-density target materials
for laser driven shock experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.