* 2140506
* Statistical Machine Learning for Model Predictive Control of Nonlinear Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 365,097.00

Machine learning (ML) has attracted increased attention in recent years due to
its ability to uncover patterns in large sets of data (â€œbig data") and its
widening application in classical engineering fields. Traditionally, process
control systems rely on a linear data-driven models, and in certain cases on
first-principles models. However, modeling large-scale, complex nonlinear
processes continues to be a major challenge in process systems engineering.
Since process models are key elements of advanced model-based control systems,
such as model predictive control (MPC) and economic MPC, building, training, and
characterizing the accuracy of ML models is a new frontier in control system
design that will impact the next generation of industrial control systems.
Motivated by this, the goal of the proposed research program is to employ and
further advance the methodological framework of generalized error bounds from
machine learning theory for the development and verification of machine learning
models and to integrate these models into predictive control system design for
broad classes of nonlinear chemical processes. The research results and software
tools will be incorporated within the undergraduate process control and senior
design/process economics course curricula at UCLA to introduce students to the
applications of machine learning techniques in accordance with departmental and
campus goals. The project will also involve a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in the research through participation in the Center for
Engineering Education and Diversity at UCLA, outreach to high school students
and teachers, and outreach to the California State Polytechnic University in
Pomona and the predominantly Hispanic El-Camino College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research program is to employ and
advance the methodological framework of generalized error bounds from machine
learning theory for the development and verification of machine learning models
with specific theoretical accuracy guarantees and integrate these models into
model predictive control (MPC) and economic MPC system design for nonlinear
chemical processes. Specifically, this research will focus on the following
broad objectives: a) the development of generalized probabilistic error bounds
for machine learning models accounting for the impact of the number of neurons
and layers on accuracy and guiding network structure selection and training, b)
the design of model predictive control schemes that incorporate machine learning
models in the form of process-structure aware recursive neural networks that are
computationally efficient and ensure desired closed-loop stability, performance,
robustness and operational safety properties, c) the development of a
methodology for on-line adaptation of machine learning models in model
predictive control to capture changing process dynamics and model uncertainty
using real-time noisy data, and d) applications of the machine learning modeling
and control methods to high-fidelity, large-scale process simulators
incorporating process-data informed parameters and noise from data sets provided
by industrial collaborators as well as from an experimental electrochemical
reactor system developed within the research team for the reduction of CO and
CO2. While the research will be carried out in the context of chemical process
control systems synthesis, the resulting design framework will broadly impact
manufacturing processes across a wide range of industrial sectors as well as
smart devices that currently make use of model predictive
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.