* 2140764
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Finding Interrogativity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 10,774.00

Language is used to perform various kinds of communicative acts - providing
information, asking questions, making requests, etc. In any language, there are
specific signals in the form of a sentence that indicates what communicative act
it is typically used for. But these signals vary from language to language. This
project examines how children learn to identify the communicative acts of the
people speaking to them while learning the surface signals associated with these
acts. Specifically, this project investigates how children come to associate
interrogatives ("Do you want a cookie?") to questions. Mapping interrogatives to
questions present interesting acquisition challenges. First, children need to
figure out the form of interrogative clauses in their language: while all
languages tend to have dedicated clauses for questions, the syntactic makeup of
these interrogatives differ: in English, interrogatives usually differ from
declaratives in word order (e.g. "Do you want a cookie" vs. "I want a cookie"),
but not in Mandarin. To figure out the form of their language’s interrogatives,
children need to notice regularities in form. But how do children figure out
which regularities matter, and how do they associate clause types with their
canonical function? Second, children need to figure out when speakers are asking
questions (vs. making assertions or requests). But how can they do so, if they
can’t yet rely on the forms typically used for these acts? Previous research
shows that, despite the complexity of the task, children understand
interrogatives and their conventionalized function as questions before age
three. To investigate how children solve this complex mapping problem, this
project examines how questions are asked in speech to children, using what
forms, comparing English and Mandarin: how much formal regularity is there in
how parents ask questions? And are there extralinguistic cues in speakers’
behavior that can give away questionhood (e.g., pauses in conversation or focus
of attention)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests the hypothesis that
children learn to identify speech act (question) and clause type (interrogative)
in tandem and mutually informative ways: children learn to identify
interrogatives by tracking formal regularities in conjunction with their growing
knowledge of questionhood and its associated social cues; similarly, they
identify questions by tracking social cues in conjunction with their growing
understanding of interrogative syntax. The project will consist of two corpus
studies and one computational model: Study 1 examines conversations between
English-speaking parent-child dyads and Study 2 conversations between Mandarin
parent-child dyads, where parent utterances will be annotated for pragmatic,
prosodic, and syntactic features. The annotated data will then be used to test
the viability of this pragmatic syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis via
computational modeling (Study 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.