* 2140247
* EAGER: Distributed Heterogeneous Data Analytics via Federated Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Yiran Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

With the growth of devices in the Internet of Things (IoT), a huge amount of
data are generated at the network edge. This provides valuable resources for
learning insightful information and enabling intelligent applications such as,
self-driving, video analytics, anomaly detection, etc. Federated learning (FL)
is a promising technique that enables a large number of clients orchestrated by
a central server to collaboratively learn a machine learning model without
sharing data. However, the data owned by different devices are typically not
independent and identically distributed (non-IID) due to different user
preferences and usage patterns. Conventional FL methods fail to generalize well
for most clients. In addition to data heterogeneity, system heterogeneity; that
is, where clients have different computation and communication capabilities, is
another critical challenge for FL development. Because the central server does
not perform the aggregation until receiving all the clients’ updates, system
heterogeneity significantly slows down the model training if the clients are
randomly selected to participate in the training. The goal of this research is
to develop a unified FL framework for addressing both data and system
heterogeneity at the same time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pave the
foundations for properly handling data and system heterogeneity in FL with three
integrated components: 1) unveiling essential reasons of performance degradation
in FL with non-IID data; 2) exploring comprehensive principles to guide the
client composition for FL with non-IID data; and 3) developing a unified FL
method for addressing both data and system heterogeneity simultaneously,
including a client utility function and a reinforcement learning based client
composition method. This project will develop and train undergraduate and
graduate researchers with comprehensive experience for developing FL systems,
including recruiting minority and under-represented students. The outcome of
this project will be incorporated in both new and existing undergraduate and
graduate courses at Duke University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.