* 2140761
* NSF-MCB/BSF - Composition and Stoichiometry of mRNA-protein Complexes Leading to Nuclear Export and Gene Expression Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Ben Montpetit, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2026
* USD 858,620.00

Gene expression in eukaryotic cells (e.g., human or plant cells) requires export
of messenger RNA (mRNA) carrying genetic information from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm where it can be translated into proteins. In this collaborative
project, the PIs will investigate the molecular machinery that enables mRNA
transport from one cellular compartment to another in two model systems, yeast
(S. cerevisiae) and human cells. The research will increase fundamental
understanding of the mechanisms and regulation of gene expression, which is
central to knowing how any organism functions in a changing environment. These
outcomes can have beneficial societal impacts, e.g., through development of new
biotechnology applications. The project will also engage a diverse group of
students to provide training, skills, and experiences in scientific research and
promote their participation in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA is a
centerpiece of the gene expression pathway that, as a functional unit, is bound
by proteins in a ribonucleoprotein particle (RNP). This project focuses on
nuclear messenger (m)RNP assembly, which is critical for mRNA export from the
nucleus. It is recognized that the protein components of a mRNP are dynamic, and
gene-specific mRNPs have varying processing and nuclear export efficiencies, yet
it is not known what protein architectures define an export-competent mRNP. The
PIs will employ single particle imaging techniques to investigate what protein-
mRNA architectures support mRNP export during cell growth and stress in yeast
and mammalian systems. They will further characterize the recruitment of mRNP
constituents to the site of transcription in order to develop spatial and
kinetic models of mRNP assembly. New knowledge expected to emerge from this
research includes protein stoichiometry and co-occupancy data for individual
mRNPs, information on where and when those proteins are assembled into an mRNP,
and identification of transcript features that lead to regulated mRNP export
during stress. The outcomes will further understanding of gene expression
regulation and how reprogramming mRNP structure-function could support changes
in cell function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.