* 2140031
* Community Coordinated Modeling Center: Facilitating Space Weather Research, Advancing Forecasting, and Providing Hands-On Opportunities for Education
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Maria Kuznetsova, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,529,495.00

Space Weather is the term used to describe changing environmental conditions in
the near-Earth space as a result of disturbances originating from the Sun. The
need to strengthen the US ability to observe, model, and forecast Space Weather
has been widely recognized, as exemplified by the recently passed bipartisan
PROSWIFT Act (Promoting Research and Observations of Space Weather to Improve
the Forecasting of Tomorrow). This award provides support for development and
operations of the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC), a premier US
center for modeling of processes in the upper atmosphere and the solar-
terrestrial environment that are highly relevant to Space Weather. CCMC provides
access to space science community models and also provides run-time for models
upon request. Specifically, this work will further develop the models for
Ionosphere-Thermosphere-Mesosphere (ITM) research community support and provide
hands-on education and outreach in space weather. The activities will comprise
(1) improvements in ITM modeling capabilities, including incorporation of the
low and middle atmosphere and better model portability and ease of upgrades; (2)
installation of new model combinations that would couple the ITM system and the
magnetosphere; (3) development of a new ITM component of CCMC software for model
output access, interpolation and post-processing and a new tool to study
relative importance of ITM drivers from above and below; (4) addition of
metadata attributes for all ITM models and simulation results; (5) development
of new online system for ITM model evaluation projects and community-wide
modeling challenges; and (6) provision of new services and tools to support NSF
Geospace Facilities and Space Weather programs. This project will also continue
and extend the Research, Education, and Development Initiative (REDI) at CCMC
that provide internship opportunities and engage students in a broad spectrum of
CCMC activities. The activities involving interns will include support for
educators with setting up Space Weather courses which would utilize interactive
visualization of Space Weather simulations in planetariums and
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.