* 2140902
* Examining Blackness in Postsecondary STEM Education through a Multidimensional-Multiplicative Lens
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Nickolaus Ortiz, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2027
* USD 888,676.00

Despite well-intentioned university efforts to support Black undergraduate STEM
students, policy and practice reforms run the risk of not appropriately
benefiting all Black people due to pervasive, deficit-based assumptions about
Black racial identities and the types of structural engagement needed to advance
holistic, racial well-being in transformative and sustainable ways. Stated
simply, STEM contexts do not adequately support Black undergraduate STEM
students because STEM educators and practitioners remain unsure of what
Blackness means for individuals, thereby constraining true racial equity
endeavors. Contemporary literature regarding race posits instead that
embodiment(s) of Blackness differ across multiple dimensions and axes, including
ethnic identity (e.g., African American, Caribbean American, Nigerian American),
place identity (e.g., South, Midwest), and generational identity (e.g., first-
generation, second-generation, third plus generation). Black students from
different ethnic and generational identities having varied perceptions of the
racial climate and understandings of their STEM experiences. Recognizing the
scope of Blackness and its implications for creating and sustaining holistic,
heterogenous conceptions of racial equity in STEM, the team will establish a
collaborative network among six institutions (two HBCUS, two PWIs, one majority
Black institution, and one HSI) located across the Mid-Atlantic, Southeast,
Southwest, and Midwest regions of the US to study how Black undergraduate STEM
students’ notions of Blackness vary with respect to these dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct an exploratory sequential
mixed methods project, integrating mosaic ethnography, survey design and
administration of the survey to Black undergraduate STEM students across five
states. Through these methods, the students’ conceptions of Blackness will be
explored as it relates to their STEM engagement and perspectives of racial
equity in STEM. In efforts to foster racial equity in STEM for all Black people,
this project will produce tools of analysis (i.e., theories, research methods,
qualitative and quantitative measures) and translational products (i.e.,
professional developments, aminations, infographics) that will change how
institutional and organizational policies, practices, and future research treat
Black people in STEM, thereby promoting tailored resources and supports to meet
Black people’s nuanced needs. The desired outcomes from this work will inform
the development and implementation of racial equity focused policies and
practices in STEM education, facilitating increased access and sustained
engagement in STEM for Black undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education
program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports research and practice projects
that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with NSF’s
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are pooled from programs across EHR
in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and
development thrusts of the four divisions of the
directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.