* 2140762
* EAGER: ADAPT: AI-based Categorization to Decipher Reaction Mechanisms from Cyclic Voltammetry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Quanquan Gu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

WIth support from the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
Artificial Intelligence Program, and the Division of Chemistry, Chong Liu (PI)
and Quanquan Gu (co-PI) at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) will
apply artificial intelligence (AI) to extract mechanistic information from
cyclic voltammetry experiments. Electrochemical measurement is a fundamental
technique for the analysis of reaction mechanisms from synthetic organic
chemistry and enzyme-catalyzed transformations. The current practice of manual
analysis of measurement results demands significant training, may introduce
unconscious bias, and is not compatible with high-throughput screening in search
of optimal catalysts, for example. This research project addresses the
aforementioned challenge by developing AI-based algorithms that decipher
experimental data for a given reaction and automatically extract mechanistic
information. The project has the potential of transforming how researchers
analyze the properties of catalysts or reaction promoters and may accelerate our
discovery of reactionmechanism. Both the PI and co-PI strive to encourage a
broader participation among students of different research and socio-economic
backgrounds. Students in this program will acquire skills and knowledge in
electrochemistry, programming, machine-learning and artificial intelligence. The
interdisciplinary collaboration and the co-mentoring of students between
chemistry and computer science will help to develop the next-generation AI-savvy
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining their expertise in chemistry and
computer science, Drs. Liu and Dr. Gu aim to develop an analytic procedure based
on AI and machine learning that alleviates the demand of manual inspection for
mechanistic analysis in cyclic voltammetry. The team is working to establish
algorithms based upon a convolutional neural network for mechanism
categorization from cyclic voltammograms. The UCLA team will then test the
predictability of the established algorithms for competing mechanisms for which
classic manual analysis has performed poorly, and develop additional algorithms
based on Bayesian optimization that suggest experimental testing conditions when
available information is not sufficient for a conclusive classification. The
developed algorithms have the potential to be more sensitive and allow access to
unbiased, probability-based conclusions that may not be possible with manual
inspection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.