* 2140793
* Collaborative Research:  NSF-BSF--Tropospheric Response to Zonal Asymmetry of the Stratospheric Polar Vortex and Its Aapplication to Subseasonal to Seasonal (S2S) Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Dara Entekhabi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2025
* USD 320,847.00

The stratosphere is the layer of the atmosphere that sits above the clouds and
storms that affect weather at the earth's surface. But despite being above the
weather the stratosphere still influences the weather, particularly when the
eastward-moving vortex that forms in winter over the polar cap breaks down in
events called sudden stratospheric warmings (SSWs). The expected tropospheric
response to an SSW is higher surface pressure over the polar cap, more frequent
occurrence of cold air outbreaks, and and more frequent coastal Nor'easter
storms. SSWs are thus of great interest for subseasonal to seasonal (S2S)
weather prediction, and the mechanisms through which SSWs influence surface
weather have been intensively studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this
award seeks to improve understanding of the effects of SSWs and other less
extreme stratospheric polar vortex disruptions on tropospheric circulation and
surface weather. A key issue is that some SSWs have a strong effect on the
underlying troposphere while others do not, and the distribution of surface
temperature anomalies can be quite different from one polar vortex disruption to
another. The Principal Investigators hypothesize that differences in the
tropospheric response are due in part to the pattern of distortions that occur
over the course of a polar vortex disruption. For instance in some SSWs a
"daughter" vortex forms after the stratospheric polar vortex breaks down, and
the surface temperature response could vary depending on the location of the
daughter vortex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves analysis of
observational datasets, output from simulations available through the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), and ensembles of subseasonal to seasonal
(S2S) forecasts and hidcasts including those available through the National
Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME). The data analysis effort is complemented by
simulations from the Model of an Idealized Moist Atmosphere (MIMA), a simplified
model capable of simulating realistic features of the Norhtern Hemisphere winter
circulation including jet streams, stationary waves, and the stratospheric polar
vortex. Experiments are conducted by using an artificial drag force to induce
vortex disruptions with specific geographical distortions so that their effects
on surface temperature can be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of
societal as well as scientific interest given the connection between
stratospheric vortex disruptions and extreme winter weather. One of the
Principal Investigators maintains a blog that serves as a portal for technical
and non-technical discussion of present and forecasted weather patterns for the
Northern Hemisphere. The project also provides support and training for a
graduate student and a postdoctoral associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's Directorate of
Geosciences (NSF-GEO) and the Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) in
accord with the language in the Memorandum of Understanding between the NSF and
the BSF. This Agreement allows a single collaborative proposal, involving US and
Israeli investigators, to be submitted and peer-reviewed by NSF. Upon successful
results of the NSF merit review and recommendation by the cognizant NSF Program
of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the
investigators associated with its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.