* 2140038
* NSF-DFG Echem: Design of Nanostructured Noble - Metal Chalcogenide Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,096.00

Hydrogen will be the most likely fuel of the future despite the technological
barriers that still need to be overcome. Layered noble metal (Pd, Pt)
chalcogenides with structural formulas ranging from MX2 to MX (M: Pt or Pd, and
X: Se or Te) have been proposed as active catalysts for the electrochemical
hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), but the details of the catalytic action are
far from being understood. In this project, the investigators will identify the
active compositional phases and how nano-structuring (number of layers and step
edge density) of these noble metal chalcogenide materials may be used to boost
the HER activity. These studies will not only provide fundamental knowledge on
the catalytic action of advanced low-dimensional materials, but also define new
pathways for the practical design of advanced electrocatalysts, and thus
contribute to finding ecological energy solutions for the society. Students
working in this project will benefit from a unique combination of different
experiences and research backgrounds in a close-knit research network with well-
defined responsibilities. They will learn how advances are often made by looking
outside of one's respective ‘comfort zone’ and collaborating with researchers in
different disciplines that encourages adoption of new
viewpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use the structural
similarities of a wide range of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) as a
materials platform to investigate possible synergetic effects in TMD-phase
mixtures (alloys) to enhance HER activity. The planar nature of these materials
will aid the characterization of structural and electronic properties of mixed-
phase materials and thus facilitate the fundamental understanding of synergetic
effects in multi-component materials. A team with complementary expertise and
capabilities will conduct these studies. Planar model systems will be
synthesized by van der Waals epitaxy, and their atomic structure and electronic
properties will be characterized by scanning probe microscopy and photoemission
spectroscopy at University of South Florida, USA. The electrochemical properties
of these well-defined samples, so far poorly investigated in the
electrochemistry community, will be analyzed at the TU Braunschweig. The
experimentally determined micro-kinetics results will be rationalized through ab
initio simulations to be done at the Helmholtz Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf. The
theoretical predictions for alloys and dopants will also guide the experiments
and help to identify promising materials combinations. The studies encompass
detailed characterization of the materials so that the kinetic parameters and
HER activities can be correlated with their physical and chemical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded under the NSF-DFG Lead
Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)
opportunity NSF 20-578. The US efforts are supported by co-funding from both
NSF-CBET and NSF-CHE divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.