* 2140020
* I-Corps: Multi-axis Additive Manufacturing Process for Performance-Optimized Composites
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Joseph Kubalak, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
significantly increase the strength of 3-dimentional (3D) printed parts, to
enable flexible fabrication of optimized composite structures, and to reduce
material consumption and overall production cost of the parts. These impacts are
enabled by a novel design optimization algorithm that simultaneously optimizes
part geometry and 3D printing toolpath. Leveraging industrial robots as the 3D
printing platform, the algorithm creates printing toolpaths along multiple build
axes, which enables the alignment of composite materials along a part's
predicted principal loads. The technology offers potential customers an
opportunity to get additional value from the materials they are already using in
production. The first benefit is in the context of the amount of material used
and the second, in final part performance through increased mechanical
properties relative to the end-use application while also reducing weight. These
improvements will be of value to industries interested in creating high-
performance composite parts where minimizing part mass. The products may be
useful in achieving key design objective for aerospace, automotive, prosthetics,
and athletic equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a
novel additive manufacturing technology and computational design algorithm that
optimizes material deposition to dramatically increase the strength of 3D
printed composite parts. The technology directly addresses the limitations of
existing 3D printing technologies where the repetitive, stacked layer interfaces
result in a part with inherent weaknesses aligned with the build direction. This
project's technology focus combines multi-axis robotics, additive manufacturing,
and topology optimization to enable concurrent optimization of part topology and
printing toolpath such that the printed material is strategically aligned within
the part to maximize performance. The algorithm optimizes material distribution
and orientation relative to the part's end-use application, propagates
deposition paths aligned to those orientations, and orders the deposition paths
to enable collision-free deposition. The combination of multi-axis robotics and
the optimized printing toolpath enables true 3D material deposition that removes
the inter- and intra-layer bonds from the load paths acting on the structure,
which enables direct additive manufacturing of end-use, load-bearing, composite
structures. The topology and multi-axis toolpath optimization workflow has
resulted in printed parts with significant improvement in strength as compared
to parts fabricated using conventional 3-axis 3D printing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.