* 2140837
* A linguistic microvariation approach to complementizers and complementation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Gluckman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2025
* USD 319,688.00

This project investigates how languages express sentences within sentences, such
as "He thinks that she left." Of particular interest are words like "that"
above, called "complementizers." A great deal of work has been dedicated to the
role of a complementizer. What function does a complementizer play in linking
together sentences, and to what extent does this function vary across languages?
This project expands the general understanding of sentences-within-sentences by
focusing on variation within a subfamily of languages. Among these languages,
there is a wide range of strategies for embedding a sentence in another
sentence, including multiple (sometimes upwards of five) different
complementizers in a single language. This project rigorously documents and
analyzes the function of these different complementizers via detailed interviews
with native speakers, and thereby increases the broader understanding of this
complex sentence type. This research adds to the empirical basis for our
theorizing about how human language works and develops pedagogical resources for
the speaker community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of cross-linguistic work,
largely on Indo-European languages, has revealed a number of different factors
affecting the relationship between an embedded clause and its associated main
clause. Syntactic, semantic, and morphological criteria have all been implicated
in determining the clausal embedding strategy. These investigations have
resulted in a complex and sometimes inconsistent picture of the syntax and
semantics of embedded clauses cross-linguistically. This project addresses these
issues by documenting and analyzing variation across closely related languages.
Previous descriptive work has revealed significant inter-language, and in some
cases, inter-speaker variation. This project focuses on variation as a means to
address some of the long-standing puzzles about embedded clauses. It also
contributes to diaspora and marginalized language communities, creating
pedagogical resources and highlighting some of the communities who speak
unofficial "dialects" that have previously received little recognition or
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.