* 2140493
* RAPID: Mathematical models for uncovering neurological disorders among the U.S. population infected with COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* ARNI RAO, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 144,940.00

The COVID-19 virus has been statistically linked to specific medical disorders
connected to the brain and nervous system. Although in the past a fraction of
SARS and MER patients have been shown to have anxiety and other neurological
disorders, the scale of the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 and 2021 is another
order of magnitude. The reasons for neurological disorders among COVID-19
patients in the U.S. and other countries are not clear, but the data indicate
that some of COVID-19 patients have issues with their awareness, consciousness,
and cognizance. Experiments have been conducted on patients worldwide and data
was recorded on the behavior of COVID-19 patients. In this project, the
principal investigators will develop a mathematical model for an understanding
of these neurological mechanisms. The model to be developed will be validated
and verified. Once the model is calibrated with data from the U.S. and other
countries, the investigators will study the role of COVID in developing brain
disorders. They will combine the predictability of the model according to the
stochastic volatility of the parameters. The results will have an important
impact on the overall well-being of the population and society as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If uncertainty concerning the reasons behind brain
damage continues then that could further increase the number of people in the
U.S. who would have neurological disorders. In spite of the positive influence
of vaccination programs, COVID-19 causes some of neurological disorders among
the current patients. Along with the COVID-19 burden, hospitals and health
administrators need to understand other long-term, brain-related disorders in
the population. A good, quantitative study will be of immediate help in
controlling the incidence of brain-related damaged individuals who have COVID-19
in the U.S. The investigators intend to provide a free consultation to neuro-
physicians across the nation if and when they need any immediate quantitative
assistance in predictions (within a limited time frame). The investigators will
develop a mathematical model to understand the size and complexity of the
association between brain deterioration and COVID-19 in the U.S. Specifically,
they will predict and evaluate people in the U.S. who will likely have
neurological disorders like psychosis, hemorrhage, delirium, and stroke.
Clinical data have shown some association, but why there are such causes of
disorders for the COVID patients is not yet clear from these studies. Several
studies among COVID patients have found a statistical correlation between
clinical case definitions for psychiatric diagnoses and intracerebral
hemorrhage. Another uncertainty remains in understanding the impact of COVID in
blood-brain barrier locations; clinical studies are in progress in this
direction. A statistical regression analysis on a large clinical population
might provide an association among various independent variables of neurological
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.