* 2140204
* CAREER: Self-Consistent Density Estimates from Accelerometers for Improved Understanding, Modeling, and Forecasting of Upper Atmosphere Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Piyush Mehta, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 204,130.00

This CAREER award supports a study at the University of West Virginia (UWV)
designed to enhance the understanding, modeling, and forecasting of upper
atmosphere variability by developing an orbital decay prediction capability for
active satellites and space debris. High precision, high resolution
accelerometer-derived mass density estimates have been the workhorse of
scientific investigations and modeling efforts for the upper atmosphere density
over the past two decades. However, the current limited knowledge of Gas-Surface
Interaction (GSI) used in the density determination based upon measured
atmospheric drag has the consequence that model results are not self-consistent.
An iterative process can address this inconsistency, but this requirement
complicates an already complex process and can be computationally challenging.
The award is aimed at resolving this inconsistency through the development of a
full-state (composition, temperature, winds) reduced order model (ROM) and
directly assimilating drag acceleration measurements to simultaneously estimate
the GSI effects and thermosphere parameters. Using these estimated parameters,
the developed GSI model would be used to comprehensively investigate the spatial
and temporal response of neutral density to geomagnetic storms and would serve
as an invaluable resource for advancing science and operations. Accurate orbit
predictions can provide more confidence in decision-making, enhance the safety
of humans in space and facilitate long-term preservation of the space
environment. This CAREER award would support the UWA space science education
through initiatives targeted at rural, first-generation, Appalachian students
and K-12 teachers. The award would support the training of two graduate and
multiple undergraduate students in both research and educational outreach
activities. A new course called “Space Physics and Space Systems” would be
introduced into the mechanical and aeronautical engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award would
achieve the development of a ROM for physics-based upper atmosphere density
models, expanding its role in science and operations. The ROM would make the
process of deriving densities estimates using measurements of acceleration on-
board satellites become more self-consistent and would provide new insights into
the temporal and spatial response of the neutral density to geomagnetic storms.
It would also help operators advance accurate modeling of satellite drag for
orbit prediction, collision avoidance and space environment
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.