* 2140249
* NSF-DFG Echem: CAS: Spin-polarized electron currents for spin-selective electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 394,122.00

With funding from the NSF Division of Chemistry, this research program involving
Professor David Waldeck of the University of Pittsburgh and collaborators at the
University of Münster (Germany) will explore the use of spin-polarized electrons
to improve the chemical selectivity, and energy efficiency, in electrocatalysis.
By building on ideas from the chiral induced spin selectivity effect, the
proposed research will develop new electrode materials and electrode designs for
generating spin polarized electrons and evaluate their performance as
electrocatalysts. The idea that chiral catalysts and chiral electrodes can be
used to generate spin-polarized electron currents which can then be used to
promote particular chemical reaction pathways represents a fundamentally new
approach for electrocatalysis and electrosynthesis. Because the oxygen evolution
reaction has been widely studied with achiral electrocatalysts, is critically
important for energy technologies, and involves the production of diatomic
oxygen (which has two unpaired electron spins), it will be used as a model
system to examine the importance of spin polarized electron currents in
electrocatalysis. Students involved in this research will have the opportunity
to engage in exchange between the US and German institutions. The team will
conduct outreach activities involving K-12 students in the Pittsburgh area that
promote interest in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research project of Professor David Waldeck of the University of Pittsburgh and
collaborators at the University of Münster (Germany) has three major thrusts. In
each case, the extent of spin-polarized electron currents will be correlated
with the selectivity and/or efficiency of electrocatalysis. Thrust 1 will
investigate a range of chiral metal oxides, whose achiral analogues are known to
be good catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction. Starting with simple chiral
metal oxides and continuing with bilayer and doped composites the
electrocatalysts spin-filtering properties and electrocatalytic performance will
be evaluated and contrasted with their achiral analogues. Thrust 2 will develop
composite materials in which achiral electrocatalysts are imbedded in a chiral
support matrix to impart spin polarization and hence selectivity for triplet
oxygen production on oxygen evolution catalysts. Thrust 3 will create and
develop chiral metamaterials for use as electrocatalysts. Using nanolithography
methods, the team will fabricate electrocatalytic films comprising nanoscale
metal (or metal oxide) helices that couple light energy into the catalyst and
generate spin polarized electrons to drive the electrocatalysis. The research
promises new insights into how chiral inorganic films can be designed to improve
the generation of spin-polarized electron currents and how they can be employed
as a new class of electrocatalysts. Although the major effort will be applied to
the oxygen evolution reaction, the insights gained for the production of spin-
polarized electron currents are expected to be directly applicable to the design
of electrocatalysts for other electrosynthesis
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was funded under the
NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG
EChem) opportunity NSF 20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.