* 2140196
* Collaborative Research: NSF-DFG: CAS: Electrochemical Hydrogenation of Amides and Esters
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Nilay Hazari, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 169,457.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation Division of Chemistry, Nilay
Hazari from Yale University and Alex Miller from the University of North
Carolina, in collaboration with the University of Göttingen in Germany, aim to
develop new methods for the preparation of chemical precursors to
pharmaceuticals and polymers. The project will provide fundamental guidelines on
how to use electricity in chemical synthesis, leading to more environmentally
friendly routes to industrial chemicals relative to current methods that rely on
toxic or environmentally damaging chemicals. Students will learn new techniques
and broaden their education through an international exchange program in which
graduate students from the University of Göttingen will travel to either Yale or
the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, and students from the American
institutions will travel to the University of Göttingen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hydrogenation of carboxylic acid derivatives, such as
esters and amides, represents an atom economical process for the production of
synthetically valuable alcohols and amines. Recent advances in hydrogenation for
amine and alcohol synthesis have relied on dihydrogen gas, which is however
currently produced in an environmentally harmful process from fossil fuels. In
this project, a collaborative team consisting of Nilay Hazari from Yale
University and Alex Miller from the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, in
further collaboration with the University of Göttingen, will use funding from
the National Science Foundation Division of Chemistry to develop
electrocatalysts for the reduction of esters and amides using protons and
electrons. The approach will leverage detailed mechanistic studies on a recently
developed manganese electrocatalyst for ketone reduction, including kinetic
analysis and spectro-electrochemical detection of intermediates, to provide a
basis for developing systems capable of reducing esters and amides. A particular
focus will be on synthesizing key hydride intermediates and establishing their
thermodynamic and kinetic hydricity. In addition to promising more sustainable
synthetic methods, electrochemical hydrogenation may well emerge as a
hydrogenation method that is more tolerant of functional groups, such as acidic
sites, and, as such, find broad application in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was funded under the
NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG
EChem) opportunity NSF 20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.