* 2140765
* Integrating Linguistic and Social Meaning in Imprecision Resolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2025
* FLORIAN SCHWARZ, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 345,907.00

Whenever we talk, we not only describe how things are, but also reveal
information about who we are — our origin, identity, and personality. The
proposed project aims at exploring how reasoning about a speaker's identity
affects how we interpret what they are saying, and to what extent we should
believe what they say. It pursues this question by focusing on how people
interpret the meaning of a sentence depending on stereotypical features of a
speaker — for example, on whether they look like, or sound like, a "Surfer
Dude"; a "Nerd"; a "Valley Girl"; a Law School student; or some other socially
recognizable stereotype. Investigating this issue will lead us to better
understand not only how we exchange information in everyday life, but also, and
most importantly, how the interpretation of sentences leads humans to ascribe
more trust to members of some social groups as opposed to others, reflecting and
reinforcing biases and preferences towards some people to the exclusion of
others. This research will thus shed light on the implicit, and often
unconscious, mechanisms whereby human communication reflects and reshapes
society and culture; and to unveil potentially harmful and discriminatory
consequences that these processes might have for people's lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on experimental methods, this project explores how
comprehenders integrate social information about speaker identity to compute the
message conveyed by a sentence. It investigates this question through the lens
of (im)precision, the phenomenon observed when speakers use words in a way that
deviates from their literal meaning — such as when they describe an actual price
of $312 as $300. Of particular interest is the question of how the
interpretation of numerals is affected by the social stereotype embodied by a
particular speaker. Previous work has shown that speakers using numerals
precisely vs. imprecisely are associated with different sets of personality and
identity traits: for example, someone describing the price as "$312" tends to be
perceived as more articulate, studious, and pedantic than someone describing it,
more liberally, as $300. This result motivates the hypothesis that, conversely,
interlocutors reason about the social identity of a speaker to determine how
precisely to interpret what they say: that is, that a sentence such as "The
price is $300" uttered by a "nerdy, articulate" speaker is more likely to be
interpreted as meaning exactly $300 than the same sentence uttered by a "chill,
laid-back" one. We furthermore ask whether imprecise uses of the same sentence
are more likely to be believed to be true when said by a "nerdy" speaker as
opposed to a "chill" one. By bringing together the social, cognitive and
descriptive underpinnings of human communication, this research builds new
bridges between different approaches to the study of language, and deepens the
integration of theories and traditions across linguistics and
psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.