* 2140729
* EAGER: IIS: Enabling Computationally Efficient Fuzzy Clustering for Distributed Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hua Fang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 116,000.00

Distributed big data are widely available now. Gathering all the data from
multiple distributed sites to one place for pattern analysis (called fuzzy
clustering) is challenging due to the requirements of computational efficiency
and data privacy. This project aims to establish a new framework that can enable
efficient pattern analysis for distributed big data. Deep understanding can be
gained on the performance of the pattern analysis methods in terms of several
metrics, such as accuracy and computational efficiency. The outcomes of this
research will constitute a significant advance in the discovery and development
of theories and algorithms for pattern analysis in distributed big data
environments. This knowledge can be used for wide range of applications, such as
healthcare and transportation. The research project is tightly coupled to a
vital education component. The project recruits and educates the future
generation of machine learning scientists and engineers through curriculum
development, student mentoring, and community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a strong theoretical
underpinning for fuzzy clustering for Big Data applications. Existing fuzzy
clustering approaches lack computational efficiency when the data are
distributed, non-normal and high-dimensional, with a mix of categorical and
continuous variables and missing values, although no prior assumptions of
statistical distributions are required. In this project, new approaches are
developed to augment the efficiency of fuzzy clustering for distributed Big
Data. The works in the project include: (1) developing computational efficient
fuzzy clustering for distributed Big Data; (2) designing a framework for
intelligent fuzzy clustering over distributed Big Data; (3) performance
validations through both simulations and real data. This project produces
algorithms, theoretical models, and guidelines for practical implementation to
enable fuzzy clustering and develop components for the scientific research and
engineering communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.