* 2140419
* CAREER: Convective Aggregation and the Hydrological Cycle, Cloud Feedbacks, and Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Allison Wing, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/28/2027
* USD 644,561.00

Tropical thunderstorm clouds often clump together into clusters, which affects
humidity, rainfall, and cloudiness. This clumping can occur because of patterns
of warm and cool ocean surface temperatures or because of spontaneous
interactions between the clouds and their surrounding environment, among other
factors. This project will study how the clumping of tropical clouds affects the
water cycle and Earth’s energy budget – the balance between heating from the sun
and the energy that flows from Earth back to space. The proposed tasks will
investigate how heavy rainfall events and the amount of cloudiness change in a
warming climate, and how changes in the properties of clouds and how they clump
together affect how much Earth will warm in the future. The investigator will
use results from many different weather and climate models set up in a
simplified framework to address these questions. The models simulate tropical
clouds over an imaginary tropical ocean. This data set of model simulations is
unique because it includes a wide range of model types set up in a consistent
manner. The investigator will also lead a group of scientists around the world
to perform new simulations with the different models that use a specific pattern
of warm and cool ocean surface temperatures to control where the thunderstorm
clouds clump together. The current group of simple simulations and the new
simulations will be used in combination to achieve the overall goal of
understanding tropical cloud clustering and its importance for climate. The
investigator will also develop a training program for university students to do
K-12 outreach and a suite of educational activities integrated with the research
themes of tropical thunderstorm clouds, weather, and climate for school visits.
These activities will be incorporated into an established summer program at
Florida State University for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses some of the most important questions in climate science, about
the role of tropical cloud systems in the water cycle and climate and how cloud
systems interact with wind patterns and Earth’s energy budget. It will improve
understanding of how tropical clouds change in a warmer climate, which is the
biggest source of uncertainty in how much Earth warms in response to an increase
in greenhouse gases. The project supports teaching and training in science
across multiple populations. By providing a suite of educational activities and
training for K-12 outreach, it will lower barriers to participation and engage a
larger, more diverse population in K-12 outreach, including both university
student facilitators and K-12 student and teacher participants. Beyond the
benefits to K-12 students of encountering scientist role models, participation
will enhance the training and education of the university students by providing
teaching experience and improved communication skills. The project supports two
Meteorology graduate students, who will gain training in climate science and
data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.