* 2140890
* Racial Equity: Collaborative Research: Understanding Persistence through the Lens of Interruption: A Framework for Transformation (UPLIFT)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Monica Stephens, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,150,110.00

This collaborative project will study the impact of interruptions on Black
women’s collegiate STEM experiences and their persistence and matriculation in
STEM majors. Interruptions are defined as overt and subtle external acts and
internal dialogues and decisions that result in a loss of focus, momentum, and
confidence and require time to rebound. Each interruption requires resources to
rebound (e.g., time), but continual interruptions impact Black women’s ability
to rebound and persist in STEM over time. Conducting research that centers the
voices of Black women who experience these interruptions will generate new
insights into redesigning institutional and other structural factors that often
serve as barriers to persistence and success in STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design entails a longitudinal, mixed-
methods design wherein they follow 45 Black women who are STEM majors across
three colleges in Georgia. Through interviews, focus groups, audio diaries, and
the use of survey methods to collect quantitative data, the research team
intends to develop a framework of interruption for Black women in STEM. The
goals of the framework include: (a) to define interruption, (b) to identify
constructs of interruption related to intent to persist, and (c) to determine
the relationship between the domains of power and the experiences of
interruption by undergraduate Black women in STEM. The creation of a clear
definition of interruption and a robust conceptual framework has the potential
to generate knowledge that will help address systemic racism across disciplines
and settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through
the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.