* 2140148
* EAGER: Microfluidic Design Automation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Gregory Nordin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Microfluidic systems employ hair-sized channels to analyze fluids in credit card
sized devices. Microfluidics has been shown to improve the accuracy, speed, and
cost of medical tests, drug discovery, and chemical testing, but every new
medical test needs to be custom designed, making microfluidic chips expensive.
3D printing (3DP) has the potential to make custom devices quickly and
inexpensively. The problem with combining microfluidics and 3D printing is that
an engineer with deep knowledge of the 3DP process is needed to do each design.
In contrast, engineers have developed microelectronic design tools that design
chips automatically. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project will investigate using the principles applied in microelectronic design
to produce automated design tools that enable medical technicians to design
custom microfluidic devices that can be ordered and reliably 3D printed.
Ultimately, custom tests might be designed, ordered, printed, and sent to a
clinic or doctor’s office. The microfluidic devices could become a critical part
of healthcare, food safety, chemical testing, and
biodefense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of design automation approaches and
software can greatly improve the efficiency of design, validation, and
manufacturing of microfluidic devices. Current CAD and simulation tools must be
customized for each application, making them slow and expensive, and
microfluidic chips often require redesign due to imperfect manual placement and
routing. To overcome these challenges, several key scientific barriers need to
be overcome to utilize design automation for 3D printed microfluidics.
Specifically, there is a need to emulate the complexities of fluid dynamics in
design automation simulation software, perform 3D placement and routing, and
automate the post-processing of 3D printed microfluidic devices. The research
team will develop a physics-based fluid dynamics framework for SPICE simulations
coded in Verilog-AMS that handles the complexities of fluids, a placement and
routing approach to build 3D designs using current open-source EDA tools with a
multilayer approach, and automated systems to remove uncured resin in printed
devices. The approach will be validated by using the tools to design, optimize,
fabricate, and test DNA analysis devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.