* 2140985
* PFI-TT:  Development of a Bubble Printer for Low-cost, Rapid Fabrication of High-Resolution Displays
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Yuebing Zheng, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a novel printer that will
enable low-cost, rapid fabrication of high-resolution display panels. Such
displays are critical for many emerging applications such as virtual reality and
augmented reality, which can be used for surgical training, military training,
and virtual tourism. Currently, the high cost of display fabrication limits wide
implementation. The proposed bubble printer is expected to overcome the cost and
resolution barriers for the large-scale implementation of the high-resolution
displays. The proposed project will create jobs at various levels in research,
development, sales, and marketing and help establish collaborations among
industry and academia. The project will expose engineering students to
entrepreneurship through hands-on experiences with market research, end-customer
validation, and cost analysis of displays. Students from underrepresented groups
are encouraged to participate in entrepreneurship, research, and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will tackle the high cost of
fabricating high-resolution displays, which is associated with enhancing the
brightness and contrast while reducing the pixel size of the displays. With the
proposed bubble printing, a proprietary lithography technique will be used for
high-resolution patterning of light-emitting materials into small pixels. Pixel
emission characteristics will be enhanced by plasmonic interactions between the
substrates and the active layers. Upon completion of the project, the team
expects to achieve a 100-fold increase in patterning area at a laser-scanning
speed of 1000 mm/s (a 10-fold increase) by studying high-speed Marangoni flows
and achieving stabilization of bubbles through use of surfactant molecules. To
increase the versatility of bubble printing on different substrates, both
continuous wave and femtosecond lasers will be utilized for bubble generation
and patterning. A stand-alone bubble printer will demonstrate its integrability
into current display manufacturing production lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.