* 2140154
* SHF: Small: A Design Automation Methodology for Flexible Real-Time Computing based on Split and Early Exit Neural Models
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Marco Levorato, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 309,848.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop highly adaptable deep-
learning (DL) frameworks for real-time applications, such as autonomous vehicles
and mobile health. To this aim, the proposed design-automation methodology will
bridge runtime system optimization with advanced DL model architectures, through
leveraging the techniques of split computing (SC) and early-exit computation
(EEC). In traditional methodologies, the design process of a DL model is
performed in isolation, where its structure is optimized with respect to a
dataset and fixed system conditions. Instead, the new frameworks will jointly
use SC and EEC to build DL models specifically designed to adapt real-time data
analysis to time-varying characteristics of the system (e.g., available energy,
computing power, channel capacity, computing task, etc.) and the information
stream. To accomplish this objective, the team will use tools such as deep
reinforcement learning and neural architecture search. The project will include
a well-laid out educational and outreach plan, in which the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students is particularly promising. The project also
proposes a suite of university initiatives which they will leverage to enhance
diversity during the execution of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research endeavor will produce frameworks that are expected to considerably
boost the performance of critical applications such as autonomous vehicles and
AI-empowered monitoring for mobile health while reducing their energy
consumption and wireless channel usage. Software and simulation artifacts will
be released as open-source platforms to enhance research in this important
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.