* 2140319
* OPUS: A Career in Cycad Biology: An e-monograph
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Michael Calonje, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2024
* USD 294,351.00

In the plant tree of life, a group of plants of special interest are the cycads.
The cycads are widely considered the world’s most endangered plants with most of
the 380 living species considered threatened by extinction according to the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s Red List of Threatened
Species. These early plants are often termed living fossils because of their
ancient origin over 300 million years ago and their prevalence during the age of
the dinosaurs, a time in which they were much more widespread and diverse than
they are today. The surviving cycads are particularly valuable for studying
plant evolution because of their excellent fossil record. Even though they have
changed little in outward appearance, these plants have many unique features,
some of which are ancestral (primitive) and some of which are derived
(advanced). To save them from extinction, we need to understand when those
changes occurred through time and correlate them with environmental changes and
other biotic factors. Furthermore, the chemistry of modern cycads is unique and
has significant implications for human health, particularly in neurobiology. In
a way, cycads serve as a Rosetta stone for plant evolution. This project will
synthesize all available data on cycad biology and make those data accessible,
via a web site, to a broad audience of researchers as well as to the community
of people who are interested in and able to contribute significantly to cycad
conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a
complete, modern e-monograph and data repository of the Cycads. Many avenues of
research will be opened in the areas of taxonomy, biogeography, genomics, and
evolutionary biology. This e-monograph, hosted by The World List of Cycads, will
serve to provide the resources, background, and basics for those pursuits. It
will include original species descriptions, type specimens, synonyms, invalid
and illegitimate nomenclature, and all published nomenclature at various
taxonomic levels. There will be modern, parallel descriptions of all taxa
accompanied by photographs and line art, as well as identification tools,
distribution maps, habitat data with historic and contemporary photographs,
ecology, structural data, chemical data, life cycle information, and phenology
and pollination biology when known. The e-monograph will also include an
illustrated glossary and sections on ethnobotany, vernacular names,
phytochemistry, growth and development, and nitrogen fixation. The comprehensive
synthesis undertaken here will benefit from the digitization of over 5000
historic and contemporary microscope slides made by C.J. Chamberlain on
embryology and by Adriance Foster, Marion Johnson, and Knut Norstog on
developmental anatomy and morphology. Relevant sections tied to black and white
images published by these researchers, as well as those of PI Stevenson, will be
digitized in color and incorporated into developmental pages, thereby providing
more detailed information on cycad structure to the research community. Historic
habitat photographs of cycads by Chamberlain, Norstog, and Stevenson will be
scanned and added to the species descriptions and the geography and ecology
sections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.