* 2140104
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Analysis of Mechanical and Biochemical Effects in Breast Tumor Microenvironment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hossein Tavana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2025
* USD 308,000.00

This project will study how breast cancer cells respond to the local tumor
environment and invade adjacent tissue. In breast tumors, biochemical signals
lead to cancer cells invading nearby healthy tissue. The cells that produce
these signals are called fibroblasts. Fibroblast cells also make tumors stiffer.
It is known that patients with stiffer breast tumors typically have poorer
outcomes. Past research on these tumors has studied biochemical signaling and
mechanical stiffness separately. As such, the combined effects of these two
processes on cancer cell invasion remain unknown. The goal of the project is to
understand how biochemical and mechanical inputs together enable invasion of
healthy tissue. The interdisciplinary research team will use state-of-the-art
bioengineered breast tumor models and imaging biosensors. The work will measure
both cell signaling and mechanical forces. Findings from this research may
eventually help develop new treatment strategies that reduce metastasis. Through
a range of educational activities, this project will broaden participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. Therefore, this project will also
benefit society by providing new training and research opportunities for the
next generation of leaders in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carcinoma-
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) and secrete
signaling molecules that promote invasion and metastasis in multiple
malignancies. While these events are commonly considered as independent
entities, their integrated effects in altering the tumor environments are
unknown. The investigators hypothesize that cancer cells establish a memory of
mechanical environments that shapes responses to biochemical signals from CAFs
and the ability of cancer cells to invade into adjacent tissue. Focusing on
breast cancer, this project will develop and apply quantitative imaging
biosensors for single-cell and subcellular force measurements and signaling
outputs, and a tissue-engineered breast tumor model for phenotypic and whole
tumor-level measurements. The research team will quantitatively (i) determine
how the interplay between matrix contraction and paracrine signaling of CAFs
promotes an invasive mesenchymal phenotype in cancer cells and alters their
responses to targeted therapies; and (ii) establish effects of matrix
composition and stiffness on nuclear architecture and chromatic condensation
that enable cancer cells to retain a signaling memory of their mechanical
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.