* 2140246
* Black Research Support Network: Studying Change By, With, and For Black Undergraduate Computer Science Faculty &amp; Students at Three Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gloria Washington, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2025
* USD 521,763.00

This project will address several aspects of the racial inequities often faced
by Black undergraduate students in the field of computer science research, such
as access to capital (social and economic), research topics relevant to their
experience, hidden curriculum, and threats to belonging. It will tackle systemic
barriers through a research support network for Black undergraduates attending
two Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs; Howard University and
Johnson C. Smith University) and one Predominantly White Institution (PWI;
University of North Carolina Charlotte), combining multiple evidence-based
approaches to provide mutual support towards institutional change that addresses
racial inequity. The research support network will include: 1) mentoring by both
Black graduate students and Black faculty, 2) culturally and socially relevant
research topics and experiences, 3) Black researcher affinity groups, and 4) a
Black researcher speaker series. The project will study the impacts of this
holistic approach on participating Black undergraduate students’ sense of
belonging within the field, computer science research skills, and intention to
pursue a graduate career. Through its evaluation, the project will explore the
impacts of the collaboration between HBCUs and a PWI on institutional policies,
programs, and practices; impacts on faculty; and Black students’ graduate school
applications, acceptances, and financial awards/support. This proposed work will
advance the knowledge base for addressing systemic barriers and racial
inequities in computer science undergraduate programs while simultaneously
evaluating the potential impact these efforts can have on participating
institutions and on Black students’ matriculation into graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study seeks to answer two main research
questions: 1: What are the effects of a Black research support network that is
designed to address systemic barriers to Black students pursuing graduate
education in computer science? 2: In what ways does a Black research support
network promote racial equity for Black undergraduate computer science students?
Using a multiple case study research design, the project will examine the impact
of a Black research support network on Black undergraduate computing students
and faculty at each of the partner universities (two HBCUs and a PWI).
Culturally relevant theories and grounding philosophies will drive the research
methods and analyses. Mixed qualitative and quantitative data will be collected
throughout the life of the project and analyzed separately per institution
utilizing a parallel mixed design. An external evaluator will collect and report
data related to the program model, undergraduate participation, and graduate
student attendance. Further, the evaluation will explore the impacts of the
collaboration between HBCUs and a PWI on systemic institutional changes. The
project will share its findings through journal publications and conference
presentations as well as webinars, workshops, a website, and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the Racial Equity in
STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports research and
practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor
into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with
NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are pooled from programs across EHR
in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and
development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate. Institutions may
include those with significant percentages of low-income undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.