* 2140704
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing the Three-Stage Model of Second Language Skill Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Aline Godfroid, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,686.00

Learning a second language is an impressive feat that can bear societal,
professional, and cultural benefits. This research project examines the number
of stages that second language learners go through as they attempt to master a
second language. The most influential contemporary theory holds that second
language skill acquisition is a three-stage process: (i) from initial slow
application of knowledge, (ii) through initial changes in behavior, (iii) to
eventual fluent and automatic behavior. At present, there is indirect evidence
that supports the existence of these three stages, yet the number and the nature
of the stages have not been examined closely through targeted research. By newly
establishing what stages language learners go through, and how many, this
research can inform modern language teaching and assessment and empower more
second language learners to reach high language proficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the stages of second language acquisition,
participants will learn and practice comprehending and producing a miniature
version of a language until they reach high speed and accuracy ('automaticity').
Half the participants will receive explicit instruction about the vocabulary and
grammar of the language before they engage in practice, whereas the other half
will not receive prior instruction but will be passively exposed to vocabulary
items and sentences of the language. These conditions mirror two broad contexts
for natural language learning in the U.S., namely, teacher-led classroom
learning and naturalistic language learning, respectively. Participants' data
from comprehension and production practice will be analyzed using hidden Markov
modeling, a novel method of cognitive modeling that will be used to test whether
the three-stage acquisition model accounts for the data better than other models
(for example, a two-stage model) do. Once the number of skill acquisition stages
has been determined computationally, a regression analysis will investigate
which of three sets of cognitive abilities - declarative memory, procedural
memory, and psychomotor ability - predicts learning at each skill acquisition
stage. Results of this study will directly serve a wide variety of second
language learners (a) by revealing whether and how instructed and naturalistic
learners attain automaticity and (b) by identifying what cognitive
characteristics make one a successful learner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.