* 2140586
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acquisition of grammatical variation: Differential object marking in heritage speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Karen Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,471.00

According to the Census Bureau, more than 41 million people in the US speak
Spanish at home. It is important to understand how the growing number of US
children who are raised speaking Spanish at home come to acquire and use
language as adults. The goal of this project is to explore the use of a variable
grammatical form in bilingual adults who were raised in the US speaking Spanish
at home and English in school; these bilingual adults are also known as
“heritage speakers”. Examining variable patterns leads to a more comprehensive
understanding of bilingual language acquisition in the US context. Disseminating
the findings from this project through both scientific and public channels helps
researchers and educators to develop more effective educational strategies and
improves speech-language pathologists' ability to assess language abilities in
clinical settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have shown that
heritage speakers demonstrate significant variability in their use of
grammatical forms. This variability can be traced to language-specific factors
as well as aspects of an individual’s language experience. While variable
grammatical patterns appear across languages and speech communities, these
patterns are rarely studied in heritage speakers. This project uses a sentence
repetition task with heritage language speakers and monolinguals to examine the
trade-off between competing influences on the distribution of differential
object marking (DOM), a phenomenon found in a number of languages where certain
objects in a sentence are accompanied by a prefix/suffix, preposition, or other
marker. The project addresses the following questions: (1) How do heritage
speakers acquire variable grammatical patterns such as DOM? (2) What are the
linguistic and extralinguistic factors that constrain heritage speakers’ use of
variable patterns? (3) How does variable usage change across generations of
bilingual speakers? This novel approach combining the study of variation,
language acquisition, and cross-generational heritage speakers has significant
potential to contribute to our understanding of bilingualism and language
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.