* 2140441
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Stochastic Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Epidemic Spread to Improve Control Interventions - From COVID-19 to Future Pandemics
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Shelley Ehrlich, Children's Hospital Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 201,299.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new scientific knowledge
related to how uncertainties in both human behavior and transmission
characteristics of a causative pathogen (such as the novel coronavirus in the
case of COVID-19) influence the spread of an epidemic, and how the new knowledge
thus obtained about epidemic spread can contribute to interventional public
health policy measures to effectively mitigate and control an epidemic. The
research will advance both the science of predicting epidemic spread as well as
national prosperity by enhancing national preparedness for early and effective
mitigation of potential future epidemic outbreaks. Mathematical and
computational models that can accurately predict an epidemic spread across
geographical regions over specified periods of time are critical precursors to
developing effective interventions for mitigation such as social-distancing
measures and vaccination campaigns (when vaccines become available). However,
the limitations of existing predictive models, as evident during the COVID-19
outbreak in the US, underscore the need for new knowledge in this area. This
award supports fundamental research to develop novel predictive models of
epidemic spread and also to validate model predictions against the extensive
COVID-19 spread data only now available. This research involves multiple
disciplines including the mathematical theory of partial differential equations,
stochastic analysis, control theory, and epidemiology and the results will
likely have broader significance in the study of rare-event dynamics in areas
such as ecology, climate science and wildfire propagation. Moreover, this cross-
disciplinary project, a collaborative effort involving multiple institutions,
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and
training, and also advance science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance the fundamental
knowledge of how uncertainties, both in human behavior and pathogen
characteristics, influence spatiotemporal, stochastic epidemic dynamics and also
yield a control-theoretic framework to analyze interventions for mitigation.
Specifically, the project will: (1) develop novel predictive dynamic models
based on partial differential equations, (2) uncover effects of the interaction
between nonlinearity and uncertainty such as noise-induced bifurcations, (3)
study infection spikes using a stochastic approach, (4) validate the models
using COVID-19 data, (5) establish a control-theoretic framework to analyze
mitigative interventions, using a combination of averaging methods from
stochastic analysis and feedback control theory, (6) obtain improved
characterization of epidemiologic parameters such as basic and effective
reproduction numbers, and (7) identify principles and strategies that can inform
interventional public health policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.