* 2140288
* Expanding The Reach of A Successful Pre-service Teacher Research Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Stamatis Vokos, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,525,558.00

This project aims to serve the national need to prepare high-quality STEM
teachers with first-hand experience in authentic disciplinary STEM practices
that are core to scientific research, while simultaneously contributing to the
understanding of what works--and for whom--in teacher-research programs. It
seeks to expand the successful STEM Teacher and Researcher (STAR) Program at
California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo to three other
institutions and to develop the ability of these institutions to operate their
own versions of STAR in the future. The pre-service teacher audience for this
effort is comprised of undergraduates preparing to be STEM teachers. STAR
focuses especially on those undergraduates from communities that have been
historically underrepresented in these domains, and will support the
participation of these students in authentic science research and structured
educational workshops. These experiences are intended to develop knowledge,
skills, and perspectives that allow them to engage their future students in
productive STEM learning situations, as well as to reflect upon and overcome the
impact of external exclusionary messages about who does and who does not belong
in STEM. Thus, this work assists the pre-service STEM teachers in developing
personal productive mindsets about their own intellect and capabilities, as well
as perspectives on promoting their future students’ sense of connection with
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration among four
institutions: the California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo,
Southern University and A&amp;M in Baton Rouge, Louisiana (one of the designated
Historically Black Colleges and Universities), Heritage University on the Yakima
Reservation in Toppenish, Washington (an Hispanic Serving Institution and Native
Serving Institution), and California State University East Bay in Hayward (an
Hispanic Serving Institution). Over three years, the project intends to provide
120 nine-week summer research placements to prospective STEM teachers from the
partnering institutions and any Noyce project in the nation. Through the efforts
of the project team research placements are anticipated to take place in one of
more than forty cooperating national labs, university research facilities
(including those of the partner institutions), and other R&amp;D settings. The
project aims to conduct a series of studies using quantitative data from surveys
and questionnaires, as well as qualitative data from in-depth interviews, to
examine the effect that participation in the STAR Program has on the development
of productive mindsets (growth mindset, belonging, identity) and their
subsequent effects on pedagogical practices. The project’s research agenda also
intends to develop a new scale - the "Disciplinary Nature of STEM Scale" - to
measure the different ways people think about the nature of STEM disciplines.
The project’s hypotheses regarding participation in STAR leading to the
participants becoming stronger in their view of STEM (compared to being taught
about research rather than doing research) will be tested. It is anticipated
that such research experiences lead to the development of the kinds of
productive mindsets and pedagogical approaches that research has found to
benefit student achievement and ultimately reduce racial gaps in educational
outcomes. This expansion of the STAR Program will undergo formative and
summative evaluation to guide improvements in the program. This Noyce Research
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.