* 2140638
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Enhancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Puerto Rico
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Alfredo Cruz, Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,129,906.00

This CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) project renewal will enable
Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico (PUPR) to continue supporting the needs of
national security and an increasingly technological society. The main goals of
the PUPR-SFS program are: 1) increase the number of qualified students pursuing
cybersecurity; 2) increase the involvement of underrepresented and minority
faculty in students; 3) engage students in professional activities such as
internships, development of workshops, and other outreach activities that
provide synergistic interactions through various activities in cybersecurity.
This project will directly impact twenty-eight (20 undergraduate, 6 Master, and
2 Ph.D.) students and broaden opportunities that enable talented Hispanic women
and students from other underrepresented groups to enter academic programs in
Computer Science and Engineering in Cybersecurity; helping to alleviate the
nationwide shortage of qualified professionals in these areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its support for undergraduate and graduate
students this PUPR-SFS project will increase research findings and improve
education in multiple technology areas relevant to cybersecurity. PUPR is
already involved in critical research in the areas of Cybersecurity and
Artificial Intelligence such as Machine Learning; IoT Security; Mobile Ad Hoc
Network (MANET); Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV); Computer and Network Security;
E-Discovery and Digital Evidence; Computer Forensics; Social Engineering;
Intrusion Detection; Cryptography; Cryptanalysis; Steganography; and
Visualization Tools; among others. The project will help increase the knowledge
base in security topics that are of national concern. Another goal is to engage
students in professional activities such as internships, workshop development,
and other outreach activities that provide synergistic interactions through
various activities in cybersecurity. These activities will also include
initiatives within the university that will enrich students' academic
experiences, such as job fairs, symposiums, "Capture the Flag" competitions, and
attendance at international refereed conferences. The project team will meet
periodically with students to monitor progress in courses, research, and any
other educational activities required of students. Expected outcomes will be
evaluated periodically using a Program Evaluation Plan consisting of internal
and external evaluations (with an experienced external evaluator). The plan
assures that formative and summative evaluations are consistent with the
program's expected outcomes, and, if required, corrective actions are taken in a
timely manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.