* 2140934
* GEM: Multipoint Observations and Global Modeling of Energetic Particle Deep Penetration into the Low L Region of Earth's Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Hong Zhao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 361,392.00

Understanding the relativistic particle environment surrounding Earth is vital
to predict and mitigate space weather effects. These effects include damage to
satellites in low-Earth orbit. This project addresses an important question of
how particles are accelerated in the inner magnetosphere through a combination
of observational studies and state-of-the-art modeling. Two early career
researchers are supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is
to investigate and quantify the role of electric fields in the deep penetration
of energetic electrons and protons using data from the Van Allen Probes and
THEMIS as well as modeling with the RCM-E and a 3-D particle tracer. Specific
science questions to be addressed are: 1) Based on the multipoint observations,
what are the quantitative differences between energetic electron and proton deep
penetration into the low L region in penetration depth, frequency, timing, and
MLT distribution? 2) Based on the multipoint observations, what is the
spatiotemporal evolution of electric fields in the inner magnetosphere during
energetic particle deep penetration events? 3) To what extent can the RCM-E
represent the observed electric fields in the inner magnetosphere during deep
penetration events? 4) To what extent can the electric fields given by RCM-E
explain the differences in deep penetration of inner magnetospheric energetic
particles of different species and/or energies? To answer these science
questions, energetic particle deep penetration events down to L&lt;4 will be
identified using data from the Van Allen Probes, and the penetration depth,
timing, and MLT dependence will be examined. The electric field measurements
from EFW on Van Allen Probes and EFI on THEMIS will be examined, and the
spatiotemporal evolution of electric fields will be investigated. The RCM-E will
be used to model self-consistent, time-varying electric fields in the inner
magnetosphere to be compared to the observations. The modeled electric fields
will then be embedded into a particle tracer to examine whether the observed
energetic particle deep penetration, especially the differences between electron
and proton penetration, can be explained by the transport of inner
magnetospheric populations by the modeled electric field of
RCM-E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.