* 2140399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Presupposition projection in conditionals and conjunctions: Developmental and psycholinguistic evidence
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Athulya Aravind, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,838.00

Human language allows us to distinguish the main new information we intend to
communicate from background information we take for granted, i.e., our
presuppositions. For example, 'again' in 'I won again' suggests that it was
already established that the speaker had won previously. A hallmark of
presuppositions is the fact that they are preserved under logical operators like
negation: a sentence like 'I didn’t win again' continues to suggest a prior
victory. The issue of how presuppositions interact with their surrounding
context – how presuppositions project – has been a central and hotly debated
topic in the study of natural language meaning. This dissertation project aims
to contribute to this debate by examining presupposition projection in sentences
where theories diverge. The project approaches this empirical terrain from an
innovative angle, turning to online processing and child language acquisition,
which can shed new light on the logical and inferential systems that underlies
human semantic competence. The project includes the training and mentoring of
undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will carry out a
series of psycholinguistic experiments with adults and children, with the goal
of distinguishing between two classes of theories: (i) theories that predict
that the presuppositions of conditionals and conjunctions should vary based on
the position of the presupposition-carrying expression, and (ii) ones that
predict uniform presuppositions across the board. Study 1 probes adults' real-
time processing of presupposition projection, with the goal of identifying
behavioral signatures of presupposition projection. Study 2 turns to child
language, where the influence of confounding pragmatic factors is minimized.
Finally, Study 3 probes in more detail how other, non-linguistic factors
influence judgments about presuppositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.