* 2140225
* Stimuli-Responsive Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,01/31/2024
* N Aluru, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 01/31/2024
* USD 398,286.00

Oil and water don't mix and exist as two separate phases of matter. Phase
separation of soft matter mixtures such as lipids, oil and water can be
exploited to create lipid coated droplets or soft particles. Two soft particles
can self-assemble with a lipid bilayer connecting the two soft particles. The
soft particle composition can also include more complex matter such as polymers.
When a biological ion channel is incorporated into one of the soft particles, it
self-assembles into the lipid bilayer forming a communication channel, where,
for example, water and ions can be exchanged between the soft particles, and the
exchange can be modulated by an external stimulus such as an electric field,
mechanical force, pH, etc. In addition to creating a platform for exchange of
contents between the two soft particles, the external stimulus can also induce
mechanical deformations in the soft particles. Self-assembled soft particles can
enable sensing of external stimuli, creation of synthetic cell-like structures,
compartmentalized reactions and other important functions. In spite of
tremendous technological impact of self-assembled soft particles, the mechanics
of the self-assembly process, complex deformations of soft particles under
various stimuli, and the functionality of ion channels beyond what is already
known in biology are not clear. This project will train next generation
scientists to develop fundamental insights into mechanics of stimuli-responsive
soft materials. This award will also support inclusion of undergraduate students
in research and education, engagement of women and minority students, and
outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to understand
the mechanics of self-assembly and functionality of stimuli-responsive soft
materials. Specifically, detailed atomistic calculations will be performed to
understand the molecular mechanics of the self-assembly process, mechanical
behavior of stimuli-responsive soft materials, and complex interactions between
soft particles when they interact via ion channels. To understand the mechanics
of larger size soft particles, coarse-grained calculations, based on the
iterative Boltzmann inversion technique, will be performed. To compute
macroscopic properties of stimuli-responsive soft materials, multiscale
calculations integrating phenomena at various length scales will be performed.
In addition to developing fundamental knowledge, various applications of
stimuli-responsive soft materials will be investigated. It is anticipated that
this project will not only lead to significant advances in mechanics of stimuli-
responsive soft materials but also enable studies of ion channels beyond their
known functionality in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.