* 2140342
* NSF-DFG: Strategies to Overcome Contemporary Limitations of Reductive Electrosynthetic Conversions in Aqueous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jean-Philippe Tessonnier, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Reductive electrosynthesis is an inherently green, safe, and sustainable
technology for chemical reductions as it replaces hazardous chemicals and/or
harsh reaction conditions by electrons supplied by renewable wind/solar energy.
Reductive electrosynthesis also offers unique opportunities for increasing
conversion efficiencies and for synthesizing new molecules that are not
accessible thermochemically or photochemically. However, the implementation of
this technology for chemical manufacturing is hampered by the parasitic hydrogen
evolution reaction and by the corrosion of conventional cathode materials. This
project will introduce highly disruptive concepts that address these severe
shortcomings. This effort is timely as it will advance the American power and
chemical manufacturing industries, and provide unique outreach and training
opportunities for building a locally-rooted STEM workforce in the
Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
and corrosion of contemporary cathode materials will be addressed through the
investigation and development of two innovative approaches, namely cationic
hydrogen inhibitors and unconventional metal and metal alloy cathode materials.
Novel cationic hydrogen inhibitors will be designed to selectively increase the
overvoltage for the hydrogen evolution reaction, which will enable reactions
that are inaccessible by the current state-of-the-art methods. These cations
will interact with the negatively charged cathode and self-assemble to create a
protective ionic layer that hampers corrosion and HER while enabling the desired
tunneling of electrons to the substrates in solution. Cations with various
molecular structures will be synthesized and investigated to establish
structure-performance relationships. In addition to self-assembly, the research
team will also explore the electrografting of selected cations to suitable
electrode materials. This approach is expected to grant a high flexibility as
the organic cationic inhibitors can be further tailored for specific
requirements, for instance using chiral additives to transfer stereogenic
information to desired substrates. The stated shortcomings will also be tackled
from a different perspective by designing unconventional electrode materials
such as Ga/In mixtures, ternary alloys of zinc and lead, bismuth, and bismuth
alloys as cathodes. These materials are expected to excel in many aspects. For
example, in addition to exhibiting high hydrogen overpotentials, some of them
should also show increased biocompatibility and resistance to biobased corrosive
compounds compared to existing metal electrodes used in reductive
electrochemistry. The performance of such alloys for reductive electrosynthesis
in aqueous media has not been carefully investigated yet and it is anticipated
that doing so will open new avenues for organic electrosynthesis. The
synergistic combination of both approaches, i.e. cationic hydrogen inhibitors
and novel metal alloys, is also expected to yield unmatched performance and
durability for challenging transformations. The technological advances achieved
through this project will promote the adoption of green electrochemistry in the
chemical industry and facilitate the implementation of electrochemical
manufacturing processes at commercial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
was funded under the NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and
Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem) opportunity NSF
20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.