* 2140296
* I-Corps: Carbon-negative supplementary cementitious materials for carbon-neutral concrete
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Hongyan Ma, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
conversion of a broad range of negative-value and low-value solid wastes into
high-value, blended, supplementary cementitious material (SCM) through enhanced
carbon dioxide (CO2) mineralization. SCM is a commodity used in the cement and
concrete industry. The commercial potential of this technology is supported by
three current industry trends. First, the grand challenge of carbon reduction
will require breakthrough technologies that can be deployed at gigaton scale.
Second, the cement/concrete industry is a major source of CO2 emissions and is
seeking alternative SCMs to replace cement for deep decarbonization. Third,
various aluminosilicate solid wastes need to be beneficially used to mitigate
their ecological burden. The proposed technology will simultaneously address
these three demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
production of blended supplementary cementitious material (SCM) through
upcycling of alkaline aluminosilicate solid wastes. These wastes contain oxides
of alkaline earth metals and transition metals. The proposed approach enhances
the dissolution of these metal elements and converts them into carbonate
particles through controlled carbonation (carbon dioxide uptake). Byproducts of
this process are amorphous aluminosilicate phases and impurities. Recent
research results have shown that if proportioned properly, carbonates (such as
ground limestone or dolomite) and amorphous aluminosilicate (such as calcine
clay) can act synergistically to replace up to 50% of cement in concrete
production, without compromising the performance of concrete. What
differentiates the proposed approach from emerging technologies is that the
components (carbonates and aluminosilicate) forming the blended SCMs are
produced from solid waste through a carbon-negative process, instead of
excavation of natural resources. Simulation and experimental results have shown
that the resultant blended SCMs, when used to replace part of cement, can change
of composition but yield comparable pore structures and mechanical properties to
normal cement-based materials such as concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.