* 2140277
* SpecEES: Toward Spectral and Energy Efficient Cross-Layer Designs for Millimeter-Wave-Based Massive MIMO Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jia Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,540.00

Millimeter-wave (mmWave) and Massive MIMO (M-MIMO) technologies have strong
potential to impact future 5G wireless networks and support data rates 50 times
greater than the current 4G LTE wireless communications. As such, 5G multi-
Gigabit wireless networks are poised to enable a myriad of applications for
(e.g., Internet-of-Things, virtual/augmented reality, etc.). However, the highly
directional propagation of mmWave signals and the special mmWave hardware
requirements introduce fundamental technical challenges for mmWave-based M-MIMO
network systems that may require a clean-slate of hardware and software
beamforming architectures. In light of these challenges, the goal of this
research program is to advance knowledge in both hardware design and theoretical
foundations of mmWave and M-MIMO wireless networks. By exploring new hardware-
software technologies for mmWave M-MIMO wireless networks, this research program
is envisioned to serve a critical need in mmWave communications, signal
processing, networking, and control research communities. In terms of broader
impacts, the PIs plan to incorporate findings into graduate courses and develop
new special topic courses on the fundamentals of mmWave and M-MIMO communication
networks. Engagement of undergrad and high school students is also planned with
the aim to provide hands-on experience in RF components, communications,
networking, control, and signal processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research address foundational problems in mmWave large antenna arrays
and communication networks, with potential breakthroughs in both theory and
practice to enable the success of on future multi-Gigabit wireless
communications and associated networking applications. This research program
spans broad areas of communications and signal processing to establish a
network-level understanding of mmWave M-MIMO networks through a unified research
program, which includes the development and exploration of: i) tractable
theoretical models, ii) theoretical performance bounds and capacity limits, and
iii) low-complexity algorithms. The novelty of this project lies in the joint
beam training and scheduling algorithms through the introduction of novel
algorithms in the radio-frequency front-end, and in the exploitation of subarray
clustering to increase throughput and reduce energy consumption. The PIs'
efforts are organized around three interdependent research thrusts: i)
Transceiver and beamforming architectures that offer large agility in frequency
tuning and high performance at several metrics, ii) Spectral-efficiency
optimization algorithms based on mmWave-based subarray clustering, and iii)
Energy-efficiency scheduling algorithms based on mmWave-based subarray
clustering. In addition to theoretical studies, the PIs plan to validate the
analytical techniques and models via extensive simulations, trace-driven
emulations, and field tests.