* 2140183
* The seeds and spread of sound change: Individual differences in coarticulatory patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Georgia Zellou, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2024
* USD 218,555.00

This project investigates contextual variation in the pronunciation of
consonants and vowels when they occur next to other sounds. This is known as
'coarticulation'. An example is that when pronouncing the word 'bone', speakers
begin the movement needed to produce the nasal 'n' sound early, during the
pronunciation of the preceding 'o' vowel. What aspects of this articulatory
overlap are universal across speakers and what aspects can vary across speakers?
This project addresses that question by examining how speakers of American
English vary in their coarticulation patterns producing the same set of words.
Since coarticulation provides advance information about upcoming sounds in the
word, it can be used predictively by listeners to comprehend speech more
efficiently. How do listeners adapt to cross-speaker variation when using
coarticulation to comprehend speech? This question is addressed by investigating
how listeners track and use cross-talker coarticulatory variation during word
comprehension. Finally, coarticulation has played a prominent role in explaining
common historical sound changes, and this project addresses the role of
coarticulatory variation in leading to historical variation across languages.
This research will contribute to our basic understanding of speech and can
facilitate better treatment of speech and language disorders. It will also
contribute to the training and mentoring of a future generation of scientists
(including undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's first objective is to characterize
individual differences in coarticulation using acoustic and perceptual
assessments. Experiment 1 identifies talker-specific relationships between
prosodic organization, nasal-coarticulatory, oral articulations, and voice
quality in order to typologize the coarticulation production grammars of 100
speakers of American English. Experiment 2 perceptually defines individual
variation in the grammatical specification of coarticulatory vowel nasalization
produced by these speakers. The goal is to typologize cross-speaker variation
using the same conventions used to define cross-linguistic coarticulatory
variation, relating synchronic coarticulatory variation across individuals to
cross-linguistically phonologized phonetic patterns. The prediction is that the
types of variation in produced coarticulatory patterns that are seen across
languages also exist systematically across individual speakers. Objective 2 is
to investigate the influence of perceptual learning of talker-specific
coarticulatory patterns on listener-based sound change mechanisms. Experiments 3
and 4 investigate perceptual adaptation to talker-specific patterns of
coarticulation, exploring how listener adaptation to talker-specific
coarticulation patterns is an integral mechanism of phonologization. The
prediction is that perceptual learning of coarticulation is helpful because it
allows listeners to both be flexible and predict how a given talker is going to
produce a word. This mechanism can also be integrated into listener-oriented
mechanisms of sound change to explain how different coarticulation patterns
phonologize. The project tests novel extensions of listener-based sound change
accounts that integrates perceptual adaptation to talker-specific coarticulatory
patterns in order to account for how novel coarticulatory patterns
phonologize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.