* 2140978
* CAREER: Modeling the unique effects of verbal and physical contact on well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Brett Jakubiak, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 508,625.00

People fare poorly when they are unable to remain in contact with close others,
as has become clear from pandemic conditions of social isolation. The positive
effects of routine physical contact between friends, family members, and
relationship partners often are taken for granted, but the importance placed on
physical contact was brought into focus when social distancing kept people
physically apart. This project focuses attention on the unique benefits of
everyday affectionate physical contact. A primary aim of this project is to test
why physical contact is beneficial for individuals and their relationships. What
are the psychological effects of affectionate physical contact that
differentiate it from verbal expressions of affection? This research tests how
physical and verbal affection influence the mental models people hold (beliefs
about whether they are worthy of love and care and whether others are supportive
and trustworthy) and their couple identity (whether they think in terms of "we"
and "us"). Further, this program of research assesses resulting behavioral
changes that enhance individual and relationship functioning. A second aim of
this project is to test how initial differences in people's mental models
modulate the psychological effects of physical and verbal affection to determine
who benefits (and perhaps who does not benefit) from affectionate physical
contact. Understanding the unique psychological processes underlying physical
versus verbal affection – how and for whom effects occur – will provide a
foundation to help couples enhance their relationships and personal well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program of research uses a multi-method
approach combining nonexperimental (ecological momentary assessments, observer-
rated discussions) and experimental designs to identify the unique consequences
of naturally occurring physical affection and a weeklong physical affection
intervention. The mechanistic model guiding this research posits that a)
physical affection uniquely encodes a state of security into existing mental
models and uniquely fosters self-other overlap between partners, which b)
enables people to enact behaviors that enhance their relationships and their
personal well-being. This project incorporates cutting-edge measurement and
analysis strategies to assess immediate and long-term consequences of physical
affection. An ecological momentary assessment component captures daily levels of
physical affection and self-other overlap. Moment-to-moment analyses of couple
discussions reveal associations of physical affection (continuous observer
ratings of duration and intensity) with secure mental models (time-linked
continuous affect ratings of felt security). Additionally, the consequences of
the physical affection intervention are being evaluated using sensitive and
objective measures, including an implicit measure of attachment security that
captures changes in mental models and observer ratings of constructive
relationship behaviors that occur in guided couple interactions. Finally, this
program of research examines who may or may not benefit from physical affection
by analyzing the significant portion of people who believe and expect that
others cannot be trusted (avoidantly-attached individuals). A significant
component of this project is dedicated to providing opportunities for students
to develop methodological and analytical expertise. Students receive direct
training on designing, conducting, and analyzing multi-method studies that
combine different measures, designs, and assessment timeframes. In addition, the
project supports the development and dissemination of scaffolded resource
toolkits that help undergraduate students produce independent research
proposals. Ultimately, this project advances knowledge on fundamental aspects of
how people think about and navigate their close relationships, and it can inform
effective and scalable interventions to protect and enhance personal and
relational well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.