* 2140235
* Observing and Modeling the Upper-Troposphere-Lower-Stratosphere Moistening Processes across Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Paul Staten, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 505,233.00

Though quiescent compared to the troposphere below, the stratosphere influences
life at the surface in important ways (like blocking harmful UV rays), each
dependent on stratospheric water vapor. The primary source of water vapor in the
lower stratosphere comes from the tropics, where year-round heating of the ocean
surface by the sun fuels some of the world's most intense storms. Tropical
thunderstorms loft water vapor into the upper troposphere. Whatever water vapor
that is not freeze-dried at the cold point tropopause – the thermal boundary
between the troposphere and the stratosphere – is free to enter the
stratosphere, where it is distributed globally. However, most water vapor does
not enter the stratosphere immediately above these storms, as this is also where
the tropopause is coldest. Furthermore, the strongest storms do not necessarily
occur over the warmest ocean surface. Leveraging the newly available high-
resolution observations and a hierarchy of climate models, this project aims to
better understand these issues involved in getting water vapor into the
stratosphere. In collaboration with scientists at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR), the proposed activities will train a graduate
student and involve the education programs at the investigator’s
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will rely on state-of-the-art
reanalyses, a hierarchy of numerical models, and the new COSMIC-II
(Constellation Observing System for Meteorology Ionosphere and Climate II) fleet
of global positioning system receivers to (1) examine how sea surface
temperatures impact cold point tropopause (CPT) temperatures, (2) analyze the
processes in the atmosphere that determine CPT temperature, and (3) determine
when and where the CPT temperature matters most for stratospheric moisture
uptake. The investigating team will first observe the relationships between sea
surface temperature, CPT temperatures, and water vapor, then compare the
observed relationships with those in model simulations. The team will also
utilize numerical models to examine the impacts of resolution and sea surface
temperature anomalies on CPT temperatures. In addition to being of interests to
the climate science community, the emerging results on stratospheric change has
implications for health and prosperity, as well as national defense (which was
the original motivation for the study of stratospheric moisture and circulation
during WWII). The proposed activities will support several outreach programs,
including the training of K-12 teachers in Indiana through the Educating for
Environmental Change initiative, and the recruitment of underrepresented
minority students in Indiana through the Jim Holland Research Initiative in STEM
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.