* 2140820
* PFI-TT: Advancing Nanocellulose-Enabled Bio-Nanofertilizers for Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impacts and commercial potentials of this Partnerships for
Innovation - Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will significantly reduce
the nitrogen fertilizer usage, thus reducing the total greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. Overuse of nitrogen fertilizers leads to nutrient losses that
contribute to climatic change that in turn negatively affects agricultural
productivity and environmental health. This project creates a new nanofertilizer
from underutilized biomass feedstocks and wastewater nutrient recovery.
Furthermore, this project trains future leaders in agricultural entrepreneurship
and innovation management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances a
simple approach using nitric acid-sodium nitrite mixtures (both are key
ingredients for N-fertilizer synthesis) that can extract nanocellulose directly
from untreated non-woody plants (e.g. agricultural residues) with significant
reduction of chemical, water and energy needs. This nitro-oxidation process
(NOP) approach combines the steps of pulping and cellulose oxidation. In
addition, the spent liquor in the process can be readily converted into plant
fertilizer. Nanocellulose has been shown to be an effective scaffolding material
to host a multitude of organic and inorganic nanoparticles and to create low-
cost and environmentally friendly nanocomposite. The proposed activities will
(1) demonstrate and evaluate the scale-up of NOP operation, involving process
optimization, safety procedure development, efficient conversion of spent liquor
and understanding of the structure-functionality-process relationships from
various non-woody biomass feedstocks, and (2) synthesize a new kind of
nanocellulose-enabled bio-nanofertilizer, including ammonium-nanocellulose, ZnO
nanoparticle-nanocellulose, and CuO nanoparticle-anchored nanocellulose
composites. The proposed research will provide new knowledge for creating
effective nanofertilizers and for overcoming technical hurdles to upcycle two
major waste streams i.e., underutilized biomass, and excess N-nutrients in
wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.