* 2140601
* Research: Engineering for Social Justice: Factors shaping the career aspirations and mindsets of humanitarian engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tiera Tanksley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,985.00

Humanitarian Engineering (HE) programs aim to train engineers to improve the
health, prosperity, and welfare of underserved and marginalized communities. HE
is increasingly desired by students and has the potential to recruit socially
attentive students and students from underrepresented minority groups to
engineering; however, there is limited research on the career paths of these
students after admission. Further, decolonization and social justice reforms are
changing the HE sector, and there is a need to understand how career outlooks,
including self-efficacy, outcome expectations, career interests, alignment with
social justice reform, and retention in the sector, are changing. This project
will characterize career aspirations and expectations and identify factors and
experiences that influence career pathways and the development of social justice
value systems. Comparisons with responses from HE practitioners will help
determine how student expectations and goals align or misalign with practitioner
reality. As a result, this project will characterize career pathways to help
inform students of potential careers post-graduation and needed skill sets in
the sector. Additionally, the project will create research-based recommendations
for HE educational programs and the sector, identify learning experiences that
enable engineering for social justice, and provide reflection for actions that
can be taken in the HE sector to retain and support socially-minded engineering
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will longitudinally study
students from eight HE graduate programs in the United States. The project will
focus on career outlooks, including career aspirations, expectations, and self-
efficacy. At the same time, we recognize how social justice movements are
impacting the field of global engineering, opening up new considerations and
pathways for socially minded engineering students that may or may not be aligned
with current opportunities in the field. In order to capture these real-time
changes and to determine how students’ socially minded career goals align with
field realities, we will use mixed-method, longitudinal data to record how these
career outlooks change over time and the factors that influence these career
outlooks and changes. Longitudinal data will include interviews conducted with
students each term, survey questionnaires, and regular discussions in a HE-
specific online community maintained by the research team. Analysis of
interviews conducted with HE practitioners and compared with student responses
will reveal (mis)alignments between career outlooks and realities. The project
will not only characterize career trajectories but also advance theory of
engineering value system development. Further, by collecting perishable data in
this time of social justice reform, the project will also build theory on how
social justice movements and mindsets contribute to engineering student outlooks
and mindsets. An expert advisory board of faculty from HE graduate programs will
help further disseminate results for uptake in
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.