* 2140305
* CNS Core: Small: Automated testing for data- and compute-intensive distributed systems through feedback-based fuzzing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Pedro Fonseca, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2024
* USD 496,450.00

The demand for large-scale data storage and processing has made distributed
systems crucial. However, programming modern distributed systems is particularly
challenging because it requires correct reasoning about concurrent code running
across machines, unreliable networks, software and hardware failures, and
complex application logic. In practice, despite the challenges faced by
developers, there are currently no good options to test distributed systems
automatically and comprehensively. This project focuses on developing techniques
that effectively test data- and compute-intensive distributed applications used
by millions of users, running on virtually every cloud service and data
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing together expertise in operating
systems, distributed systems, and systems testing, this project will make
contributions to both theory and practice by (1) designing and building
efficient test execution engines that transparently make large distributed
systems amenable to low-overhead and high-throughput execution, (2) exploring
test coverage and mutation policies that are tuned to address multi-node and
fault-tolerant systems, and (3) developing techniques that use the likely root
cause of distributed system bugs to minimize test cases and reproduce production
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed systems are now the foundation of
society's most essential services, including e-commerce, banking, financial,
medical, and logistics services. This project will allow distributed system
developers to build more reliable distributed systems by developing practical
and high-coverage testing approaches. The testing approaches developed will
prevent service downtime, data loss, system malfunctions, and business and
customer trust loss across a range of multi-billion dollar industries.
Furthermore, the testing systems developed will reduce developer effort and time
devoted to fixing distributed systems, which are notoriously challenging for
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All project data is stored in public sites and
university storage systems to ensure safe long-term storage for at least seven
years from the award conclusion or public release, whichever comes later. The
data produced includes system implementations and source code, documentation,
test sets, analysis datasets, and educational material. The project information
will be located at https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/pfonseca/projects/ds-
fuzzing.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.