* 2140528
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Data Collection for Robot-Oriented Disaster Site Modeling at Champlain Towers South Collapse
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 70,000.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will support a collaborative team
of researchers from Florida State University, Texas A&amp;M University, and
Carnegie Mellon University to operate under the supervision of the Miami Dade
Fire Rescue Department and Florida Task Force 1 at the site of the Champlain
Towers South condominium collapse in Surfside, Florida. This project will
address the need for a robot-oriented model of rubble by using unmanned aerial
system (UAS) imagery and other contextual information. The lack of a robot-
oriented model of rubble is a major barrier to the design and manufacture of
effective, economical, and reliable ground robots for disasters and other
extreme environments. Although structural engineering teams are also
investigating the site, they do not capture data about the factors that impact
whether a robot can navigate the interior of a building collapse. This project
will benefit society by facilitating the design and deployment of robots to save
lives, either to find survivors in rubble otherwise inaccessible to humans and
dogs or by reducing the need for human responders to enter unsafe areas. The
team is diverse, with a woman as the principal investigator, and will train a
diverse set of students to conduct robotics research for
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will: 1) assist rescue, recovery, and
forensic structural teams by collecting UAS images of the collapse from response
through recovery, 2) collect and analyze data on UAS performance relating to
flights, missions, data processing, and operations tempo, 3) analyze orthomosaic
and digital elevation imagery to formally model traversability constraints for
ground robots in extreme environments, including features such as scale, shape,
and surface properties, 4) curate images for general use and archive on the
Texas Data Repository open source dataverse site, and 5) attempt to create a 3D
visualization of the voids in the interior of the rubble from the progressively
uncovered site via a subtractive and labeling process. The research will create
a new fundamental research methodology for analyzing disasters, and extreme
environments in general, from the perspective of ground and aerial robotic
systems. The image datasets may also enable the computer vision machine learning
communities to recognize structural conditions and indications of survivors. The
results of the study will be made freely available, including a workshop, and
will improve use of robots in future disasters by formalizing design features
and offering a rapid recognition of which robot types to deploy for what
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.