* 2140650
* Collaborative Research: Design, Flight Control, and Autonomous Navigation of Bioinspired Morphing Micro Aerial Vehicles for Operation in Confined Spaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Koushil Sreenath, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2025
* USD 382,640.00

This project will promote the progress of science in aerial robotics and advance
the national prosperity and welfare, by creating bat-inspired drones that can
operate in extremely confined spaces. There is an increased demand for fast,
continuous environmental surveillance in city sewers. These confined spaces
occupy a large portion of a city's infrastructure. However, today's conventional
robots, including ground and aerial systems, cannot operate in a vast majority
of sewers. Sewer networks present a veritable maze of pipes, chambers, and
utility holes that pose tremendous challenges for robot locomotion control and
navigation. Therefore, human operators still inspect these dangerous spaces. In
addition to carrying many risks for humans, manned operations in these
environments are costly and slow. This grant’s research will contribute to the
design of aerial, bat-inspired robots that can operate in sewers, by mimicking
bat aerial locomotion principles in caves. The results from this research will
greatly benefit the society. Especially during a pandemic, the continuous and
automated monitoring of a city’s aging sewer systems using these bat-inspired
drones can play a vital role in saving human lives. For instance, SARS-CoVs can
be present in wastewater for several days, and its early detection in sewers in
2019 could have allowed for increased preparedness in combating the current
pandemic. This project trains new generation scientists, engineers, and
technologists with interdisciplinary skills, providing future professionals with
vertically integrated, use-inspired experiential learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's rotary-wing drones are better solutions
for inspection and monitoring city infrastructure than ground robots because
they are scalable, inexpensive, easy to deploy, and possess fast mobility.
However, these systems cannot fly inside tight areas such as tunnels with small
cross-sections because they rely on powerful and continuous air jets. So far,
the confined space applications of these drones include only flying inside
buildings or very spacious confined environments, which are not comparable to
the application of aerial robots in sewers. This research will allow drones to
complete fully autonomous flights inside tight spaces such as sewer galleries.
The research team will (i) use an integrated mechanical intelligence and control
framework to design drones with dynamically versatile body conformations and
significant computational complexity to prevent creation of powerful air jets,
(ii) design an integrated model-based and data-driven flight control framework
that captures not only the model uncertainty but also the environmental
aerodynamic effects that arise due to flight in tunnels, and (iii) develop a
novel navigation framework that relies on high-level abstract guidance extracted
from sewer schematic diagrams, enabling robust navigation in unmapped
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.