* 2140660
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Signals of genetic quality and mate choice
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Janet Buckner, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2026
* USD 130,808.00

In some species, males display traits that may provide information about their
quality to potential female mates, and variation in those traits drives females
to choose or avoid those males as mates. This study examines whether seasonal
fat increase in wild nonhuman primate males is related to their reproductive
success. This project advances knowledge about the evolution of physiology and
sociality in our nonhuman primate relatives. This project also fosters the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM by providing
mentored research to historically underrepresented groups such as first-
generation students, low-income students, and students of color at Hispanic
Serving Institutions. Undergraduate students work to collect and analyze field
data and assist in the dissemination of the project findings. This project
provides mentored research and field-based experiences, unique training
opportunities for these students, and supports conservation of wild primates and
their habitats through activities at the local level through educational
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;This work provides new insight into sexual selection by
examining the relationships among signals of mate quality, a measurement of
genetic quality, and mate choice in a wild nonhuman primate. The research team
integrate behavioral data collected in the field and molecular methods used in
the laboratory to examine the reproductive consequences of individual variation
in seasonal male fat increase, and test whether this variation is related to
variation in Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) genes. Specifically, this
project determines parent-offspring relationships and uses behavioral and
genetic data to assess whether male fattening is a product of female choice, and
thus an honest indicator of one marker of genetic quality, or a product of male-
male competition and therefore decoupled from male MHC
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.