* 2140195
* Student Support: 2022 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 50th North American Manufacturing Research Conference; West Lafayette, Indiana; June 27-July 1, 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Barbara Linke, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,770.00

This award supports approximately 80 selected graduate and undergraduate
students studying at U.S. institutions to participate in the co-located
conference event consisting of the 2022 International Manufacturing Science and
Engineering Conference (MSEC) sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME) Manufacturing Engineering Division (ASME/MED) and the 50th
North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC) sponsored by the North
American Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing
Engineers (NAMRI/SME). These are world-class conferences in the manufacturing
engineering fields involving conventional and emerging manufacturing
technologies, manufacturing systems including quality control and reliability,
advanced materials processing, data-driven manufacturing innovations (e.g.,
applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence), and sustainable
manufacturing with life cycle engineering, etc. As such, MSEC and NAMRC uniquely
act as global bridges between industries, government laboratories, and academic
institutions. This award provides student participants with opportunities to
exchange ideas with leading researchers and engineers from industrial and
governmental facilities around the world, as well as with students and faculty
from both domestic and international universities. In addition to nurturing a
global manufacturing vision, participants will learn about the latest research
and developments in manufacturing engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide selected students with support for conference registration and
accommodation. The call for student support applications will be disseminated
through postings on main conference websites, announcements through conference
organizers, track chairs, and symposium organizers, and direct communication
with students involved in poster session, manufacturing design competition and
research presentation competition. The submitted applications will go through a
selection process by the conference committee. The eligibility criteria to
receive the funding include the following: (1) students must be from U.S.
institutions and (2) students must be actively participating in the conference
through presenting a paper, a poster, or participating in a competition.
Students from the underrepresented groups are strongly encouraged to apply. The
list of student awardees will be announced in the conference program. This award
will enable selected student participants to improve their knowledge of
manufacturing technologies and help them become engineers and researchers to
lead the next generation of U.S. manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.