* 2140226
* EAGER: An Actor-Network Investigation of the XSEDE Project
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Winona Snapp-Childs, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 11/30/2023
* USD 298,271.00

Cyberinfrastructure is defined as an ecosystem that includes people, software,
networks, data, and compute capabilities. While this term commonly refers to
supercomputers, this definition places “people” first. XSEDE, the eXtreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment, is the largest NSF-funded
cyberinfrastructure support and coordination activity. XSEDE has helped
researchers find the computing power they need and the assistance essential to
making it work, with a large range of associated services. This research project
examines the factors that motivate participation in XSEDE. It elucidates the
specific methods XSEDE and NSF use to balance cooperation, collaboration, and
competition, and it investigates how XSEDE has encouraged interactions across
divisions, creating a single, coherent organization. To study these methods, the
project uses Actor-Network Theory, a social science approach that considers
social structures to be formed by individuals operating through networks of
relationships. This theory is used to understand how the project’s human
elements interact with each other and with the organization as a whole. The
project’s findings will provide insight into the design and governance for
future organizations supporting cyberinfrastructure in the United States.
Importantly, this research will provide insight about how best to organize
large-scale collaborative projects and services. As a result, the study will
increase the extent to which structure, leadership, and management of large
cyberinfrastructure projects may be based on sound sociological science. Science
and society alike will also benefit from the spread of diverse approaches to
studying the formation, engagement, and maintenance of expansive scientific
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XSEDE project will end on August 31,
2022, offering a unique opportunity during the project’s final months to learn
from the people who have enabled its function for the last decade. By studying
XSEDE through the lens of Actor-Network Theory, this study will obtain,
preserve, and disseminate information on what has made this organization
successful in attracting and retaining talented staff and leaders, while also
discerning participant views on what could be improved in future organizations.
By applying a well-known theoretical approach in a new situation, the project
creates new knowledge that will improve understanding of large-scale
cyberinfrastructure project function in ways that are important to federal
funding agencies and the U.S. science and engineering community. The project
will proceed through two rounds of interviews focused on the interactions and
motivations of XSEDE participants, beginning with XSEDE leadership and key
stakeholders and staff members who are employed directly in the organization’s
various functions. After this first round, the project will produce preliminary
findings, which it will share openly with the XSEDE community while soliciting
feedback. The second round of interviews will focus on verifying and validating
findings among both previous and new interviewees. After this second round, we
will revise the findings with community input, paying specific attention to the
(mis)alignments between the two rounds of interviewing, looking for
opportunities to triangulate the findings to develop a full, complex
understanding of XSEDE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.