* 2140306
* I-Corps: Advanced Truck Detection with Lidar Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Sarah Hernandez, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
transportation agencies to gather critical freight movement data using passively
collected and anonymous sensors. Anonymity is of key importance for the
successful collection of transportation datasets, especially in the competitive
freight industry. Traditional approaches such as image-based detection, cell
phone tracking, or other visual monitoring (license plate tracking or logo
recognition) can violate privacy considerations and hinder widespread freight
data collection. Such data collection is necessary for travel demand modeling
and forecasting as well as for infrastructure planning, operations, and
maintenance for roadways, bridges, and freight terminals. The market for this
advanced truck detection device includes public transportation agencies at the
city, county, state, and national levels, traffic sensing device manufacturers,
transportation consulting companies, and freight terminal operators. While
current sensors may distinguish trucks from cars or trucks by axle
configuration, there are no non-pavement intrusive technologies currently able
to predict the body-type of the vehicle in enough detail to indicate freight
carried. Agencies tasked with data collection often must rely on time-consuming
periodic surveys to estimate where and what freight is moving on their highway
system, making it difficult to produce timely project cost-benefit and
resilience/impact analyses. Commercial applications can be extended to large
distribution centers, mining areas, rail yards or other intermodal terminals and
ports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a system
for low-cost, anonymous, and pavement-nonintrusive advanced truck detection by
developing a side-fire (perpendicular to traffic flow) Lidar (Light Detection
and Ranging)-based traffic detection and classification system. In side-fire
configuration, Lidar sensors capture the profile of the truck (tractor and
trailer/semi-trailer) which can be classified by body type with high-resolution
while maintaining the anonymity of the driver, license/registration, and
company. The innovation of this technology includes: 1) novel configuration and
application of off-the-shelf Lidar technology for traffic detection, 2) coupling
of technology with machine learning algorithms for feature detection,
extraction, and classification with the aim of high-resolution truck
classification, and 3) implementation of classification outputs in a data
dashboard for real time and historical review. This novel truck detection
solution using Lidar can enable a fundamental shift in how freight data is
collected, especially by public transportation
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.