* 2140987
* SBP: CAREER: Inferior and foreign racial stereotypes give rise to exploitative and exclusionary discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Linda Zou, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2027
* USD 485,350.00

Many racial and ethnic groups in the U.S. experience discrimination. However,
groups confront different types of discrimination, which creates a problem that
may not have merely one solution. Some discriminatory actions and practices
involve taking advantage of racial and ethnic groups in ways that benefit some
Americans and keep relative group status and economic positions stratified
(i.e., exploitation). Other discriminatory actions and practices involve
preserving traditional notions of what it means to be American and denying
racial and ethnic groups their own American national identity (i.e., exclusion).
The current project examines when and why these different forms of racial and
ethnic discrimination are likely to occur, as well as the self-reinforcing
nature of discrimination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad aim of this research
is to provide important insights into the complex nature of racial and ethnic
discrimination. Seven studies employ survey and experimental methods to
investigate the cognitive, motivational, and social factors that lead to the
exploitation and exclusion of racial and ethnic groups. First, this research
tests specific predictions of the racial and ethnic stereotypes that tend to
cause unique forms of discrimination. Perceiving a group as low status likely
gives rise to exploitation, whereas perceiving a group as culturally foreign
gives rise to exclusion. Second, this research examines the individual
differences and social contexts that motivate some Americans to maintain
socioeconomic differences between groups and preserve dominant cultural values
and practices. Third, this research explores how exposure to existing patterns
of exploitation and exclusion reinforce stereotypes about group status and
cultural foreignness; those stereotypes, in turn, reproduce the same patterns of
discrimination. This project advances an understanding of the psychological
mechanisms of racial discrimination, provides mentorship opportunities to young
researchers of color, and develops educational activities that foster awareness
of racism. The project will contribute to precise and group-specific efforts
that can reduce discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.