* 2140971
* NSF-DFG Echem: Electrochemically enhanced low-temperature catalytic ammonia synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Robert Kee, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2024
* USD 375,584.00

As the nation and the world move toward carbon-free energy economies, ammonia
will likely play significant roles as a hydrogen carrier. Today, essentially all
ammonia is produced in high pressure Haber-Bosch plants at very large scale.
There is a growing need for smaller scale, geographically distributed, ammonia
synthesis using renewable resources. However, because of inherent thermodynamic
and kinetic limitations, typical catalyst-based thermal processes (e.g., Haber-
Bosch) are not economic at smaller scale. The present project seeks to enable
distributed ammonia synthesis using electrochemical interactions that
significantly reduce activation barriers. The research relies on the combined,
complementary, and unique expertise of the partners in the context of materials
synthesis, characterization and process demonstration (KIT) and physically based
modeling of the electrochemistry, charged-defect transport, and catalysis
(CSM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint project addresses significant scientific
challenges in transitioning to environmentally friendly ammonia production as an
energy carrier and commodity chemical. The project’s objective is to develop and
demonstrate electrochemical enhancement that enables low-temperature and low-
pressure ammonia synthesis. Nanophase Ru is dispersed on a proton-conducting
BCZY support (BaCe1-x-yZrxYyO3-δ). Directly polarizing the catalyst structure
with an electric field decreases the kinetically limiting barrier for N2
activation. Although the proposed research is scientifically fundamental, it has
excellent technology potential for cost-effective distributed production of
ammonia. The research focuses on postulating, modeling, and validating proposed
chemical behaviors. The electrical field is expected to reduce rate-limiting N2
dissociation barriers via two synergistic mechanisms:&lt;br/&gt;1. Electrical
fields affect the proton-conducting BCZY support, enabling H2 dissociation to
form protons that can activate gas-phase N2, directly forming desired surface
adsorbates such as NH on the BCZY support.&lt;br/&gt;2. Fields in the range of
0.1 to1.0 V/Å on dispersed nano-Ru also reduce the nitrogen activation barrier.
The energy barrier for nitrogen activation Ru varies between 30-42 kJ mol-1.
Based on our validated reaction mechanisms for Ba-promoted Ru/YSZ, simulations
show that reducing the N2 dissociation energy by 10 kJ mol-1 will increase the
ammonia formation rate by an order of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research was funded under the NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis
and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem) opportunity NSF
20-578.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.