* 2140176
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Multiple origins of tuber formation: Evolution of a unique storage organ
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carol Buell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,869,487.00

As with the majority of animals, plants reproduce sexually and are subsequently
dispersed through fruits and seeds. However, numerous plant species are also
able to reproduce asexually via modified below-ground storage organs as seen in
potatoes, onions, and daffodils. These below-ground organs provide a means for
survival during the winter and/or prolonged periods of environmental stress as
well as a means to bypass sexual reproduction. One type of storage organ is that
of a tuber. Tuber crops provide significant calories and nutrition worldwide and
are an especially important component of food security in developing countries
as exemplified by potatoes and yams. The trait of tuber production has evolved
multiple times throughout the history of flowering plants. Based on studies in
potato, the signals to make tubers are related to genes involved in flowering
including genes that sense daylength and genes that control the 24-hour daily
rhythm of all organisms, suggesting that the origin of tubers is an ancient
trait. This project will employ state-of-the art technologies in genome biology
to provide new insights into the mechanisms of tuber development and evolution
and help to train the next generation of scientists in computational methods. In
addition, the project will demonstrate the importance of tuber crops in food
security through educational activities with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origin and evolution of novel
complex traits is a fundamental goal in biology. Tubers, below-ground storage
organs derived from stems, provide significant calories and nutrition worldwide
and are an especially important component of food security in developing
countries as exemplified by potato, yam, oca, kaffir potato, ulluco and mashua.
The trait of tuber production has evolved multiple times throughout the history
of angiosperms across taxa separated by ~130 million years of evolution.
Although it has long been hypothesized, only within the last decade have studies
demonstrated that many novel traits are encoded by pre-existing genes and
regulatory networks. This project will employ an integrated comparative genomics
approach in which multiple species-pairs that have evolved the ability to
produce alternative reproductive structures (i.e., tuber) will enable
identification of "core" genes, sets of interacting pathways, and encoded
processes necessary for tuber production. Models for tuberization will be
validated using functional genomics approaches and experimental data used to
refine models of tuber development. This project will train students in
computational plant biology and data science to address gaps in the scientific
workforce. In addition, this project will mentor under-represented groups in
science research through participation in the Michigan State University National
Migrant Scholars Internship Initiative and engage the lay public in the
importance of tuber crops in food security through activities with the Michigan
State University 4-H Children?s Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.