* 2140175
* Towards Provable Security of Real-world Servers: Where Online Learning Meets Server Retrofitting
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Peng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2025
* USD 425,000.00

Servers located in enterprises (e.g. private data centers and public cloud data
centers) play a critical role in human society. However, real-world servers are
plagued by various security vulnerabilities. Memory overwrite and over-read
vulnerabilities are among the most dangerous of the known vulnerabilities. They
are the root causes for a variety of serious real-world server attacks. Cyber-
defenses are broadly deployed to protect real-world servers from these
cyberattacks. However, it is widely recognized in the cybersecurity community
that there is no silver bullet. Moreover, the existing cyber-defenses (e.g.
patching) are still very limited in handling the so-called zero-day
vulnerabilities. Furthermore, a fundamental limitation is that the widely
deployed real-world defenses usually do not provide provable guarantees. This
project aims to develop online learning-based adaptive cyber defenses, which are
expected to be able to provide provable guarantees for real-world servers. The
developed defenses will present adversaries with optimized dynamically changing
attack surfaces, thereby significantly increasing uncertainty and complexity
that adversaries would need to overcome in order to succeed. These measures are
expected to substantially improve adaptive and autonomous defense capabilities
of real-world servers against zero-day attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new co-design framework to protect data centers against
(i) stochastic attacks through dynamic runtime environments; (ii) intelligent
strategic attacks through dynamic platforms; and (iii) multi-stage attacks
through dynamic networks. The co-design framework will involve three intertwined
components: newly synthesized mathematical models, online learning-based defense
algorithms and server retrofitting. In particular, the mathematical models will
be of high-fidelity and also analytically tractable to allow online learning to
provide provable guarantees. On the other hand, the deviations of the
mathematical models from real-world servers will be bridged by server
retrofitting. In each proposed mathematical model, a utility function can be
easily evaluated by deployed preliminary defenses and will provide necessary
feedback to perform online learning, and on the other hand, it properly reflects
the cost-effectiveness of defenses. Online learning algorithms are developed to
tackle the unique challenges of computer security (e.g., detection delays,
detection inaccuracies, strategic attacks, unknown system states and unknown
exploit likelihoods). The most suitable server retrofitting will be customized
to meet the assumptions of the mathematical models. Further, the three
intertwined components will be integrated into real defenses. The proposed
research is interdisciplinary and integrates technical tools from machine
learning, game theory, control theory and cybersecurity. Hackathon events will
be held to inspire studentsâ€™ engagement in research on machine learning and
cybersecurity. All the research results will be made available to industrial
stakeholders, federal government agencies and the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.