* 2140139
* NSF Workshop on State-of-the-Art and Challenges in Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Saurabh Bagchi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Society depends on the interconnection of systems including hardware and
software. They make up the built environment and the infrastructure that we
depend upon. Today’s systems are subject to an increasing number of hazards and
disasters both natural or manmade often leading to failures that have major
impact on society. We want to know how to design systems to avoid such failures
and how to bounce back quickly if such failures occur. &lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will reflect on the current state-of-art and state-of-practice for the above two
questions. It will then bring out the research and the translational challenges
to make our infrastructures truly resilient. This workshop will be hosted in a
hybrid mode, with both in-person and virtual participation. The workshop will
bring together external thought and action leaders in the area of resilient
systems, drawn from universities, federal laboratories, and commercial
organizations and providing multi-disciplinary and convergent perspectives. The
workshop will be broad-based considering areas of resilient and adaptive
cyberinfrastructures, resilient cyber-physical systems, and scientific
foundations of resilient socio-technical systems. The workshop will be hosted by
Purdue’s Center for Resilient Infrastructures, Systems, and Processes and will
address three broad technical themes. An objective is to develop technology for
research concepts suitable for a near-term (1-5 year) and mid-term (5-10 years)
considering theoretical and practical advancements in
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall goal is to answer: 1. How can
autonomous systems be made more resilient? This will include discussion of human
on/in-the-loop autonomy; 2. How to build in probabilistic guarantees in our CPS
operations? We want to provide such guarantees even when the systems are subject
to perturbations, both anticipated and unanticipated; and 3. How can we make our
systems resilient to black swan events? As we are living through one such, we
are fast accumulating a set of best principles and practices to make our
computing systems and socio-technical systems resilient to such events. Our
discussion will bring out principles that will aid societies to bounce back from
such events. The workshop will unify these and lay out ideas for further
development. The workshop will provide significant societal benefits. The topic
is timely and relevant to challenges to our systems through natural disasters
and cyberattacks. Workshop results will be published online and open to the
broad community of researchers. Results will be disseminated through rich
multimedia material in addition to the traditional method of scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.