* 2140398
* Collaborative Research: Neogene history of mass transport deposits offshore North Carolina
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Anne Becel, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 577,548.00

Submarine landslides are a common seafloor feature of the North Atlantic passive
margin on both sides of the ocean; their presence on the Eastern North American
Margin is the rule rather than the exception. They threaten large population
centers along these coasts with possible tsunamis, and move material from the
shallow to the deep sea during margin evolution. Despite their high prevalence
on passive margins and in particular, on the U.S. east coast, very little about
their causes, mechanical behavior, and frequency is understood, and their role
in the development of the passive margin as it exists today has not been
examined. This project will collect new seismic data with the R/V Marcus
Langseth to examine large submarine landslide behavior over the past 23 million
years in a region offshore North Carolina that has experienced large, recent
submarine landslides. Sediment cores will be retrieved from the Cape Fear Slide,
which is the most recent large submarine landslide in the area and still
expressed on the seafloor. The cores will provide insights into pre-conditioning
and triggering mechanisms. This study will improve understanding of how slope
failures operate through time and the manner in which past events might
influence subsequent events, and will provide training and international
collaboration opportunities for three graduate students and three early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collect high-resolution
multichannel seismic data and piston cores on the continental rise and slope in
the vicinity of the Cape Fear submarine landslide offshore North Carolina. These
data will be used to examine the interplay between margin topography, fluid and
heat flow, pore pressure, and submarine mass transport deposits. Mass transport
deposits, bottom-simulating reflections, and stratigraphic sequences in the Cape
Fear region will be seismically imaged. The new high-resolution seismic data
will be combined with existing seismic and borehole data to interpret number of
events, timing, source areas, volumes, areal extent and runout length, and
bounding surfaces of mass transport deposits. The seismic data will be used to
assess and model internal characteristics of mass transport deposits and
surrounding sediments, including deformation style, present-day pore pressure
and temperature distribution, and the presence of gas. This project consists of
acquiring 3843 km of 2D high-resolution multichannel seismic data, along with
bathymetry, subbottom profiler, and water column data. Seven piston and seven
gravity cores will be collected in locations associated with seeps or bottom-
simulating reflections. Geotechnical and pore fluid chemical analyses will be
performed. The processed seismic data will be interpreted for stratigraphic age
control, areal extent, and volume of mass transport deposits. Internal
deformation of mass transport deposits will be examined through seismic
attribute analysis. Sediment physical properties will be derived using full
waveform inversion and quantitative models of conditions for failure will be
developed. The results of this project will be relevant to understanding
submarine landslides dynamics on passive margins with similar characteristics
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.