* 2140552
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: A Unified Prefetch Framework for Approximation-Tolerant Interactive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ravi Netravali, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Interactivity is a core requirement for a wide range of user-facing
applications, including data visualizations, web search and games. These user-
facing, interactive apps must achieve low latency responses in order to satisfy
users, which cannot always be met by waiting for a user's decision before
reacting. An alternative is to pre-fetch data in anticipation of users' choices.
There are several limitations to existing uses of prefetching: (1) it is often
developed in an adhoc way for each application, and does not consider all
optimization aspects, and (2) they do not explicitly take advantage of the
approximation tolerant nature of many interactive applications. Approximation
tolerance means that users prefer fast but approximated, over fully correct but
slow, results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs a General Prefetching
Framework called GPF that explicitly decouples prediction and scheduling from
the client application. A configurable prediction model estimates the likelihood
of requests at different future time intervals, and a general scheduler uses
these predictions to decide which requests to send to the client. This framework
is novel in several ways: (1) rather than explicit requests, the client
occasionally offers predictions to the scheduler, which considers network and
resource conditions when pushing results to the client, (2) GPF exploits
application tolerance to send partial results for a massive number of candidate
requests, rather than full results for a few requests, and (3) GPF dynamically
shifts placement of the predictor and scheduler computation on the client or
server based on latency, network, and resource
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supporting research brings together
performance and scheduling ideas from the networking community with
optimization, storage, and interaction ideas from the database and visualization
communities. GPF will integrate and eliminate user-perceived application latency
in applications across multiple domains, including data visualization, media
players, webpage navigation, vehicular control, and games. The multidisciplinary
research (networking, information visualization, and database systems) will be
integrated into courses on data science, databases, networking, and
visualization. Software will be open sourced, and will have significant, long-
term impact on the way interactive applications are developed. The outcomes of
the research and education material will be disseminated via workshops,
publications, and open-source repositories. These education and outreach plans
will further increase participation in this multidisciplinary topic that will
lead to the continuing advancement of big data visualization techniques, network
scheduling and prioritization designs, and ultimately benefit the increasing
number of domains that rely on, or demand, interactive applications to make time
critical decisions and discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.