* 2140503
* I-Corps: Microscale Selective Laser Sintering Process
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Michael Cullinan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
fabrication of high-density, high-aspect-ratio, freeform 3-dimentional (3D_
microscale interconnect structures at rates up to three times faster than
existing technologies. This new commercial capability may have far-reaching
implications due to the significant demand for new advanced packaging
technologies for integrated circuits. The microscale, selective, laser sintering
system has the potential to lower the cost of consumer and business facing
products such as cloud web services and mobile computing while enabling new
high-performance embedded applications such as self-driving vehicle technology,
radiation-hard and high-acceleration sensing, and internet-connected medical
devices. This technology may also potentially enable new packaging architectures
not possible using current state-of-the-art fabrication techniques, increasing
the design freedom of integrated circuit architects and enabling new
technologies and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further
develops a microscale selective sintering process. In this process a layer of
nanoparticle ink is coated using a slot-die coater and shuttled to the optical
subsystem using a long-range custom air-bearing stage. There, a laser is focused
through a digital micromirror device to sinter the nanoparticles into the
desired pattern. After the first layer is sintered, the air-bearing stage
translates the substrate back under the coater for the deposition of the next
layer. The process of deposition, transfer and sintering is then repeated,
building the 3D part. The research focuses on improving the current capabilities
of the subsystems within the proof-of-concept prototype tool and the developing
computational models along with materials/thermal measurements to understand the
nanoscale physics within the microscale selective sintering process. Previous
work has demonstrated fabrication of 3D metal structures with feature sizes of
less than 5 microns and aspect ratios of greater than 20 to
1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.