* 2140694
* PFI-TT:  Novel Silicon Photovoltaics for Efficient and Low-cost Conversion of Heat to Electricity
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Stephen Forrest, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve storage of energy created
by solar cells. photovoltaics. The proposed technology is designed for use in
utility-scale stationary electricity storage systems, or thermal batteries, with
a novel systems architecture. This project will demonstrate a low-cost approach
to energy storage using earth-abundant storage materials and able to be deployed
virtually anywhere in the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
advances a cost-effective form of photovoltaic cell with a novel architecture.
This system utilizes incident thermal radiation with near-perfect efficiency.
The objective of the project is to design and demonstrate a scalable airbridge
silicon thermophotovoltaic (TPV) technology that achieves sufficiently high
efficiencies to enable the deployment of thermal batteries. The project will
also explore the integration of the TPV cells with high-temperature thermal
storage media to provide design guidelines for future system-level demonstration
projects. Overall, the proposed project will provide a more complete
understanding of how the airbridge architecture can enable an energy system that
provides long-duration energy storage at a significantly lower cost than
existing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.