* 2140478
* Capacity: Biological Collections: Securing and Sharing  Biocultural Diversity Collections at The New York Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michael Balick, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 424,728.00

Plants and traditional knowledge about plants are important elements of all
cultures, ranging from crops and medicines, to religious practices, and the
sustainable management of ecosystem services. One way that cultural knowledge
about plants is preserved for future generations is through mutually beneficial
ethnobotanical research which often depends on the creation and preservation of
herbarium specimens. In this project, The New York Botanical Garden will enhance
curation of 11,000 specimens, physically and digitally securing and increasing
access to them, linking specimen data and publications to other objects that
document biological and cultural knowledge. These valuable collections serve as
vouchered primary data for biocultural research, and serve as baseline data for
future comparisons, as the species and knowledge they document are important
components of interconnected societal and ecological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biocultural diversity is a concept that emphasizes
the mutual connections between biodiversity and cultural knowledge, beliefs, and
practices associated with biodiversity. As global environments and human
cultures become ever more connected and homogenized, biocultural diversity faces
threats, with such knowledge ultimately facing extinction if action is not taken
to preserve and share it. Therefore, the collections and data that capture
biocultural diversity are becoming ever more important. The documentation and
preservation of biocultural diversity is an essential means of safeguarding
traditional knowledge to solve future ecological challenges, support resilience
and local livelihoods, and help Indigenous and other traditional peoples
maintain food sovereignty. In addition to securing these specimens and their
assoicated data, this project will help establish global standards that will be
widely implemented across institutions that hold biocultural collections, while
introducing students, typically from groups underrepresented in science, to data
science methods using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), ethnobotany, and
conservation assessment. This project will augment how The New York Botanical
Garden shares these cultural resources and their data to the public, including
an expanded search feature for 23,000 vernacular names, and increased public-
oriented digital content. Specimen data resulting from this project will be
shared and accessible to all through iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.