* 2141798
* A New Generation of Broadly Accessible Remote Engineering Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Denise Wilson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2024
* USD 622,388.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing a new
generation of remote engineering labs that support underserved communities and
schools with limited resources. Lessons learned during the COVID-19 crisis have
helped educators rethink teaching practices that are sustainable and safe after
the pandemic era. Offering hands-on engineering labs in off-campus settings has
presented significant challenges to educators. By taking advantage of advances
in cloud computing, implementing a remote hardware laboratory will allow
students to experience a full-fledged remote experience without compromising
what they could have learned and accomplished if they were physically present in
the lab. This project will advance the potential of using remote laboratories
for electrical and computer engineering students in embedded computing and
wireless communications courses. The proposed work is expected to allow
educators and institutions to rethink the delivery of hands-on engineering labs
via a cost-effective, broadly accessible, and equitable solution. The complete
remote lab solution, including hardware and software, has significance to
underprivileged universities and K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projectâ€™s goal is to develop a remote computing and wireless communication
laboratory based on field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and software defined
radio (SDR) platforms; provide a full technical evaluation of remote solutions;
and perform a comprehensive assessment of student learning and engagement in
remote settings for these engineering technologies. The scope of the work is
scalable, and the open-source hardware and software toolkit that will be
developed can be deployed at other institutions, as well as K-12 and underserved
community settings, to provide access to industry-grade hardware to all
students. The sustainability plan includes a scalable solution that allows
universities to pool their individual remote labs together to further increase
access and decrease equipment costs and foster further collaboration among
institutions by sharing resources and pedagogical content. The open-source
remote labs will be disseminated via a highly modular repository (GitHub), and
partnerships between schools will be encouraged to improve course materials,
perform version control, pull requests, provide issue tracking, and use the
course materials at their universities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.