* 2141732
* State Response to Climate Instability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Elizabeth Minor, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2027
* USD 304,252.00

An international team will investigate how an ancient community adapted their
social relationships and subsistence strategies to overcome disappearing water
resources and increasing economic pressures during a period of early state
formation. The researchers seek to understand how communities come together to
negotiate socially complex relationships in order to overcome outside pressures,
such as adverse climate conditions and demand from regional trade networks. The
archaeological framework will provide in-depth case studies that tell the story
of how community members adapt their daily lives within these changing
circumstances, and how their choices to collaborate or compete with the
environment affect the trajectory of their survival. Settlement archaeology, in
particular, gives insight through a detailed, intersectional record of how
people constructed their built landscape through agriculture, animal husbandry,
tool and craft production, and trade networks. Archaeological research offers a
complimentary benefit of building modern community relationships, a top priority
for this project, where neighboring stakeholders will be consulted in the
development and interpretation of the research process. This project will center
the relevancy of the research outputs by ensuring the full incorporation of
modern community members’ voices through research-focused input meetings,
ethnographic interviews about analogous current daily-life practices, and
participation in archaeological interpretation outcomes. The researchers will
undertake special effort to encourage the full participation of local women, who
are often excluded in archaeological work. This will be achieved by building
collaborative training resources produced by the international majority-women
excavation team and archaeology undergraduate students from the grant's managing
institution, a historically-women’s college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
international team of experts will analyze complementary lines of evidence:
architectural developments, material culture production, pottery design and
exchange, use of cultivated and wild plants, domesticated livestock and hunting,
supported by geo- and hydro-archaeological models of environmental conditions.
Interpretation will focus on the agency-based active resilience of ancient
community members, rather than a passive adaptation to increasingly arid
conditions in the region. The broader impact of this project will include open-
access publication of the detailed archaeological and ecofact sequence data to
allow for regional comparative studies. Collaboration with international
societies will create shared approaches to community based participatory
archaeology that can be successfully applied globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.