* 2141966
* CAREER: Correlations, responses and dynamics of interacting topological matter
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Biao Lian, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2027
* USD 274,867.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education to study novel
phenomena and dynamical properties of topological states of strongly interacting
electrons in materials. Topological states are a class of phases of matter which
show properties that are robust against any local changes of the material, such
as creating vacancies (missing atoms). An example is the topological insulator,
which is insulating in the bulk, but has protected conducting electrons on its
surface or edge. In contrast, a trivial insulator is insulating in both bulk and
surface or edge. Certain topological states are particularly interesting as they
host topological excited states which may be applied in quantum computation and
information technologies. However, such topological states may only arise when
electrons are strongly interacting and are difficult to
realize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims at theoretically predicting and
identifying such strongly interacting topological states in various materials.
Promising systems include the so-called moiré materials which are engineered by
stacking two-dimensional atomically thin materials at a relative twist angle,
and two-dimensional metals in strong magnetic fields. The other focus of this
research is to investigate the quantum dynamical evolutions of topological
excited states in the interacting topological states, which are crucial for
applications in quantum computation. Both analytical and numerical methods will
be employed for these studies. The proposed research will advance our
understanding and the technological applications of topological
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will incorporate educational
activities for undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will organize
workshops and seminars with the support of the Princeton Center for Theoretical
Science, providing the students opportunities to learn about topics at the
forefront of condensed matter physics. The award will also contain outreach
activities, including maintaining a group website to disseminate the team’s
latest research to the non-scientific community, giving public lectures, and
creating artworks bridging science and the broader interests of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports theoretical research and education to investigate the correlated
phenomena, topological responses and dynamics of interacting topological states,
dominantly in low-dimensional quantum systems, and to explore their applications
in quantum information. The PI will develop analytical models, perturbative and
nonperturbative methods, and many-body numerical computations to perform the
research. This research will focus on four directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Two-dimensional moiré systems from stacking and twisting of graphene and other
layered materials. The PI will investigate the mechanism and topology of the
correlated phases and superconductivity under Coulomb and electron-phonon
interactions, and predict their experimental signatures. An important goal is to
search for topological superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Competing
phases in fractional quantum Hall systems. The PI will study the effective
interactions between composite fermions or bosons from realistic Coulomb
interactions between electrons, to investigate the origin of different
fractional quantum Hall states observed in GaAs and graphene, and the competing
ground states at half-odd integer Landau level
fillings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) The mode reconstruction, quantum coherence,
chaos and dynamics of generic interacting topological edge states and bulk
anyons of two-dimensional topological matter, and the effects of interaction on
the edge state interferometers. These studies will be further applied to propose
quantum information devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) The interaction effects
and responses in three-dimensional topological phases of matter with defects and
disorder, including the interaction induced three-dimensional quantum Hall
effect, axion insulators and generic topological crystalline states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will incorporate educational activities for
undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will organize workshops and seminars
with the support of the Princeton Center for Theoretical Science, providing the
students opportunities to learn about topics at the forefront of condensed
matter physics. The award will also contain outreach activities, including
maintaining a group website to disseminate the team’s latest research to the
non-scientific community, giving public lectures, and creating artworks bridging
science and the broader interests of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.