* 2141243
* EAR-Climate: Acquisition of hydrometric equipment to support undergraduate training and research on glacier lake outburst floods in southeast Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 77,687.00

As glaciers melt each summer and recede over the years due to the warming
climate, the chemical nature of their meltwater changes. Studying the physical
and chemical characteristics of the meltwater released from glaciers is
important because it directly affects the quality of downstream lakes, streams,
and coastal marine zones. The Coastal Mountains of southeast Alaska are
experiencing some of the highest glacial melt rates on Earth. As the glaciers
shrink, they leave behind newly formed landscapes and waterbodies such as lakes
collecting water in front of the glacier (proglacial lakes) and lakes on the
edges of glaciers that are dammed by the glacier ice (glacially dammed lakes).
Such lakes can trap sediment, nutrients, carbon, and other elements, preventing
them from moving downstream. Additionally, glacially dammed lakes can suddenly
release massive outbursts of water if their ice dam fails, creating flooding
hazards and sending a surge of sediment and dissolved chemicals downstream. With
thousands of glaciers currently receding in Alaska, it is critical to
characterize and quantify the ongoing changes in glacierized watersheds and to
better understand their ecological impacts. We will track the quantity and
quality of water and sediment moving through and out of a glacially dammed lake
and a proglacial lake in southeast Alaska using the acoustic doppler velocimeter
and other equipment acquired through this project. In doing so, we will involve
and train undergraduate students from the University of Alaska Southeast and the
local high school, helping to equip the next generation of earth scientists with
the skills and tools they need to address glacier change, hydrologic dynamics,
Earth surface processes, and natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
change has triggered glaciers in the Coastal Mountain of Alaska to recede at
some of the highest rates on Earth. Increased glacier mass loss is causing the
growth of (1) proglacial lakes that can dramatically alter sediment and chemical
export from watersheds and of (2) glacially-dammed lakes, which can produce
hazardous glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs) and release a large pulse of
biogeochemical elements and sediment to downstream ecosystems. Understanding the
storage and release of carbon, water, sediment, and metals such as mercury in
and through these glacier-associated lakes is important for explaining how
glacier retreat and ensuing landscape change will affect current and future
chemical and sediment fluxes. As warming continues and glaciers further
diminish, the changing physical and chemical outputs from glaciated watersheds
will have implications for recipient aquatic ecosystems, including food web
structure and productivity, availability of contaminants, organic carbon burial
in coastal sediments, CO2 outgassing to the atmosphere, and the seasonal timing
and intensity of coastal ocean acidification. In this project, we will monitor
the hydrometric impacts of glacial change in southeast Alaska by acquiring an
Accoustic Doppler Velocity meter, water quality sondes, and a multi-probe water
quality meter for use in the glacierized Mendenhall watershed in Juneau, Alaska.
The hydrometric instruments will be used to train undergraduate students through
class labs and research assistantships at the University of Alaska Southeast,
which is a small, Alaska-native serving, undergraduate university, and to engage
local high school students. The instruments will allow us to further develop a
research program aimed at understanding the dynamics and consequences of glacier
melt and GLOFs on sediment and chemical export to the highly productive coastal
watersheds of southeast Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.