* 2141412
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Culturally-Responsive Measures and Comparisons to Strengthen Developmental Models of Reasoning and Executive Function
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lucia Alcala, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 144,497.00

Training children to reason and handle cognitive challenges in the midst of
action is a key developmental goal in 21st century society, yet current
approaches to training children’s thinking tend to undervalue diversity in the
ways that families and life experiences foster growth. This project in
particular considers the often complex and high effort cognitive activities that
many first and second-generation Latinx youth take on (e.g. managing home chores
that require multi-step solutions and attention to complicated constraints), and
aims to explore how these practices may relate to more traditional models of
Executive Functions (EFs), the set of shared cognitive resources believed to
underpin educational and reasoning skills through the ability to manage and
control attention. Importantly, the project aims to refine the developmental
field’s theories of what constitute high leverage practices for growing EF
skills to include meaningful management and participation in tasks with real-
world consequences. If successful, this would suggest the need for a
transformative shift away from training models centering on developing skills
through repetitive use of cognitively taxing, abstract reasoning and attention
tasks, generally on a computer, and toward intentionally providing children with
responsibilities and consequential participation in everyday social and cultural
practices. This might be a scalable, feasible approach to strengthen children’s
cognitive EF resources through use in everyday reasoning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests concerns that extant developmental
models of Reasoning and Executive Functions do not capture the range of
socialization practices that may train and shape expression of EFs in everyday
usage. Mixed method data collection will be administered to first and second
generation Latinx children and non-immigrant Euro-American children, including
1) EF and reasoning skill measurement using both traditional and newly
developed, culturally responsive tasks, 2) surveys of children’s everyday
responsibilities and autonomous activities, and 3) videotaped interviews and
structured scenarios discussed together by a primary caregiver and
child.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Developmental
Sciences Program and the Science of Broadening Participation
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.