* 2141289
* Collaborative Research: The Angry Crowd Bias: Social, Cognitive, and Perceptual Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sarah Lamer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 272,286.00

Most people believe they see the world and those around them accurately.
However, the way people initially perceive others is often inaccurate and
systematically biased towards negative perceptions. For example, when first
exposed to faces that are hard to see or that have subtle expressions, people
report that these faces look threatening (even when they are not). This project
examines a bias to judge unfamiliar others in crowds as being angry. This
research tests whether a perceiver's bias to judge others as angry depends on
the others' race and gender, whether the others are alone or in a crowd, and the
perceiver's own beliefs about race and gender. Racial and gender bias in crowd
perception is not simply an academic issue. Crowds have been at the center stage
of protest and social unrest moments that are causing vastly divergent
interpretations of current events. This project reveals who may be most
susceptible to negative crowd biases, the underlying visual and cognitive
process that cause biased judgments, and the malleability of these biases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes state-of-the-art methods and
statistical tools to examine visual attention to faces, and bias and accuracy in
emotion judgments (specifically, eye-tracking data, signal detection methods,
and drift-diffusion modeling). The approach makes it possible to track visual
patterns – for example, which faces people look at first in a crowd, how long
they look at each face, whether they ignore anyone, whether faces appear alone
or in a crowd – all of which are likely to be affected by the racial and gender
features of the faces. Newly-developed materials include an extensive set of
computer-generated faces that have been designed with precise variations in
gender and racial features. Tracking visual patterns and judgements of these
computer-generated faces can establish at what point, for whom, and why bias
occurs for crowd perception. Additional materials include a representative set
of crowd images from real-life settings (i.e., published in popular news
sources), which help to advance an understanding of how people perceive and
react to crowds they typically encounter as part of their daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.