* 2141091
* PFI-TT: Novel Vortex-Flow Driven Process for Producing Calcium and Magnesium Carbonates Using Anthropogenic CO2
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Yong Joo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to produce new products for filler
materials and in construction materials. The proposed technology enables
industries emitting CO2 and producing alkaline industrial residues to capture
and convert their emissions into commercially useful and stable products. It
will replace the mining of carbonate materials with engineered products, meeting
the growing demand for green construction materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will lead to the development of an innovative low-temperature
approach to convert captured CO2 emissions into calcium and magnesium carbonates
with regular particle size distributions. Currently there is no process in
industry that integrates CO2 capture and regeneration via solid carbonate
formation with regular pore size distributions. The proposed technology is an
energy-efficient alternative to conventional thermally driven energy-intensive
grinding approaches. The project will address challenges associated with the low
solubility of CO2 by harnessing regenerable solvents, such as sodium glycinate.
As an alternative to thermal regeneration of solvents, the CO2-loaded solvents
are chemically regenerated using calcium and magnesium bearing materials that
react with CO2 to produce inorganic carbonates and regenerate the solvents. The
chemical regeneration of solvents at 50-75 °C via solid carbonate formation is
significantly lower compared to conventional thermal regeneration of solvents
which occurs above 90 °C. Calcium and magnesium carbonates with well-ordered
particle size distributions are realized using turbulent vortices in a Taylor-
Couette reactor customized for these studies. The research will advance
fundamental aspects of reactor engineering, tuning of multiphase chemical
interactions, and practical challenges of scalable
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.