* 2141681
* Collaborative Research: Using a Self-Guided Online Intervention to Address Student Fear of Negative Evaluation in Active Learning Undergraduate Biology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Katelyn Cooper, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 12/31/2024
* USD 130,214.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing the understanding
of how to equip undergraduates with the skills to cope with fear of negative
evaluation. Negative evaluation is defined as a sense of dread associated with
being unfavorably evaluated while participating in a social situation.
Increasingly, college biology courses are transitioning from traditional
lecture-based learning to active learning. In active learning classrooms,
students engage in activities and discussions in class. However, students’ fear
of negative evaluation can negatively impact their learning in active learning
courses. This project will develop a brief, self-guided online intervention
designed to help undergraduate students productively cope with fear of negative
evaluation within the context of active learning biology courses. Equipping
students with skills to cope with fear of negative evaluation via this free
online intervention has potential to change who is participating in active
learning classrooms and whose voices are heard in science. The effectiveness of
the intervention will be evaluated by studying its impact on student fear of
negative evaluation, performance, and persistence in college biology. Project
outcomes are intended to enhance students’ experiences and performance in active
learning biology courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop and evaluate a brief online Single-Session Intervention (SSI) to help
undergraduates cope with fear of negative evaluation in the context of social
evaluative situations encountered in active learning biology courses. The self-
guided SSI developed in this project will be a brief (&lt; 30 minute) online
activity comprised of evidence-based program components drawn from research in
clinical, social, and educational psychology. The SSI will be designed for both
scalability and accessibility. It will be easy to administer, independent of the
instructor, freely available, and delivered to students at scale. To assess the
impact of the SSI, the research team will conduct a large, randomized controlled
trial across multiple introductory biology courses at one large diverse and non-
selective institution. The randomized controlled trail will assess the impact of
the SSI on (1) student fear of negative evaluation and other affective outcomes,
(2) student performance outcomes, and (3) student persistence outcomes. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.