* 2141358
* Collaborative Research: Carbon Levels at the Arctic Salinity-Stratified Sea Ice Edge (CLASSSIE)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 02/28/2025
* USD 321,184.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Ocean covers the North Pole and its surface is
frozen each winter with a layer of sea ice that can be 1-3 meters thick. When
seawater freezes, the ice expels the salt so that the layer of ice is composed
mostly of freshwater. Therefore, when the sea ice melts in summer, it creates a
thin layer of freshwater that floats on the saltier seawater beneath it.
Traditional oceanographic measurements rarely measure this fresh layer because
ships typically collect data from a depth of about 5 m. Yet, these freshwater
lenses may play a key role influencing the atmosphere-ocean exchange of gases,
including carbon dioxide, the principal gas responsible for global warming and
the loss of nearly half of the summertime sea ice coverage of the Arctic Ocean.
The Arctic Ocean is thought to absorb about 10% of the human emissions of carbon
dioxide. Still, this number is highly uncertain, owing partly to the scarcity of
observations at the very surface. This project aims to address that source of
uncertainty by sampling the freshwater layer in the Beaufort Sea, both aboard a
Research Vessel and on an autonomous surface platform called Wave Glider. We
will compare the chemistry of the fresh layer to the saltier water just beneath
it and use these data to correct estimates of carbon dioxide uptake for this
previously-unmeasured impact across the entire portion of the Arctic that
experiences seasonal sea ice melt, an area up to 2.5 times the size of Texas.
Better estimates of ocean carbon uptake help us better understand the global
carbon budget and monitor efforts to slow climate change. Project scientists
will train a Ph.D. student and work with science communication experts at URI’s
Metcalf Institute to engage journalists and public audiences in Arctic Ocean
science through a webinar series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;The
Arctic Ocean takes up about 10% of the carbon dioxide that humans emit, which
helps diminish the effects of climate change. However, our knowledge about the
Arctic Ocean carbon sink is uncertain due to the number of observations and how
they are collected. The Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else on Earth,
leading to dramatic changes in sea ice cover. The fresher meltwater layer left
behind by the retreating sea ice typically lasts for 1 to 5 weeks. It has
different carbon dioxide levels than the water just a few meters deeper, where
ships generally have sampled due to the locations of their water intakes.
Because the uptake of carbon by the ocean is determined by the carbon dioxide
levels right at the surface, this difference between the meltwater and what is
typically sampled by ships requires a correction to these ship-based
measurements. This correction will affect the carbon sink over an area of the
seasonally ice-free Arctic Ocean covering 0.35 to 1.75 million km2 (an area up
to 2.5 times larger than Texas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon Levels at the
Arctic Salinity–Stratified Sea Ice Edge (CLASSSIE) is a project to measure key
carbon system parameters in the marginal ice zone of the Beaufort Sea. The
project will collaborate with scientists funded by the NASA Physical
Oceanography program in a project called Salinity and Stratification at the Sea
Ice Edge (SASSIE). SASSIE will include measurements from a ship and autonomous
surface vehicles called Wave Gliders. CLASSSIE will make carbon measurements in
and under the meltwater layer from the ship and do the same from one of the Wave
Gliders. From these measurements, CLASSSIE will determine a relationship between
salinity and carbon dioxide levels for an ocean with meltwater input. Using that
empirical relationship between salinity and carbon dioxide levels, a correction
in the meltwater layer will be proposed and combined with meltwater layer
statistics from a computer model to produce a modified map of Arctic Ocean
carbon dioxide levels. Finally, a revised estimate of the Arctic Ocean carbon
sink will be created with the modified map. Refining estimates of the Arctic
Ocean carbon sink will help constrain the global carbon budget, which is crucial
to monitoring climate change mitigation. The project will train a Ph.D. student.
CLASSSIE will also work with the Metcalf Institute at URI to develop a four-part
webinar series to engage journalists, public audiences, and interested
researchers in Arctic Ocean science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.