* 2141693
* CAREER: From clock genes to phenotype: organismal response to artificial light at night
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Jenny Ouyang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2027
* USD 484,832.00

Currently, over 65% of the world’s population live under light pollution, with
artificial light raising night sky luminance by over 10% of natural lighting
levels. By 2025, over 80% of the world’s population will live under light
polluted skies, which raises concern for human and wildlife wellbeing. This
project will investigate how different colors of night lighting affect the
health and behavioral rhythms of wild birds. It will also test how night light
affects avian offspring. Lastly, an integrated educational plan seeks to train
the next generation of young scientists. The proposed project will: 1) provide
tangible outcomes through outreach to the community, 2) provide critical
information for addressing light pollution, and 3) contribute significant
educational outcomes, particularly for underrepresented students. Project
results will enhance scientific and technological understanding by converting
light data into the index used by light engineers, which will inform engineers
about artificial light sources that are most eco-friendly. In turn, the research
will benefit society by informing public policy on the biological effects of
light pollution. The PI will collaborate with Philips lighting company to
develop light boxes as an educational tool for elementary schools. Additionally,
the education plan contains a partnership with Sierra Nevada Journeys to develop
an “ALAN (artificial light at night) and clocks” station for family STEM nights,
reaching a broader audience of families, teachers, and administrators. Together,
the findings of this project and the educational programs cohesively tackle an
environmental pressure that is of growing societal and scientific
concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cycles of light are a fundamental component of
natural environments, but over the last half century, electric lighting has
inundated the world with ALAN. ALAN profoundly disrupts the temporal
organization of light cycles, and the growing diversity of electric lights also
provides light with spectra different from any natural light. It is clear from
decades of research that light is the most important time cue for the regulation
of circadian rhythms. Growing evidence also suggests that light pollution causes
physiological disruption and pathology. However, the molecular mechanisms that
cause these downstream effects remain unclear. This project will test whether
short-wavelength ALAN reduces fitness through circadian disruption. The
objectives of this proposal are to 1) evaluate whether observed physiological
and behavioral effects of ALAN are due to changes in the central and peripheral
clock, 2) identify effects on reproductive fitness and offspring development,
and 3) engage the next generation of young scientists through educational tools
and mentoring. We will combine field and laboratory experiments to test the
effects of nocturnal lighting with modified spectra on behavior, physiology,
reproduction, and gene expression. By uncovering the mechanisms underlying
responses to artificial light, we will be able to measure, predict and
ameliorate potential harmful effects of light pollution, especially because the
disruptive effects vary depending on the spectral composition of light. Merging
genetic, mechanistic, and behavioral approaches is a way forward to uncover the
proximate as well as ultimate consequences of light
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Integrative
Ecological Physiology Program, the Behavioral Systems Cluster, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.