* 2141883
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The evolution of early hominin locomotor anatomy
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* David Strait, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 26,037.00

Bipedalism is the ability to habitually stand and walk upright on two legs and
is one of the defining features of humans. Consequently, our understanding of
human evolution depends on reconstructing how and why bipedalism evolved. This
doctoral dissertation research project uses information about the “family tree”
of extinct human species to reconstruct how, when, and why skeletal features
that are critical for bipedalism evolved. This reconstruction allows the project
investigators to test key hypotheses about human origins, including those
concerning the role that environmental factors may have played in shaping our
evolutionary history. This study investigates how ecological conditions have
influenced human evolution, a line of inquiry that is particularly important in
the context of global climate change. This project also supports the research of
an early career female scientist from an historically underrepresented group in
STEM and contributes to the diversity of scholarship in Biological
Anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests two hypotheses relating
patterns of character evolution to the ecological, temporal, and geographical
contexts in which skeletal traits related to hominin bipedalism evolved. The
first hypothesis addresses the patterns and processes by which bipedalism
originated and subsequently evolved, as well as the selective history that may
have shaped its evolution. The second hypothesis concerns whether the evolution
of derived locomotor traits is temporally correlated with paleoenvironmental
change and whether incorporating available paleoenvironmental data improves
evolutionary models. Patterns of character evolution are analyzed using maximum
parsimony and Bayesian inference. Random and non-random evolutionary models are
tested to examine which model is the most appropriate for explaining the
evolution of hominin locomotor anatomy. The project helps answer several
fundamental questions in paleoanthropology: How does phylogeny inform our
understanding of the evolution of postcranial traits that function mechanically
during bipedalism? What does the pattern of evolution for these traits tell us
about how, why, and when bipedalism evolved during human evolution? What are the
evolutionary forces driving the evolution of these characters? What are the
magnitude and direction of changes in morphological characters that enhance
bipedalism? How might changes in bipedal features relate to changes in the
environment? Answers to these questions substantially inform our understanding
of the evolution of one of the first and most fundamental hominin
adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.