* 2141146
* Transforming Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation: A Conference to Focus on Recruitment and Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* W. Gary Martin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,967.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by convening a conference
focused on increasing the number of higher education institutions that are
committed to improving secondary mathematics teacher recruitment and preparation
programs, ultimately improving access to high-quality mathematics instructions
for 6-12th grade students. The Association of Mathematics Teacher Educator’s
(AMTE), Get the Facts Out (GFO) taskforce, and the Mathematics Teacher Education
Partnership (MTE-P), will use this conference as a vehicle to address issues
related to recruiting diverse mathematics teacher candidates, exploring
transformational efforts relevant to teaching, and examining the role of equity
in secondary mathematics teacher recruitment and preparation. New and existing
partners will share tools and strategies for solving common challenges and
develop ideas for local program transformation efforts. Broadening participation
in who becomes mathematics teachers is vital; therefore, the project will
approach recruitment and program transformation efforts from an equity
perspective. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the 2022 MTE-P &amp; GFO Conference,
participants will engage in focused discussions about the significant work of
transforming preparation programs to more closely align with the AMTE’s
Standards for Preparing Teachers of Mathematics. The conference will be offered
in a hybrid format, with participants invited to fully engage either in-person
or online. The in-person portion will be held in the same location as the 2022
AMTE annual conference, one day prior to the AMTE conference. An evaluation
effort will examine (1) the ways in which the conference has expanded the
network of partners who focus on secondary mathematics teacher preparation
beyond the GFO and MTE-P communities, and (2) the degree to which the sessions
address equity, diversity, and inclusivity; recruitment strategies; as well as
supports for and dimensions of program transformation. Information and materials
from the MTE-P &amp; GFO Conference themes and sessions will be disseminated
through the AMTE newsletter and the Teaching Mathematics Teachers podcast. By
utilizing ideas of improvement science to support institutional transformation,
participants will impact STEM educational experiences across K–12 and post-
secondary contexts. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program support research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.