* 2141431
* Does loneliness enhance fear learning and can social support reminders ameliorate this effect?
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Naomi Eisenberger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 459,641.00

Loneliness, the distressing experience associated with feeling socially
isolated, is estimated to affect more than 3 out of 5 Americans and is on the
rise. In addition to causing emotional distress, loneliness has been linked to a
multitude of negative mental and physical health outcomes, including an
increased risk of death. One explanation for these harmful effects is that
loneliness may intensify harmful and distressing fear responses. Individuals who
experience loneliness overreact to potential threats, and they may also
experience excessive fear when learning about new threats. The proposed project
examines whether being lonely increases the strength of fear learning, the
process by which new fears are formed, which would amplify the development of
persistent fears in humans. Importantly, this research also tests methods to
alleviate these effects by preventing or reducing the development of harmful
fears among lonely individuals. By examining the relationship between loneliness
and fear learning, this work advances an understanding of a route through which
loneliness leads to negative outcomes and how to mitigate these effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides new insights on how humans
experience loneliness. Findings in the animal literature demonstrate that social
isolation causes increased anxious behavior, augmented fear learning, delayed
reductions in fear (extinction), and persistent fear responses. Additionally,
preliminary work in humans reveals that the process by which fears are reduced
is impaired in lonely individuals, but that this impairment is less pronounced
when there are reminders of social support figures. This project involves a
series of studies that examine whether: 1) loneliness augments fear learning in
humans, leading to more persistent fears, 2) images of social support figures
reduce fear learning and retention processes, and 3) the mitigating effects of
social support reminders similarly occur when experiencing physical warmth.
Physically warm objects share overlapping fear-reducing properties with social
support reminders and are more accessible for lonely individuals who do not have
supportive social bonds. The findings of this work provide important information
on loneliness. Support for the expected fear processes can suggest simple, non-
invasive, and low-cost interventions to reduce the harmful effects of being
lonely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.