* 2141433
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Phonetics of period doubling
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Yaqian Huang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 18,845.00

The human voice is an essential part of speech, serving to identify and
distinguish talkers. A fundamental question regarding human language is how
voice quality affects speech production and perception. This project approaches
the question by looking at “period doubling” in natural speech, where a voice
has a rough quality and more than one pitch. This also frequently occurs in
pathological voice and singing styles. This dissertation project provides
insight into 1) the articulatory and acoustic properties of period doubling,
compared to those of other voice qualities; 2) the interaction between perceived
pitch and voice quality in period doubling; and 3) the role of period doubling
in the perception of linguistic tone. The findings are relevant to theories of
the voice in linguistics, speech-language pathology, and music. The study of
voice quality improves our understanding of the differences between typical and
disordered voices, which can be used by clinicians to improve diagnoses and
therapy strategies for individuals with vocal pathology. A better understanding
of the distribution of period doubling in typical speech is also important to
improving pitch detection and voice synthesis technologies, which are used in
text-to-speech and automatic speech recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project serves as a probe of how people produce and make use of voice
quality when processing linguistic information. It consists of three studies.
Study 1 includes a production experiment of different voice types in a tonal
language to investigate the articulatory and acoustic properties of period
doubling and its linguistic distribution. Study 2 investigates pitch and voice
perception during period doubling using synthesized speech that is controlled
for various acoustic properties. Study 3 investigates the role of period
doubling and other voice qualities in tone identification, with the goal of
explaining the interaction between pitch and voice in different voice types, and
the roles they play in distinguishing words.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.