* 2141019
* PFI-TT: Cell Culture System with Enzyme-based Control of Oxygen Concentration to Enhance Biomedical Research
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* SIDI BENCHERIF, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enhance biomedical research by
controlling oxygen in cell culture. Cell culture, in which scientists attempt to
grow cells in conditions like those in the body, is one of the most useful
techniques in biomedical research. However, oxygen, a critical factor for cell
behavior and physiology, is not controlled during standard cell cultures. In
fact, cells in laboratory cell culture experience up to 50-fold higher oxygen
concentrations than they do in the body. By changing the status quo of cell
culture from non-oxygen-controlled to oxygen-controlled, the proposed technology
can advance the scientific understanding of oxygenâ€™s role in disease
development, biological processes, and human tissues. In addition, the
technology can improve human health by (i) fueling the discovery of new drugs
and drug targets, (ii) improving the accuracy of the drug screening process,
reducing the attrition rate, cost and time spent on failed drugs, and (iii)
accelerating the commercialization of cell-based therapies for cancer treatment
and regenerative medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
develop the Oxygen-Controlling Cell Culture (OCC) system, an enzyme-based
approach adaptable to the vessels already in use for cell culture. Unlike
current oxygen-controlling products that function by reducing oxygen in the gas
phase surrounding cell culture vessels, the OCC system takes an innovative
approach by harnessing enzymes to locally control oxygen concentration directly
in the cellular environment. This approach improves data accuracy, consistency,
and reproducibility. The OCC system will be developed by testing a number of
strategies to chemically attach enzymes to cell culture vessels. The oxygen
concentration will be tuned to specific values by controlling the enzymatic
depletion rates and oxygen transfer rates within the vessels. System performance
will be validated by examining the impact on stem cells and cancer cell behavior
and physiology. Through this proposal, it is anticipated that an OCC system
prototype will be ready for the next stage of
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.