* 2141520
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Physical Controls on CO2 Release from Shale Weathering
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Torres, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 258,177.00

Shales, commonly found sedimentary rocks, contain a large amount of organic
carbon and have been mined for oil, natural gas, and other fossil fuels.
Analogous to how the burning of fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide (CO2) to
the atmosphere, the natural weathering of shale also releases CO2. While this
CO2 release occurs slowly, it has potential to change Earth’s climate over
million-year timescales. The scientific community currently lacks understanding
about how shale weathering (and associated CO2 release) occurs, and this limits
understanding of both past changes in Earth’s climate and predictions of future
changes. This project examines how changes in climate and erosion influence the
rate of shale weathering via performing a detailed field study in shale rock
exposed throughout California. Field work results will be incorporated into a
mathematical model that will allow estimates of the rate of CO2 release from
shale weathering across the globe. This project will thus both advance
understanding of an important natural control on Earth’s climate, and provide a
framework to improve predictions of climate change in the future. In addition to
these benefits, the project will also provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students and project members will engage in K-8 and community
outreach to provide geoscience education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite previous
work on the chemical and biological processes that drive shale weathering, there
does not exist a mechanistic understanding of how physical processes modulate
CO2 release from shale weathering. This project addresses this knowledge gap by
quantifying how variations in physical erosion rate, precipitation rate, and
local topography influence shale weathering. The project tests the hypothesis
that feedbacks between the supply of carbon during conversion of rock to
regolith, chemical kinetics, and topographic controls on weathering zone
thickness cause CO2 release from shale weathering to be maximized for areas with
modest erosion rates, modest precipitation rates, and high topographic curvature
(i.e., ridges). To accomplish this, the researchers will measure the loss of
organic carbon in depth-profiles of shale up to 10 m deep, focusing on shales of
the Monterey, Rincon, and Cozy Dell formations in the Santa Ynez Mountains,
California, where a &gt;6-fold erosion gradient allows assessment of how
variation in erosion influences shale weathering. The Santa Ynez Mountain
samples will be supplemented with depth profiles of Monterey Shale from Point
Reyes National Seashore and Carrizo Plain, California, allowing exploration of
shale weathering over a 5-fold gradient in precipitation within the same
lithologic formation. The field data will be used to calibrate and modify a
reactive-transport model based on physical forcing, thereby providing new
opportunities to link geomorphic transport laws with biogeochemical models, and
predict CO2 release from shale weathering across a wide range of spatial and
temporal scales. Documenting links between physical processes and silicate
weathering has led to major advances in the understanding of feedbacks between
climate, tectonics, and topography, and documenting such tradeoffs for shale
weathering in this project is a logical, yet critical next step to advance
understanding of the geologic carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.