* 2141975
* Developing, Testing, and Disseminating Reasoning Chain Construction Tools for Introductory Physics and Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2027
* John Speirs, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 10/31/2027
* USD 71,289.00

This project seeks to serve the national interest by developing tools to better
understand and improve college students’ reasoning skills in the context of
chemistry and physics courses. Despite decades of work aimed at improving
students’ science learning by developing and implementing research-based
instructional materials, emerging evidence suggests that students who
demonstrate correct conceptual understanding and reasoning on one task often
fail to reason productively on analogous tasks that require the same knowledge
and skills. The persistence of such reasoning difficulties after instruction is
concerning since the development of reasoning skills is possibly one of the most
important outcomes of college instruction in the physical sciences. However,
many existing research-based assessments for physics and chemistry do not
provide sufficient insight into student reasoning approaches because they were
not designed to disentangle reasoning from conceptual understanding. This
project seeks to address this challenge by developing and disseminating online
reasoning chain construction assessment (ORCCA) tools and instructor guides
designed to be incorporated into college-level physics and chemistry courses.
The project team will also use the assessment tools developed to conduct
research to better understand student reasoning about chemistry and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team from four
institutions (North Dakota State University, University of Maine, Penn State
University - Greater Allegheny, and University of North Florida) will examine
and seek to improve student reasoning by developing online reasoning chain
construction assessment (ORCCA) tools for physics and chemistry courses. Drawing
upon dual-process theories of reasoning, researchers have found that reasoning
inconsistencies often stem from the interplay between human reasoning tendencies
and relevant discipline-specific knowledge and skills. Online reasoning chain
construction assessment tools present students with reasoning elements, i.e.,
statements about the physical situation as well as related concepts and
mathematical relationships, and prompt the students to assemble them into an
argument to answer a target question that often elicits incorrect intuitive
responses. This project will focus on introductory physics, general chemistry,
and organic chemistry courses, and will: (1) develop, refine, and disseminate
ORCCA tools; (2) develop, refine, and disseminate screening-target question
pairs that provide measures of both disciplinary knowledge and the reasoning
skills necessary to apply that knowledge consistently; (3) generate cross-
disciplinary knowledge about student reasoning; and (4) develop instructor
guides for the use of ORCCA tools and screening-target pairs for both assessment
and instruction. The project will employ a mixed-methods sequential exploratory
design, leveraging both qualitative and quantitative analyses, and will draw
upon a variety of experimental techniques and frameworks from cognitive science.
Dissemination will include publications of results in scientific journals,
workshops at national meetings, online access to assessment tools and instructor
resources, and individualized support for pilot sites in implementing ORCCAs.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.