* 2141131
* PFI-TT: Crowd-based Alert and Detection Service to Increase the Safety of People with Special Needs
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Baek-Young Choi, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2024
* USD 249,698.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to effectively address the safety of
people with special needs. People with age-related or cognitive disabilities
often find it hard to express themselves. They are not fully aware of their need
for assistance when lost or wandering. Keeping track of people with special
needs can be a daunting task for a caregiver and can lead to isolation, which
significantly deteriorates their quality of life. While several assistive
commercial devices are available to locate people with special needs, they have
not yet been widely adopted due to various social and technical challenges. This
PFI project develop a technology to address the challenges faced by existing
solutions, including usability, privacy, deployability, and effectiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop an intelligent,
integrated system for people with special needs that includes multiple safety
features, including preventive sentiment analysis, safe-zoning, and safe-
tracking. It also enhances privacy protection, and reliability by leveraging the
power of crowd sourcing in zoning and tracking. The project includes the
development of the following components: i) an intelligent tag system, ii)
software-based safety services, iii) beacon stuffing technologies, and iv) a
privacy-aware tracking service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.