* 2141253
* Virtual Galápagos: A Novel, Project-Based Approach to Training Pre-Service STEM Teachers in Innovative Pedagogical Design
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,979.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing an alternative
approach to STEM teacher preparation that is grounded in a highly collaborative,
project-based structure. For 2 summers, a diverse cohort of 10 undergraduate
pre-service teachers from across rural New York State will engage in a 10-week,
project-based experience to learn student-centered pedagogical design methods by
using them to create an inquiry-driven, interactive, interdisciplinary science
website for grades 3-5. The curricular materials designed by the pre-service
teachers will encourage elementary students to employ evidence-based practices
as they address scientific questions about the Galápagos Islands, carefully
aligned with Next Generation Science Standards and delivered at a critical point
to fuel interest in science. Curricular materials will be piloted in local
schools, professional development workshops, and by pre-service teachers prior
to being widely disseminated. As a result of the program, the future teacher
participants will be equipped with the skills, knowledge, and dispositions
necessary to create pedagogical materials that utilize proven project-based
methods for enhancing student persistence in STEM; as the pre-service teachers
gain proficiency using student-centered pedagogies, their instructional
abilities improve, creating a positive feedback loop in which they, in turn,
inspire their own P-12 students to pursue STEM careers. The new curricular
materials will be free to all and available in English and Spanish, to expand
their utility to underserved groups in rural settings. Furthermore, two new
courses on pedagogical design in STEM and technology use in the classroom will
be created at Colgate University, filling critical gaps in the existing Teacher
Preparation Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By engaging pre-service teachers in
an intensively collaborative pedagogical design process, the project will
address three urgent needs in STEM education: limited science training and
curricular resources for elementary teachers, the national shortage of quality
STEM teachers, and the lack of STEM teachers in rural districts. Over the course
of the project, a cohort of 20 undergraduate pre-service teachers will learn how
to integrate emerging educational technologies using design-based frameworks
into inquiry-based classrooms, an especially important training opportunity in
rural, under-resourced districts post-pandemic. The project will build a
learning environment of diverse individuals committed to STEM teaching in rural
districts, to support recruitment and persistence of STEM teachers in such
communities. Underserved groups will be strongly represented in the cohort and
greater learning community, providing diverse, scientist role models and mentors
for participants. Our knowledge-generation research will examine how pre-service
STEM teachers approach curricular tasks to produce educational products in a
design-based setting, informing teacher preparation programs about best
practices to train and retain high quality childhood educators. Furthermore, our
teacher-preparation model stresses the need for global curricular perspectives
that feature an international bio-geologic treasure, the Galápagos Islands, but
which can be adapted to address science issues in any location that offers depth
of science content and significance. Thus, our project will result in a
replicable, transferable teacher-training system adaptable for other
institutions interested in preparing high-quality STEM teachers in student-
centered pedagogy using design-thinking methods. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.