* 2141666
* CAREER: Multimodal Biomaterials for Sequential Delivery of Diverse Immunotherapeutic Cargos
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Thomas Werfel, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2027
* USD 298,819.00

This project is jointly funded by Biomaterials program, and the Established
Program to&lt;br/&gt;Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: MULTIMODAL BIOMATERIALS FOR SEQUENTIAL
DELIVERY OF DIVERSE IMMUNOTHERAPEUTIC CARGOS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The human immune system is diverse beyond compare and capable
of responding to all types of challenges with precise control over the timing
and area of the response. However, immunotherapies – one of the most promising
types of medicines in the 21st century – are typically given all at once as
single therapies, without regards to the spatial and dynamic considerations of
delivery. Additionally, materials capable of controlling the timing or sequence
of delivery of immunotherapies are lacking. The current project seeks to
overcome these shortcomings and radically improve our ability to program immune
responses. To do so, new biomaterials that can deliver a diverse range of
immunotherapeutic agents in precise sequences will be generated. If successful,
the project will produce innovative new polymeric technologies with applications
ranging from vaccine development to immuno-oncology, having the potential to
significantly improve healthcare in the US. Outreach and educational programs
that build from these research efforts will include: incorporation of the
research findings into undergraduate teaching, recruitment and exposure of
underrepresented groups to research through a Nanoengineering Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU), and establishment of a STEM Excursion
Program where North Mississippi high school students visit the University of
Mississippi to learn about the growing field of Nanobiotechnology, while
undergraduate researchers serve as mentors/role models to solidify their
identity in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Existing
immunotherapies involve either a single agent or multiple agents given in
combination. However, due to both the complex nature of the immune response and
the diverse physicochemical nature of immunotherapeutic agents, it is incredibly
challenging to design combination immunotherapies with the spatiotemporal
control of delivery needed to program holistic immune responses. Moreover,
materials capable of sequentially delivering immunotherapeutic agents from
diverse chemical classes with control over the timing and order of release are
lacking. Thus, the central research goal of this project is to develop a new
class of multimodal biomaterials capable of: 1) delivering diverse
immunotherapeutic agents from a single material and 2) programming sequential
drug release to recruit, train, and sustain the immune system during response.
The first objective of this proposal is to generate a new class of glycopolymer-
corona nanoparticles (NPs) that can train the immune response by co-delivering
antigen and adjuvant to the same antigen-presenting cell (APC) with precise
targeting of each component to the appropriate subcellular location of interest.
Importantly, glycopolymer coronas will circumvent the use of poly(ethylene
glycol), which is responsible for negative reactions in some patients, target
the NPs to precise subsets of APCs, and inherently enable cryoprotection and
lyophilization of the NPs. The second design objective of this proposal is to
generate multilayered films which surface erode and release cargo sequentially
at pre-programmed rates. The films will be composed of
poly(2-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone) (PVDMA), which undergoes ring-opening
reactions in the presence of nucleophiles such as primary amines to produce
hydrolytically-stable amide bonds or alcohols to yield hydrolyzable ester
linkages. Thus, by post-polymerization modification, we will produce crosslinked
polymer networks with control over the crosslinking density, swelling and
erosion rates, and scaffold hydrophobicity. The resulting multilayered films
will be engineered with three distinct phases of release: 1) recruitment phase
to attract APCs, 2) training phase to deliver antigen and adjuvant to APCs, and
3) sustainment phase to boost immunogenicity and maintain a robust immune
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.