* 2141841
* CAREER: Developing electrically charged biomaterials for targeted drug delivery to negatively charged complex tissue environments
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Ambika Bajpayee, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2027
* USD 241,857.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are tissues within the human body that are not
receptive to systemic or local drug delivery methods due to their high negative
charge density and lack of blood vessels. The proposed work will investigate how
to improve drug delivery in these less receptive tissues by using charge
interactions. The impact of modifying different physical and chemical properties
of positively charged biomaterials on their transport will be evaluated using
cartilage and joint fluid, as a model of negatively charged tissue environment.
The study will reveal key structure-property relationships in electrically
charged biomaterials and complex negatively charged musculoskeletal tissue
environments in both healthy and diseased states that can be generalized and
tuned to target other charged tissue systems. Long-term, the program has wide
applicability as it can be extended to other tissues with similar properties
(meniscus, intervertebral disc, fracture callus, eye, mucus), diseases and for
delivery of various drugs and imaging agents – ultimately facilitating their
clinical translation. Complementing this research program is an integrative
education plan designed to train students to approach research with a view
towards translatability and creating real-world impact. The education program
will establish a collaborative translational biomaterials conference to engage
local industry to provide undergraduate and graduate students with professional
developmental opportunities. New modules and demonstration videos focused on
biomaterials design and electric charge-based drug delivery will be developed
that target high school, undergraduate women and underrepresented minorities.
Finally, a unique intra-American scientific exchange program will be established
to foster relationship between diverse communities within the US to help create
more understanding and broadly effective scientific leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal investigates how physicochemical properties of polyvalent cationic
macromolecules affect their electro-diffusive transport within negatively
charged tissues and their cellular microenvironments and uses this knowledge to
rationally design cationic carriers for targeted drug delivery to tissues based
on their negative fixed charge density (FCD). Human body contains several
negatively charged tissues that are inaccessible to both systemic and local drug
delivery due to their avascular, dense extracellular matrix. This high negative
FCD, however, can be converted to an opportunity by modifying therapeutics to
add optimally charged cationic domains such that electrostatic interactions can
enhance their transport rather than hindering them. This long-range, weak-
reversible charge-based intra-tissue binding can be synergistically stabilized
by short-range binding effects (H-bond, hydrophobicity) such that these carriers
can have long residence times even in degenerated tissues with diminished FCD.
Using cartilage as a model target tissue of high negative FCD owing to its high
density of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), this proposal will investigate the effects
of physicochemical properties of cationic carriers on their transport in aim 1.
Cationic peptide carriers (CPCs) with the same short length but varying net
charge comprising of arginine (exhibits H-bonds and charge interactions) or
lysine (primarily charge) will be designed to determine an optimal configuration
for fastest intra-tissue diffusivity, full-depth penetration, highest
equilibrium uptake, and long-term binding to target chondrocytes residing in
both healthy and arthritic cartilage. In addition to short intra-joint residence
time of drugs due to rapid exit from lymphatics, cartilage targeting is further
compromised by competitive binding with synovial fluid, that comprises of both
negatively charged hyaluronic acid and hydrophobic globulins. In aim 2,
hydrophobic or hydrophilic tails will be added to the optimized CPC designs to
investigate the synergistic or competitive effects on charge-based binding
within cartilage of varying FCD in presence of synovial fluid. In aim 3, these
optimized cationic motifs will be anchored on exosome’s anionic surface in
varying densities to demonstrate improved targeting of arthritic cartilage in
presence of synovial fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.