* 2141774
* CAREER: Spectroscopic Exploration of Microscopic Superfluidity
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Paul Raston, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 02/28/2027
* USD 530,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Paul Raston and his research team at James Madison University will
investigate the quantum solvation of small molecules with helium or hydrogen
using sophisticated microwave and laser spectroscopy techniques. When liquid
helium is cooled to ultra-low temperatures it becomes superfluid, which is a
state of matter that is characterized by a variety of peculiar properties. One
of these properties is the ability to flow without friction, which implies that
if an isolated superfluid is set into rotation, it will continue to rotate
indefinitely. This type of frictionless flow was discovered in bulk superfluid
helium about 80 years ago, and in tiny droplets (consisting of about 10 helium
atoms) about 20 years ago. Surprisingly, the evolution of superfluidity in the
realm between tiny droplets and the bulk remains largely unexplored. This CAREER
award supports curiosity-driven exploration in this uncharted territory using
state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques. By exploring new manifestations of
finite-sized superfluidity, the work aims to provide fresh challenges for theory
and seeks to provide for a deeper understanding of quantum chemistry at a
fundamental level. The research program also will provide an enriching
educational experience for undergraduate student researchers and seeks to
attract a diverse body of students into science. Inspired by difficulties
associated with online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic, the project also
includes an educational component that focuses on developing virtual
instrumentation and experiments for teaching modern techniques and approaches in
spectroscopy to undergraduate students when in-person classes are not possible,
or when the instrumentation is not available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
intellectual contribution of this work lies in determining the minimum number of
helium atoms that are required for superfluidity according to the Landau
criterion, which is the traditional criterion for bulk superfluidity. This
number is especially important since it corresponds to the transition from the
cluster having discrete energy levels to one that has a (quasi) continuum of
energy levels, implying that the gap between the energetic properties of small
clusters and the bulk has (finally) been bridged. Along the way, it is expected
that broad oscillations in the rotational inertia will occur, which are thought
to be related to the opening and closing of solvation shells, thus providing
detailed structural information regarding microscopic solvation. Another
significant contribution involves exploring how nanoscopic surfaces are wetted
by investigating the quantum solvation of small aromatics with helium. The
spectra of these systems provide information about how the helium fluid coats
the surfaces, and about how the superfluid behavior evolves with cluster size.
Finally, Dr. Raston and his research team are investigating quantum solvation by
fermions (deuterium hydride) in order to experimentally test whether the
previously reported decoupling of boson (helium or hydrogen) density from
molecular rotation is indeed an indicator of microscopic superfluidity. The
educational dimension of this project is inspired by the difficulties associated
with delivering upper-division laboratory courses online. To help alleviate
these challenges and to make experiments possible for those who do not have
access to the required scientific instrumentation, a suite of modern virtual
instruments is being developed. The user-friendly interface is designed to
engage and guide students through a variety of experiments that will be made
freely available on the web so that users can easily access them. The virtual
instruments will provide a platform for learning about data acquisition in an
autonomous environment, while also fostering an improved understanding of
instrument control and developing student intuition about instrument
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.