* 2141223
* PFI-RP: High-Throughput Scanner for Non-Destructive Manufacturing Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Nezih Yardimci, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2026
* USD 549,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the advancement of non-destructive,
industrial-quality instruments for quality control in advanced manufacturing.
There is a demand for high-throughput quality control systems in manufacturing
plants to further increase production efficiencies and reduce production costs.
In addition, valuable feedback provided by in-line quality control systems may
enable optimization of the manufacturing processes to minimize defects and
provide high-quality products. Terahertz imaging offers unique functionalities
for non-destructive evaluation of various industrial products. Teraherz
frequencies also offer higher resolution imaging than radio frequencies and they
can penetrate through many opaque materials at visible and infrared frequencies.
Compared to ultrasound imaging, terahertz imaging does not require any coupler
and can enable a non-contact evaluation. Terahertz waves also do not pose health
hazards, unlike X-rays. Although these unique capabilities have been known for a
long time, terahertz quality control systems are not yet widely utilized in
manufacturing plants due to the absence of high-performance terahertz cameras
capable of producing large-pixel-count three-dimensional (3D) images with a high
frame rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to address the
technological limitations of using terehertz cameras in high throughput
manufacturing through a cross-disciplinary research, education, development, and
commercialization partnership between the university, industry, and federal
laboratories. This university-industry partnership seeks to develop and assess a
terahertz camera for high-speed and high-sensitivity quality control in
industrial production settings. The proposed camera utilizes plasmonic
nanoantenna arrays to address the main challenges of conventional terahertz
detectors for use in a multi-pixel terahertz imaging systems: low signal-to-
noise ratio operation and small device active area, which requires complex
optics to be scaled to large arrays. The proposed work may extend the scope and
potential uses of terahertz technology for non-destructive quality control of
various products in industrial manufacturing settings, which were not possible
before due to the low throughput, low sensitivity, and the bulky nature of
conventional terahertz scanner systems. While the developed hardware and data
analysis software provide a high-performance, compact scanner for non-invasive
material characterization and inspection, field tests and partnerships provide a
deep understanding of the critical customer needs in real-world field
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.