* 2141283
* The TIMES Model: Investigating the Importance of Social Support Timing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Niall Bolger, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 395,668.00

Stress is a regular part of everyday life. It may arise from common experiences
such as problems at work or arguments with friends, or it may have its origin in
large-scale traumatic experiences such as a pandemic, political polarization, or
economic depression. Such experiences permeate lives and are known to harm well-
being. Research shows that the negative effects of such stressors can be reduced
by supportive social relationships. Prior studies examining social support
during times of stress have focused almost exclusively on the period leading up
to or during a stressor. Yet, there is a growing recognition that recovery
processes following a stressor may have important long-term implications for
well-being, and in ways that differ from social support before or during a
stressful event. This project focuses on how the psychological mechanisms of
social support differ before versus after a stressful event. It is expected that
social support received after a stressful event provides a particular benefit
for recovery, and that it operates through distinct psychological mechanisms and
has different outcomes compared to support enacted before a stressor. Making a
distinction between pre-stressor and post-stressor social support is important
because many stressful events are not anticipated, which means that pre-stressor
support is not always available. This project will inform potential
interventions by advancing understanding and improving how close others can help
each other cope with stressors in the aftermath of stressful
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the role of social support
during a post-stressor period in facilitating emotional and physiological
stressor recovery. The research considers the questions of whether post-stressor
support involves distinct mediating processes and distinct outcomes when
compared to support provided during the pre-stressor period. It is generally
hypothesized that post-stressor support benefits physiological and emotional
recovery. More specifically, it is expected that effective pre-stressor support
reduces recipients’ distress and sympathetic arousal because of higher self-
efficacy. In contrast, effective post-stressor support is expected to enhance
recipients’ calmness, composure and parasympathetic control because of lower
rumination, greater positive reframing, and rebuilding of the self. These
hypotheses are tested in a daily diary study with a long-term follow-up and in
an experiment introducing a social stressor. The project explores longer-term
implications of post-stressor support and considers potential boundary
conditions. Laying the foundation for potential future interventions is a
priority. Students involved in the research learn about psychophysiological
methods and participate in the conduct of studies on people in close
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.