* 2141335
* HCC: Small: Modeling Ad Hoc Collaboration on Complex Manipulation Tasks for Human-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gregory Hager, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,373.00

This project will study how people collaborate with each other to complete
complex physical tasks and investigate ways to enable robots to collaborate with
people in similar tasks. Many task collaborations emerge on an ad hoc basis,
with teammates making decisions about who does what parts of the task as it
unfolds. Achieving similar emergent collaboration in human-robot teamwork is
critical for applications such as in-home assistance, flexible manufacturing,
and search-and-rescue. This project will contribute to the understanding of
complex human teamwork and the fundamental technologies needed to bring about
effective human-robot teams. This research will be widely disseminated, and will
broaden participation in computing by mentoring teams of students with the
diverse backgrounds needed to address both the human and the technical aspects
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project will
investigate ad hoc collaboration on complex manipulation tasks. While research
on human-robot collaboration has expanded over the years, prior work has been
largely limited to the investigation of small-scale tasks (e.g., tabletop
manipulation), dyadic teamwork (i.e., two-person teams), and/or prescribed
collaboration (e.g., tasks with predetermined roles and procedures). Through
this project, the research team will 1) investigate a principled framework for
describing, representing, reasoning, and enabling collaborative interactions
based on rigorous modeling of human ad hoc collaboration on complex manipulation
tasks; 2) develop computational methods for inferring and grounding
collaborative events and actions using perception data; and 3) explore how the
developed framework and reasoning capabilities may be leveraged to enable ad hoc
human-robot collaboration in an experimentally constrained
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.