* 2141070
* Construction of the 'Other': Development, Consequences, and Applied Implications of Racism, Prejudice and Discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Gustavo Carlo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 77,564.00

Deep divisions between majority/minority groups, overt violence and hate crimes,
and increasing social inequities around the world are pervasive and exacerbated
by a global pandemic. This award will support the travel and mentoring of up to
30 emerging scholars from underrepresented minority (URM) groups to attend the
Society for Research on Child Development 2022 Special Topics Conference
entitled Construction of the “Other”: Theory, Research, and Applied Implications
of Racism, Prejudice, and Discrimination and to reconnect at the SRCD Biennial
Conference. The special topics conference will bring together scholars to
discuss theories and research on: a) how children develop prejudice, racist
attitudes and conceptions of in- and out-group, b) the health and developmental
consequences of experiencing bias and discrimination, and c) the policy and
intervention programs aimed at reducing such prejudice. High quality speaker
presentations, symposia, and posters will summarize the state-of-the-art
theories, research and methodologies in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will spur increased efforts by researchers to address the major gaps
in theory, research, policy, and intervention on prejudice, bias, and
discrimination. Moreover, the conference will have far-reaching impact to our
communities and inform important global movements and crises. First, the
conference sends a strong message to the public regarding the serious efforts by
major research organizations focusing on child health to address the challenges
related to racism and prejudice. Second, the conference will serve as a
springboard for translation to policy. And third, a mentoring program will
provide much needed training for URM junior scholars to spur broader diversity
to address the major gaps in theory, research, policy, and intervention on
prejudice, bias, and discrimination. This effort will support the next
generation of scholars to acquire rigorous scientific training and expertise on
this topic and to become a resource to provide evidence-based practice
recommendations to community entities facing the social challenges of racism,
prejudice and discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.