* 2141728
* CAREER: Understanding the Local and Remote Drivers of Regional Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Malte Stuecker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2027
* USD 718,487.00

The warming effect of greenhouse gases is global but not uniform over the globe,
and regional differences in the warming have important consequences for climate
change impacts. El Nino events provide a useful point of reference for the
importance of differential warming over tropical oceans, as the warming of the
eastern equatorial Pacific relative to the western Pacific causes disruptions in
weather and climate worldwide. An assessment of future climate impacts over,
say, the Southwest US, would have to take into account not only the magnitude of
the warming of the tropical oceans but the pattern of the sea surface
temperature (SST) increase. But despite considerable research a clear
understanding of what the warming pattern should be and what factors determine
it has not yet emerged. In particular, it is not clear how much the SST
difference between the tropics and subtropics will change and wether the warming
pattern in the Pacific will look more like El Nino or La Nina (with greater
warming in the western Pacific).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted under
this award addresses the warming pattern using a suite of climate model
experiments to identify the physical mechanisms that influence the SST warming
pattern and its possible evolution over time. Further work considers the
implications of the warming pattern for precipitation changes around the world.
The model simulations are performed through a Model Intercomparison Project
(MIP) organized by the Principal Investigator (PI) and involving collaborators
at the University of Tokyo, the Alfred Wegener Institute in Germany, National
Taiwan University, and the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology in
South Korea. The simulations use a hierarchy of model configurations and
specialized techniques to isolate mechanisms of interest. The work is based on
an earlier study by the PI and others in which radiative heating by greenhouse
gases was applied only in specific latitude bands, with the somewhat unexpected
result that off-equatorial heating made a greater contribution to equatorial SST
increase than local heating over the equator. Additional experiments use the
"flux correction" technique to examine the effect of mean state bias in
determining the warming pattern, motivated by concerns that the commonly
occurring cold bias in equatorial Pacific SSTs could cause climate models to
produce an incorrect warming pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this CAREER proposal focuses on the use of graphic art as a tool
for climate science communication. The project convenes a series of workshops
for students in local media and graphic arts programs to develop scientific
visualizations to explain climate change impacts relevant to Hawai'i. The
visualizations, also known as infographics, are developed in partnership with
local K-12 schools to reflect community concerns regarding climate change. The
resulting infographics are distributed throughout schools across the state to
help increase science literacy. Graphic design concepts are also introduced to
graduate students in a new climate dynamics class, with the goal of creating
publication-quality scientific illustrations. The infographics workshops serve
to introduce climate science concepts to students outside STEM disciplines, many
of whom are Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.