* 2141627
* Primate gut microbiomes in relationship to behavioral traits
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Jason Kamilar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/28/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The gut microbiome is comprised of the microorganisms that inhabit digestive
tracts, including bacteria, viruses, and others. How the gut microbiome is
established early in life, what causes it to change throughout life, and how it
influences biology, health and behavior are topics of great interest across many
realms of research. Studies on humans and animals support the influence of these
microorganisms on behavior, but we have little knowledge of this relationship in
wild nonhuman primates. By understanding links between products of the gut
microbiome and behaviors, and how these vary across individuals in highly social
species, this research provides insight and comparative context for
investigating these links in humans. The project provides training and research
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoctoral
researcher, engages school-aged children with educational opportunities, and
integrates local researchers into the projectâ€™s activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in gut microbial diversity has been connected to
poor memory and depression, and the relative amounts of specific microbes, such
as Lactobacillus, has been associated with mood and behavioral variation. This
previous work has shown that gut microbes that can biosynthesize and/or
metabolize neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, are associated with the
behavior of the host who harbors those microbes. While this evidence has been
generated from human and lab animal studies, we have little knowledge of these
relationships in wild animal populations in their natural habitats. This study
addresses several questions in a wild and social nonhuman primate, including: 1)
Is gut microbiome diversity associated with behavioral traits? 2) Are certain
microbial functional genes associated with behavioral traits? 3) What is the
association between gut microbiome diversity and individual dominance rank? and
4) Are social networks associated with inter-individual variation in gut
microbiome diversity? The research team analyzes behavioral and fecal samples to
address these questions. Behavioral data are used to quantify the behavioral
traits of individuals as well as the emergent social network of the groups, and
gut microbiomes are quantified through genomic sequencing of fecal samples using
the 16S rRNA gene to quantify the taxonomic diversity of microbes. Functional
genes of the microbes are quantified via shotgun metagenomic sequencing. A
comprehensive set of bioinformatic and statistical methods are used to examine
the potential relationships among these datasets, and to inform future studies
in other species including humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.