* 2141268
* Understanding eye movements in skilled readers and novice readers: A behavioral and computational approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jon Willits, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

When we read, it feels like we can see many words at once, but in fact we can
only see a word or two at a time clearly enough to read. Skilled readers are
very good at quickly and efficiently moving their eyes to see a word and move on
to the next. This project is about how readers learn to make these quick and
efficient eye movements. Many individuals around the world and in the United
States struggle to become skilled readers. This project will investigate how
young readers become skilled readers and what knowledge someone must gain in
order to become a skilled reader. This understanding will help teachers and
clinicians develop better strategies to help individuals who struggle to
read.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Readers consider many sources of information when
planning eye movements, including visual properties like word length or what
letters tend to appear together in words. One underappreciated source of
information is linguistic—a reader’s knowledge of what words and phrases tend to
follow each other, based on their language experience. This project will
investigate the linguistic information that skilled readers use to guide eye
movements and how skilled and less skilled readers are different. Skilled adult
readers and younger adolescent readers will read sentences that vary in
complexity and predictability (how well a reader is able to anticipate what
words are coming next) while their eye movements are measured. Then, a
computational model will model and predict eye movements during reading to
better understand how linguistic factors and individual factors, like reading
experience, affect how readers move their eyes. This work will be informative of
the skills and knowledge underlie healthy reading development, which is
necessary to develop remediations to help individuals who struggle to
read.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.