* 2141035
* PFI-TT:  Solar Evaporator-Based High-Efficiency Water Desalination System
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Yi Zheng, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/29/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to provide a low-cost, low-energy,
off-grid system to obtain freshwater. Water security has been considered the top
global risk, as a 40% shortfall is expected between forecasted demand and the
available supply of water by 2030. Energy-intensive processing and insufficient
clean water productivity of current technologies have become bottlenecks for
cost-effective desalination water supply. The renewable energy-driven water
utility market is growing, with key stakeholders in developed nations including
agriculture and municipal water utility providers. The solar-driven water
desalination system in this project is particularly suited for individual
installations, underserved populations, and disaster scenarios, all of which are
underserved by current desalination techniques. This project advances a process
to convert seawater and other brackish water sources into freshwater via a
versatile, environmentally friendly, and economically viable desalination system
to alleviate water scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
identifies a reliable, robust, and cost-effective solution for a solar-driven
water desalination and treatment system. The project will optimize the advanced
thermal and mechanical properties of a scaled Cu/CuO foam-based all-in-one solar
evaporator, investigate a cost-effective strategy for efficient water
desalination, and integrate a solar energy system with water desalination system
by supplying the preheated sea or brackish water through existing solar-related
infrastructures. A novel design of a planar interconnected open-pore foam-based
evaporator will be demonstrated. The spatial extension of a planar structure is
featured with an addition of a third vertical dimension to improve the
evaporation performance. When compared to a similar interfacial structure, no
extra photothermal materials are required for this design, and the simple
structure is favorable for large-scale applications. The goal of this project is
to develop a highly-efficient (&gt;4.5 kg/m2 h), cost-effective (&lt; $40/m2)
desalination system for freshwater supply driven by direct solar irradiation,
enabled by novel functional materials and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.