* 2141592
* Meeting: SICB symposium for January 2022: Causal Mechanisms of Metabolic Scaling
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 13,703.00

This project supports a symposium focused on the causal mechanisms responsible
for the relationship between animal metabolic rate and body size, or metabolic
scaling, to be held at the January 2022 meeting of the Society for Integrative
and Comparative Biology. The symposium brings together an interdisciplinary and
diverse group of senior and early-career scientists to discuss and synthesize
the current understanding of this topic and to identify gaps for future
investigations. One of the most important parameters explaining the structure
and function of animals is their body size. Larger animals are not just scaled-
up versions of small animals. They have lower heart rates, move their limbs more
slowly during running, and eat and burn less fuel per pound. The tendency for
larger animals to use less energy per pound is termed “hypometric metabolic
scaling.” This size-related difference is critical for biomedical and veterinary
procedures, agriculture, and ecology. For example, drug doses must be reduced in
larger animals because they metabolize drugs more slowly, and scaling must be
taken into account when estimating food needs of cattle and the crop consumption
of locusts. While we know how body size affects patterns in animal structure,
function, and metabolism, we lack an understanding of the molecular mechanisms
explaining why these patterns occur, and the symposium addresses this gap.
Symposium speakers will publish at least ten manuscripts related to metabolic
scaling, and will together write a synthetic paper that outlines how ecological,
biomechanical, and evolutionary processes create metabolic scaling. Development
of a rigorous understanding of the evolutionary factors that drive metabolic
scaling will contribute broadly to basic and applied
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Body size explains a large fraction of phenotypic
variation in all animal groups, with many aspects of morphology, behavior,
physiology, ecology, and evolution differing between small and large animals.
However, biologists have a limited understanding of the causes of these scaling
patterns. Of all scaling patterns, the hypometric scaling of metabolic rate has
been particularly well-established, and the lower mass-specific energy turnover
in larger animals is thought to drive many other observed scaling patterns such
as lower mass-specific food consumption or smaller territories. This award will
fund a symposium, “Causal Mechanisms of Metabolic Scaling,” at the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology meeting in January 2022. This will be the
first symposium to focus on how natural selection acts differentially on animals
of different body sizes in ways that produce interspecific metabolic scaling
patterns. The symposium will encourage connections across fields, by bringing
together scientists who are paleontologists, behaviorists, physiologists,
biomechanists, neuroscientists, and ecologists. This symposium will lead to the
production of at least ten papers in the journal, Integrative and Comparative
Biology. The speakers will also meet by zoom before and after the meeting, and
in a workshop after the symposium, to prepare a synthesis paper, written
collaboratively by all participants, that will synthesize the diverse
perspectives that exist on metabolic scaling. The symposium promotes inclusive
scientific training by including many scientists who are early-career and/or
from groups currently under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.