* 2141073
* PFI-TT: Self-Centering Seismic Dampers for Resilience-Based Earthquake Design of Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Robert Archer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create a full-scale seismic damper
that can ensure rapid recovery and reoccupation of buildings after a strong
earthquake. A structure’s ability to re-center after a large seismic event
strongly affects post-earthquake building downtime, with significant economic
consequences. The proposed system can mitigate the drawbacks in current design
and address the continued functionality after a hazard event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to advance the knowledge in
shape memory alloy-based seismic control devices by revealing cyclic response,
failure behavior, and repairability of a full-scale seismic damper. This project
advances a self-centering, re-usable and practical seismic damper providing non-
sacrificial energy dissipation with high re-centering capabilities.
Computational modeling will supplement these experimental campaigns and allow
simulation of the proposed devices and their failure modes and inclusion of
models in reliably analyzing response of buildings. This project will also lead
to formulation of fragility specifications for a self-centering damping system,
which will enable accurate seismic loss and functionality assessments of
buildings designed with such systems. The research will provide recommendations
for the design of buildings with the proposed dampers such that high seismic
performance objectives stated in terms of post-earthquake re-occupancy and
functional recovery time are easily achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.