* 2141461
* CAREER: The Effects of Spatiotemporal Storm Surge Clusters on Coastal Flood Risk
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Thomas Wahl, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In September of 2017, Hurricanes
Irma and Maria caused strong winds, rainfall, and storm surges in Puerto Rico
within less than two weeks of each other. Two years later, in 2019, Hurricane
Dorian caused high storm surges in the Bahamas and southeastern U.S. adversely
impacting thousands of kilometers of coastline. When multiple storm surges, or
other hazards, affect the same area in relatively close succession (i.e.,
temporal clustering) or when longer coastlines stretches are often impacted
simultaneously by the same storm surge event (i.e., spatial clustering),
compounding effects in time and space with potentially devastating impacts to
coastal communities occur while also straining (re-)insurance and government
budgets for rebuilding homes and other infrastructure. Despite many recent
examples, these compounding effects, which will be further exacerbated by
continuing sea-level rise, are ignored in current coastal risk assessments. The
research goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
illuminate where existing dependencies in space and time make such events more
likely, how they are changing through time, and how humans and the built
environment are affected by them. This will lead to better-informed decisions to
mitigate short- and long-term risk and facilitate more efficient emergency
response and coastal adaptation planning. A new generation of diverse coastal
researchers and practitioners will be trained to be able to work across science
and engineering disciplines by integrating classroom instruction, summer
training and networking events, and outreach activities with community partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformative knowledge will be developed by (1) using
historic observational data and model hindcasts to identify regional hotspots of
spatial and temporal storm surge clusters, (2) assessing non-stationarity,
including trends and variability, in the frequency of temporal clusters and in
the size of spatial clusters and the links to large-scale climate modes, (3)
deriving innovative multivariate statistical methods to account for
spatiotemporal clusters alongside known and unknown covariates, and (4)
incorporate spatiotemporal storm surge clusters into broad-scale coastal risk
assessments for present-day climate and when considering future sea-level rise
scenarios. The latter will account for the dynamic linkages between the hazard
and socio-economic drivers of risk while deriving innovative impact metrics
relevant for coastal decision makers, e.g. the likelihood that x people are
affected or x dollars of damages are incurred in a given year, or over a decade.
Exploratory work will also focus on incorporating additional hazards (e.g.,
pluvial and/or fluvial flooding drivers, extreme wind, heat-stress) into the
analysis to build the foundation for future multi-hazard risk assessments
accounting for spatiotemporal clustering and compounding effects of connected
climate extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.