* 2141989
* Collaborative Research: Concentration - Ratio - Discharge (C-R-Q) relationships of transient water-age distributions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 273,237.00

The weathering of silicate rock in the hillslopes that feed headwater streams
sets the chemical characteristics of water draining catchments, the transport of
mass from continents to oceans and critical feedbacks between atmospheric CO2
and the land surface. Yet quantitative models for the basic relationship between
the rate of water discharge from a landscape (Q) and the concentration of
solutes (C) within that water remains a significant challenge. This is in part
due to close coupling between the solubilization of bedrock and the formation of
new secondary minerals, which we term silicate weathering. At the core of this
uncertainty is a practical issue: the rates of silicate weathering are slow.
This means that typical flow-through columns built in laboratories cannot
capture even a simplified representation of silicate weathering in upland
watersheds. In contrast, natural hillslopes are complicated and difficult to
constrain. In this work, investigators will overcome this disparity using the
unique mesoscale Landscape Evolution Observatory (LEO), which affords three
replicate convergent hillslopes constructed on the world's largest weighing
lysimeters. The LEO facility is housed within the Biosphere 2 center, which
translates Earth system science research into tractable examples and
demonstrations for over 100,000 public visitors per year. This includes 10,000
students who use the Biosphere 2 as part of their STEM curriculum. The project
will train two PhD students, thus forming a collaborative research group across
three institutions, and produce 'on-display' projects as part of the Biosphere 2
educational tour including information about the purpose and status of the work.
Finally, the reactive transport simulations developed and calibrated by this
project will be leveraged as an example for a current NSF Research Coordination
Network: Community-based educational infrastructure for numerical simulation in
the Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Even in a perfectly homogeneous
system, an infinite combination of these tandem dissolution and precipitation
rates could lead to the same solute concentration. Further, these reactions
occur through non-uniform flow paths subject to unsteady infiltration. Thus, a
critical need to advance process-based understanding of the C-Q relationship is
the provision of additional constraints which embed within the same model
framework and reduce the number of free parameters. Here, the researchers will
use the characteristic shifts in stable isotope and trace element ratios to
diagnose the relationship between primary silicate weathering and secondary
mineral precipitation. Specifically, they will pair silicon isotopes (delta
30Si) and germanium-silicon ratios (Ge/Si), which are each uniquely sensitive to
the rate and nature of secondary mineral formation in weathering systems, to
unmask the balance of secondary precipitation reactions contributing to C-Q
observations through expansion to a C-R-Q (concentration – isotope/element ratio
– discharge) framework. At present, laboratory characterization studies of the
parameters which describe partitioning of delta 30Si and Ge/Si during secondary
mineral growth are expanding, as well as datasets of these ratios versus
discharge at the field scale. Yet a critical gap existing in pairing this
information across a flow-through system with constrained fluid transit time
distributions to verify appropriate model representation of observed behavior.
This gap is contingent upon operational limitations. The slow weathering rates
of silicate water-rock interactions impede the use of standard flow-through
column designs at reasonable scales, while the complexity of natural systems
limits the capacity to develop constrained relationships between reactivity and
fluid travel time. Here, they will use LEO and employ a novel flux-weighted time
approach to constrain transient fluid travel time distributions across the
system. Through this combination of unique experimental facility, novel
transient travel time constraint, reactive transport modeling, and
(pseudo)isotopic tracers, they believe that a transformative advancement in
process-level representation and prediction of C-R-Q relationships is
achievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.