* 2141375
* CAREER: Mitochondrial Genome Regulation By Nucleoid Proteins Involved in Redox Sensing and One Carbon-Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Kristin Dittenhafer-Reed, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2027
* USD 230,675.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
biochemical mechanisms that control the function of mitochondria, specialized
compartments within cells that are central to energy production and cell
metabolism. Mitochondria contain their own small genome (mitochondrial DNA) that
contains the genetic instructions for a small number of proteins required for
cellular energy production. How cells regulate the expression of the
mitochondrial genome in response to changing energetic needs is largely unknown.
This work will explore if proteins known to interact with mitochondrial DNA
serve as sensors of nutrient availability and in turn control mitochondrial gene
expression, providing insight into fundamental mechanisms that control mammalian
cell function. The project will also expand undergraduate training in
biochemistry at Hope College through the training of undergraduate researchers,
the implementation of a general biochemistry lab curriculum designed for short
class periods, and the incorporation of the research in an upper-level
biochemistry lab course. The research and educational objectives of the project
promise to have broad societal impacts by providing opportunities for
undergraduate research in biochemistry. These opportunities will improve the
retention of students in science who will help populate the scientific
workforce. American Rescue Plan funding of this project will support the
investigator at a critical stage in her career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will focus on the intersection between one-carbon metabolism and redox
metabolism with mitochondrial genome regulation. For mitochondria to function
properly, these organelles rely on genetic instructions carried within their own
genome, as well as those carried in the nuclear genome. Nuclear DNA carries the
instructions for the majority of the 2000-member mitochondrial proteome,
including a number of nucleoid proteins which are shown to associate with
mitochondrial DNA. A combination of biochemical and cell biology approaches will
be used to study four nucleoid proteins involved in formate and NADPH
metabolism. The nature and effect of the association of these enzymes with mtDNA
is unknown. As formate and NADPH levels reflect the metabolic state of the cell,
the research will investigate the hypothesis that these enzymes relay signals of
energetic status to control mitochondrial genome dynamics and energy production.
The research promises to provide significant advances related to regulatory
mechanisms within the mitochondria and mammalian
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.