* 2141183
* PFI TT: A hand-held device for rapid and accurate determination of cancerous tumor margins during surgical resections
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Nicole Dominiak, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 315,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project improves outcomes for cancer patients.
The proposed research will develop a hand-held device that helps surgeons
rapidly and accurately determine the marginal areas around the tumor during
surgery. Correct tumor removal (known as resection) reduces the surgical time,
the recovery time, and the risk of subsequent surgeries. The proposed technology
will reduce cost and improve outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will demonstrate a hand-held sensor device that rapidly and accurately
determines the resection area around a tumor during surgery. Identifying and
verifying the resection perimeter can be challenging, and inaccurate
determination of tumor margins can lead to subsequent surgeries. The proposed
research will investigate: 1) rapid, accurate and consistent measurement of
hydroxyl radicals as a biomarker for active tumor growth, and 2) the
relationship between hydroxyl radical concentrations and the cancer stage of
progression. The project will design and optimize the sensor tip and electrode
composition and geometry to minimize noise; it will further validate the data
with in vitro tests using 3-D spheroids matrixes with varying hydroxyl radical
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.