* 2141029
* PFI-TT: Development of an Automated Cell Culturing Platform for Highly Efficient and Reliable Drug Testing in Physiologically Representative Disease Models
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Roman Voronov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/29/2024
* USD 282,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project to make drug testing faster and more
reliable. This project will build a first-of-its-kind automated cell culturing
platform that will allow pharmaceutical companies make faster, more efficient,
and reliable predictions regarding whether costly (up to a $billion) animal and
human drug trials are justified. This leads to: (1) cheaper, faster, and more
reliable data collection per sample, (2) more robust product quality, and (3) a
significant labor reduction. Lastly, an education program will be designed to
train diverse entrepreneurial students in the time-sensitive financial, legal,
managerial, and ethical aspects of commercialization and running biotech
startups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances the ability to
perform localized cell and/or chemical manipulations (i.e., removal/collection,
delivery/addition) within living cultures used as disease models on microscales
and without significantly disturbing an ongoing experiment. The benefits
articulated above are generated by: (1) real-time non-sacrificial monitoring of
the cell behavior (as opposed to the typically sacrificial endpoint analysis
necessitated by the conventional products currently on the market); (2) detected
problems corrected within the culture immediately (as opposed to waiting until
the endpoint analysis to find out about their existence) and in a consistent
automated manner; and (3) automation of the manual labor associated with
culturing and analyzing the cells. Project objectives are to: (1) Make the
culturing platform easier to set up and operate by an inexperienced user. This
will be done by bundling its individual hardware and electronics components into
a single Plug-and-Play system; (2) Design disposable culturing inserts for
ensuring system sterility for the customers and recurring profits for the
partnership; and (3) Develop a fabrication recipe that will enable less labor-
intensive mass manufacturing of the product than the manual method that was used
to create its alpha prototype. This will be accomplished using automated tools
like laser-cutting and 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.