* 2141727
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Data Science and Statistics Teacher Education--Transforming and Building Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* William Finzer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2027
* USD 756,799.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building a community that
will transform undergraduate teacher preparation so that future K-12 mathematics
teachers are prepared to effectively teach modern data science and statistics
(DS&amp;S). Society demands that citizens be statistically and data literate,
resulting in growing efforts at the secondary level to include more DS&amp;S in
the curriculum. To meet these demands, new teachers will need additional
preparation to foster students’ statistical and data literacy. Secondary
mathematics teacher education programs often minimally address DS&amp;S in
comparison to other branches of mathematics, and new teachers tend to lack
content knowledge and confidence to teach statistics topics. Transformative
activities of this project focus on modifications of curriculum within courses
and programs, innovations to technological tools, and faculty development at a
broad range of institutions. The project aims to examine the current state of
DS&amp;S teacher education and intends to assemble an extensive community of
faculty, organizations, initiatives, and projects focused on transforming
undergraduate teacher preparation in DS&amp;S education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of transforming teacher preparation programs
to integrate DS&amp;S is met using tools, methods, and approaches of improvement
science as a guiding theory of change. There are three specific project goals:
A) investigate the current systems in undergraduate teacher preparation for
teaching DS&amp;S by examining early career mathematics teachers through surveys
and classroom observations, and a second survey and interview study to identify
problems of practice for DS&amp;S of mathematics teacher education programs; B)
build and sustain a DS&amp;S teacher education networked improvement community
through partnerships with national organizations and projects and extensive
faculty learning opportunities; and C) reach a broad, large, and diverse teacher
education audience through developing, curating and disseminating high quality
DS&amp;S teacher education curriculum materials. The Common Online Data Analysis
Platform (CODAP) of the Concord Consortium, “an easy¬-to-¬use data analysis
environment designed for grades 5 through 14,” is the primary technology to be
used in engaging with data, simulation and modeling. In this project, CODAP
functionality is to be expanded and capabilities modified. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.
Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.