* 2141348
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic illusions and incremental interpretation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Colin Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 16,591.00

Adults are very good at understanding sentences quickly and easily.
Psycholinguists often use their occasional mistakes as a way to understand the
mechanisms that underlie this speed and ease. This project investigates two
varieties of language comprehension errors, which reveal the underlying
computations that allow language users to understand most sentences so
successfully. The first of these errors involves the failure to notice anomalous
word substitutions. For example, when asked "what is the name of the holiday
during which children dress up and go door to door giving candy?", many people
do not notice the substitution of "giving" for "receiving" and simply answer
"Halloween". The failure to detect this type of word substitution can be thought
of as a type of illusion - the comprehender imagines the sentence to be
different from how it actually is. This project investigates what causes these
illusions - for example, whether "giving" was simply mis-read, or if the meaning
of the word was mis-remembered, or if attention was mis-directed toward other
parts of the sentence. Identifying the processing mis-step that causes this
particular error provides clues as to where comprehenders are vulnerable to
misunderstanding more generally. The second case study concerns the processing
of a special class of words known as negative polarity items or NPIs. These are
words like "ever" and "any", which are generally appropriate in negative
contexts (e.g. "John doesn’t have any money.") but sound strange or
ungrammatical in positive contexts (e.g. "John has any money."). Prior work has
shown that an NPI in a positive context can seem, at first glance, to be
appropriate if there is a negative context nearby, another type of linguistic
illusion. This project investigates the specific circumstances under which this
mistaken perception arises, in addition to asking what people think these
ungrammatical sentences actually mean when they judge them to be
grammatical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a combination of speeded and
unspeeded judgments, eye-tracking methods, and sentence repetition tasks to
measure people’s responses to illusion sentences. Two initial experiments on
word substitution illusions test how often mistakes occur when the substitution
is in a declarative sentence instead of a question, and when the substituted
word has been primed through previous exposure. Two independent experiments
investigate the role of attention by measuring eye movements as comprehenders
read sentences with various types of anomalies, including both word
substitutions and spelling errors. Three additional experiments on NPI illusions
investigate the causes and consequences of these errors. First, two experiments
using speeded acceptability measures test the influence of broader
conversational context and expectations on illusion rates, and the role of the
precise timing of the appearance of the NPI. Finally, a sentence repetition
experiment, in which subjects attempt to recall an NPI illusion sentence after a
delay, reveals the inferred meaning of these
sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.