* 2141854
* Collaborative Research: Role of Flexible Design and Instructor Supports in Implementing Sustainable Course-based Research Experiences Across Diverse Institution Types
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Bonnie Hall, Grand View College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2027
* USD 87,172.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
teaching practices using course based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs). Students learn most effectively by doing rather than merely watching
and listening. At the undergraduate level in sciences, this translates into
learning science by doing science. It is well-known that undergraduates have
improved outcomes in performance, persistence, and progress when they engage in
hands-on research; that is, doing what scientists in any field do. These
improved outcomes could be particularly valuable for students from minoritized
groups and first-generation college students. At the same time, access to
research experiences as undergraduates in the form of traditional
apprenticeship-based laboratory research has historically favored majority-group
students. CUREs have been shown to provide some of the same benefits as
traditional research experiences, but at a much broader scale, at lower cost,
and with shorter time commitments. This project will provide broad access to
learning-by-doing in biochemistry research by lowering barriers to implementing
CUREs. The project intends to assess participation in a previously developed
biochemistry CURE, the Biochemistry Authentic Science Inquiry Laboratory
(BASIL). The project will engage with faculty at institutions whose students
will most benefit from increased access to research experiences, with a focus on
Minority-Serving Institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BASIL CURE is fully
implemented on ten campuses. More than 25 other campuses are exploring and/or
using parts of the curriculum through prior work. The project will add 50 more
campuses to the project over the next 5 years through a series of recruiting and
training workshops and through a well-designed mentoring program. The project
will focus on Minority-Serving Institutions, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Tribal Colleges, and Community Colleges. The goal of the project
is to investigate the processes by which CUREs are adopted, implemented, and
sustained with three specific aims: Aim 1. Identify the supports for and
barriers to CURE implementation and sustainability across institution types; Aim
2. Characterize the relationship between institutional context and variations in
CURE implementation across institution types; and Aim 3. Facilitate
implementation and sustainability in diverse contexts through faculty
development. The project will collect data from participating faculty by
administering and collecting (a) pre-engagement surveys, (b) implementation
plans, (c) implementation surveys, and (d) semi-structured interviews. The
project will partner with other established CURE communities in the field to
assess the process of CURE implementation for any barriers such as impacts of
cost, institutional support, or faculty workload. The project will also assess
the sustainability of the CURE strategy across participating campuses based on
demographics, size, location, and other factors. As a result of this
implementation and assessment process, the project seeks to contribute to
strengthening the diverse workforce in sciences, technology, and medicine. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.