* 2141189
* Testing the role of learned regularities in visual working memory: The nature of chunking for continuous visual features
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 173,204.00

Working memory allows people to hold information in mind over a short period of
time, and to work with this information. For example, while doing a math
problem, working memory is used to hold in mind the numbers and manipulate them;
and while driving, working memory is used to hold in mind the locations of other
cars as you check whether it is safe to change lanes. Working memory has a
severely limited capacity, such that only a few items can be accurately held in
mind at any given time, and this limited capacity provides a strong constraint
on people’s ability to perform many cognitive tasks. One well-known aspect of
working memory capacity is that it is affected by learning: “chunking”
frequently encountered information into compressed, meaningful units allows more
efficient representations, and allows us to store more in working memory. For
example, remembering a random string of 7 numbers is much more cognitively
demanding than remembering our own phone number. The current research
investigates the cognitive and neural basis of how learning increases the amount
of information that we can process via chunking, and the extent to which the
contents of “chunks” are actively stored in working memory vs. off-loaded into
long-term memory after we have learned them. Importantly, the amount of
information a person is able to hold in mind in working memory has been shown to
be related to many other cognitive abilities (including intelligence), and
disruptions of working memory are common in clinical disorders like attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder and schizophrenia. Therefore, new knowledge
regarding how this information is stored and used is critical for understanding
the nature of important differences between individuals and how such differences
may be impacted by learning. In addition, in many real-world situations it is
vital to maintain detail about many objects or events at once, to make informed
decisions in real time (e.g., changing lanes while driving). This research will
inform how learning affects working memory capacity in such situations. In
addition to this work on chunking, the proposal also includes the development of
tools to allow scientists to measure memory performance and to do so in a wider
variety of individuals (i.e., via internet-based experiments), as well as an
outreach component, featuring the training and recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses behavioral and
electrophysiological measures of working memory to test the role of item-
specific, detailed information in chunk learning. The proposed studies are meant
to distinguish between two potential theoretical explanations for how chunks are
instantiated in working memory, one based on content-free pointers and the other
based on hierarchical storage of objects and their features. A sequence of
behavioral experiments asks how people’s representation of the visual features
of objects is affected by learning, and in particular the extent to which
learned regularities cause people to lose access to the details of visual
objects in working memory. These behavioral experiments are followed by
replications and extensions using electroencephalography (EEG), which will be
analyzed to look at an event-related potential, the contralateral delay
activity, which provides a measure of the amount of information held in working
memory. Together, the behavioral and electrophysiological measures inform how
learning and chunking affect our capacity to hold information in mind in working
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.