* 2141184
* PFI TT: Intelligent quality assurance and integration tool for sewer inspection data
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Chenang Liu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is conduct quality monitoring of sewers
for clear public benefit. Current practices in handling data incompatibility and
quality issues are manual and time-consuming. In addition, these practices are
customized for individual projects, a process hard to adapt to different
projects. Moreover, the sewer inspection data remains fragmented within the
utilities due to the lack of proper data management solutions, which makes data
less accessible for asset management. The envisioned technology will help to
combine sewer inspection data with standard PACP (Pipeline Assessment
Certification Program) format, ensure data quality, and integrate historical
data for easy and secured access so that cost-effective asset management plans
can be developed based on true conditions. Each utility could save up to 80% of
the time (on the order of months) for manual data quality assurance. With
accurate and accessible sewer condition data, it is anticipated that at least
20% (approximately $600 million) of the annual spending on pipe rehabilitation
can be saved for the entire industry. More importantly, improved sewer
infrastructure condition can greatly reduce gastrointestinal (GI) illness
emergency room visits induced by sanitary sewer overflow events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to 1) develop an artificial
intelligence (AI)-enabled algorithm to resolve data incompatibility issues to
maintain data fidelity and facilitate data exchange among different software
platforms; 2) establish a holistic AI-enabled methodological framework to
automatically detect and treat data quality issues, including data records
inconsistency, incompleteness, and duplicates, caused by the interruption of
inspection operations due to pipe defects or human errors; and 3) standardize
municipal utilities’ practices in managing sewer condition data using
blockchain-enabled technologies. This PFI-TT project will tailor the emerging
AI/machine learning and blockchain technologies to develop an efficient data
format translation algorithm, effective data quality assurance framework, and a
blockchain-enabled sewer data management tool, with the objective to save
engineers’ effort in data processing and render them more time for engineering
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.