* 2141605
* CAREER: Just add water? Investigating RNA stability in desiccated soil bacteria.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Paul Carini, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,154,389.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dryland soils are home to complex
microbiomes that mediate processes crucial to human and planetary health,
including water sustainability, soil fertility, food security, biodiversity, and
variability in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Drylands are particularly
sensitive to the effects of drought; about 20% of global drylands are classified
as “degraded” or “marginal,” with an annual cost of ~$300 billion. Soil microbes
persist in dry soil by entering desiccation-induced microbial dormancy. The
mechanisms that allow dryland microbes to enter and exit desiccation-induced
dormancy are poorly understood. This research project investigates how different
groups of bacteria tackle the problem of surviving desiccation. The soil
bacteria that will be investigated are abundant mediators of soil carbon cycling
and agricultural health in drylands. Thus, studying the mechanisms of
desiccation tolerance in soil bacteria can influence decisions about how to
prevent or rehabilitate degraded dryland ecosystems. The results can also lead
to new methods to measure how agricultural practices focused on reducing
irrigation will affect the microbes that regulate soil fertility. The project
aims to attract, train, and retain undergraduates that are historically excluded
in STEM fields as part of a larger vision to build a diverse American STEM
workforce. The research aims will be conducted by students conducting authentic
course-based research on drought—a topic of global and local importance. A
mentorship training program will educate graduate students in effective
mentorship and provide them with authentic mentorship
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes in dry soils face extreme stress from
increases in temperature and drought that lead to severe soil drying. Although
non-spore forming soil bacteria in drylands can persist without water for months
at a time through desiccation-induced dormancy, the molecular systems that
control the tolerance and resiliency to prolonged desiccation are largely
unknown. Specifically, the effects of drying on RNA—the labile molecular bridge
between genetic information and functional protein—are virtually unexplored. The
hypothesis that water availability regulates RNA stability, which in turn
controls desiccation tolerance will be tested. To test this hypothesis, the
primary investigator and a team of research students will quantify the
relationship between desiccation tolerance and RNA stability in cultures of
diverse soil bacteria by 1) measuring the desiccation tolerance of non-spore
forming soil bacteria; 2) relating desiccation tolerance to mRNA activity after
drying; and 3) calculating the gene-resolved RNA half-lives in desiccated and
rehydrated soil bacteria. Determining the molecular controls of bacterial
desiccation tolerance is vital to understand dryland vulnerability ahead of
visible aboveground changes and will inform development of soil inoculants
better suited to drought-impacted agricultural systems. The primary investigator
and student research teams will explain how the stability of different RNAs
influence desiccation tolerance in diverse soil bacteria with course-based
research activities. The primary investigator will apply an innovative graduate
student mentorship training program that connects historically excluded graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.