* 2141961
* NSF ChemData/AI Researcher Meeting: Evaluate Progress and Think About What the Future Brings
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Adrian Roitberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 44,205.00

Professor Adrian Roitberg of the University of Florida and Professor Facundo
Fernandez of the Georgia Institute of Technology are supported by the Chemistry
Division - Office of Special Projects, to organize a online workshop entitled
'NSF ChemData/AI Researcher Meeting: Evaluate Progress and Think about what the
Future Brings.' In the context of recent investments by the Division of
Chemistry of NSF to encourage in the application of Data, Machine Learning (ML),
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) sciences for chemistry research, the PIs are
engaging again the frontline researchers to catalyze a discussion and identify
research directions that may inspire more creative use or adaptation of modern
data science tools toward new chemical understanding and research directions.
The objective is to gather expert advice from AI/ML practitioners in the broadly
defined chemistry arena, to stimulate discussion about the role of Data science
in chemistry, and to think critically about lessons learned and future
endeavors. The workshop participants will explore what are the critical areas of
strength, what are the opportunities, and perhaps more importantly, what are
areas of chemistry where AI/ML has yet to make an impact, and yet, that are ripe
for future efforts, from the standpoints of research, facilities and resources,
and workforce development. The outcome of the workshop will be a report
available to the chemistry community and to the NSF that highlights research
directions, needs, gaps, and opportunities. The use of AI/ML tools in the
chemistry enterprise is in its infancy but is expected to start to occupy a
central role in the near future. Making sure that the community is involved in
discussions can accelerate discovery and potentially influence policies. The
results of this workshop will be advertised broadly, and will end in a document
that will present the current thoughts of leaders in the field, and can serve as
a roadmap for a future AI/ML-involved chemical
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.