* 2141626
* Addressing Cognitive and Instructional Challenges in Introductory Proofs Courses: A Gateway to Advanced STEM Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Anderson Norton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
abilities to reason logically, think critically, and solve complex problems. It
will identify instructional strategies for introductory proofs courses that
empower students to analyze and solve important problems in advanced STEM
settings. Poor performance in proofs courses often serves as a barrier for
students’ successful course progression and can prevent them from becoming or
remaining as STEM majors. This IUSE Engaged Student Learning Level 1 project at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) is designed
to increase and diversify the pool of students pursuing STEM careers. This will
be a two-phase project for which phase 1 will include a cyclical approach to
investigate student reasoning and to design and study research-based
instructional tasks that evoke and address challenges in the teaching and
learning of foundational ideas. Efforts from phase 1 will have an immediate
impact on every Virginia Tech mathematics major, including pre-service teachers
preparing to teach secondary mathematics. In phase 2, project outcomes will be
disseminated and used to support introductory proofs instructors nation-wide as
they optimize instruction for facilitating students’ development of robust
logical reasoning, critical thinking, and overall success in the STEM
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue several underlying goals.
The first goal is to provide students taking an introduction to proofs course
with opportunities to develop reasoning skills and to incorporate the logical
structures that are essential for flexibly solving problems in advanced STEM
settings. The second goal is to contribute to the knowledge base and fill gaps
in the literature through research findings by investigating: (1) how students
experience epistemological obstacles in proofs courses; (2) how course
instructors experience these student obstacles; and (3) how to enable these
instructors to employ teaching and learning interactions surrounding the
epistemological challenges that provide the students with opportunities to
realize, explore, and overcome these difficulties. The third goal is to
disseminate (through national workshops and other venues) research findings,
resources, and a replicable and sustainable course model that promotes student
success to instructors, departments, and institutions working to enhance student
learning, problem solving abilities, and success in introductory proofs courses
and beyond. The project team will take a cyclical approach by investigating
student reasoning and designing and modifying research-based instructional tasks
for evoking student experience of the cognitive challenges associated with
foundational ideas such as logical implication, quantifiers, and proof
techniques. Research and task design will draw on action-object theory, which
derives from Piaget’s (1970) genetic epistemology and Dubinski’s (1991)
extensions. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.