* 2141674
* 3D Printing Integrated Engineering Design Education for Preservice STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Weihang Zhu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing an Engineering
Design and Technology course tightly integrated with 3D Printing for preservice
STEM teachers. 3D printing brought transformative change to the Engineering
Design Process which is an iterative process that needs virtual/physical
prototyping; 3D printing can be used to rapidly make physical prototypes.
However, mere availability of 3D printing is not enough for teachers to fully
utilize its potential in their classrooms. In addition, while the Maker
movement, which embraces 3D printing, has been gaining traction, rigorous and
credible empirical research on the utilization of 3D printing for high school
preservice STEM teachers is missing from the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to purposefully integrate
in-depth discussion of 3D printing in a preservice STEM teachers' course on the
Engineering Design Process. The approach is to dissect a 3D printer’s hardware,
explain each component’s function, introduce each component’s manufacturing
methods, describe possible defects, and elucidate what works and what does not.
The course modules will be designed to meet the requirements from the Texas
Essential Knowledge and Skills standards. The development process will follow
the Scaffolded Technological, Pedagogical, and Content Knowledge lesson design
model. The developed course modules will be implemented and assessed in the
Engineering Design and Technology for Preservice Teachers course in the
teachHOUSTON program, the University of Houston’s secondary STEM teacher
preparation program. The target audience is ~45 STEM majors seeking STEM teacher
certification per year with diversified ethnic backgrounds for a total of 135
STEM majors who are preservice STEM teachers impacted during the project. The
project intends to contribute credible empirical research results to the
literature on the 3D printing-integrated Engineering Design Process for
secondary preservice STEM teachers. These modules will be shared and
disseminated through the teachHOUSTON STEM Interactive summer camp, teachHOUSTON
teacher professional development, and the University of Houston Research
Experience for Teachers site. The project research team will report the results
in conference presentations/papers and journal papers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.