* 2141072
* EAGER: ADAPT: Understanding Nonlinear Noise in LIGO: A Machine Learning Approach
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Evangelos Papalexakis, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The detection of gravitational waves by LIGO has enacted a paradigm shift in the
exploration and study of cosmic objects. Despite a series of upgrades and
improvements, the LIGO detectors suffer from noise whose origin is largely
unknown and whose presence limits the astrophysical reach of the detectors, thus
reducing the mass and distance of systems accessible to observation. This
project will develop novel machine learning methods capable of providing insight
into the physical origins of noise in LIGO, yielding actionable information to
guide commissioning efforts and future design decisions. Success in this project
will improve the operational stability of the detectors and increase their
astrophysical range, with the potential to advance scientific discovery. The
project will train graduate and undergraduate students in the confluence of
detector commissioning and machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence
(AI) research, will develop open-source tools for understanding and detecting
noise in complex scientific experiments, and foster an interdisciplinary
research community which bridges physics and machine learning. Finally, success
in the project has the potential to benefit efforts in cloud infrastructure
resilience, a problem with multiple parallels to understanding noise in
LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the main strain channel, each LIGO
detector has over 10,000 auxiliary channels monitoring the operation of each
subsystem and the seismic, acoustic, and electromagnetic environment. This vast
data set can be leveraged to understand spurious effects in the interferometer
that generate noise nonlinearities in the strain signal channel, and may cause
the interferometer to lose lock. The challenge is that, unlike previous
applications of ML/AI in LIGO, here there is no known ground truth (witness
channels known to capture features related to the nonlinearities) or well-
defined input-output relations in the channel data (due to feedback loops, which
can reinject noise into unrelated parts of the system). To address these unique
challenges, the project will develop novel unsupervised ML/AI methods to model
and analyze the vast amounts of data recorded in the LIGO detectors, towards
enhancing the understanding of the emergence of nonlinear noise. Developing new
tools and approaches for identifying instrumental noise promises to
significantly improve the sensitivity, data quality, and operational stability
of LIGO and future facilities, with the potential to increase detection rates of
mergers of the most massive stellar black holes by more than a factor of six.
The ML/AI techniques developed will also advance the state-of-the-art in (a)
physics-guided AI for anomaly detection in complex systems and (b) AutoML for
joint exploration of data and AI model
hyperparameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.