* 2141903
* Collaborative Research: Sustaining and Scaling the impact of the MIDFIELD project at the American Society for Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Joseph Roy, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2024
* USD 281,353.00

A substantial investment by the National Science Foundation, including awards
from Engineering Education and Centers in the Engineering Directorate and the
Division of Undergraduate Education in the Education and Human Resources
Directorate, has led to the creation of a large database of student records from
multiple institutions that has yielded groundbreaking research on student
pathways by a small interdisciplinary team of researchers, all while protecting
student identity. Using this database, the team has shown that while individual
engineering programs may have poor graduation rates, that a multi-institutional
view reveals that engineering programs as a whole graduate a larger fraction of
students than other groups of disciplines. The team has also shown that women
and men have similar graduation rates in engineering, likely a result of efforts
to make engineering education a welcoming environment for women and the high
academic credentials of the women who do study engineering. As with the overall
graduation rate, individual institutions and programs can and do have worse
outcomes. A comprehensive study of student pathways in various engineering
disciplines provided practitioners with rich information specific to their
disciplinary context. The team has also designed a variety of metrics that have
provided researchers and practitioners with an improved understanding of student
pathways. The quality of the data source and the research team is attested by
these substantial findings, multiple best paper awards, and other recognitions.
Following efforts to solicit data from additional institutions and create
opportunities for other researchers to use the database, this project will make
the data more accessible to a wider range of researchers while making it easier
to recruit new institutional partners. Making the data available to a wider
range of researchers in different disciplines will use result in a larger range
of research results more quickly using different approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will transition this useful dataset to ASEE,
the American Society for Engineering Education, and allow ASEE to build the
technical infrastructure to maintain the data collection after the transition.
ASEE has a mechanism for collecting institutional data (though with less detail)
and a mechanism for charging for access to the data they collect. ASEE does not
compete with alternative data providers because ASEE is not an academic
institution, which will make it easier to solicit new data to expand this
resource. The project will support ASEE in building a new data schema to collect
and store this richer dataset as well as build a range of tools to make it
easier for practitioners and researchers to view aspects of the data through
dashboards. During the term of the project, ASEE will also transfer all legal
agreements with the institutional partners. The current team of researchers
using the database will support this effort as a liaison to provide an interface
with institutional partners. To support a growing community of researchers in
using the database, the research team will also deliver workshops to help
educate people about the database and how to use it effectively. The research
team will also continue to develop software tools that can be used by other
researchers and practitioners to work with the database. Archiving and
maintaining the data collection at ASEE ensures that the current dataset will be
preserved, that it will grow to include a larger and more diverse set of
institutions, and that the dataset will be more accessible, which will ensure
that these insights are able to continue and, through ASEEâ€™s national platform,
influence multiple national stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.