* 2141955
* CAREER: Understanding and Quantifying System-level Seismic Performance for the Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures with Highly Ductile Concrete Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Matthew Bandelt, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2027
* USD 559,998.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support research on
the seismic behavior and design of reinforced concrete structural systems using
highly ductile concrete materials known as high-performance fiber-reinforced
cementitious composites (HPFRCCs). Engineers have made rapid advances in the
development of concrete materials with enhanced mechanical properties and
cracking resistance. Proof-of-concept studies have shown that HPFRCCs
drastically improve the seismic response of individual building components. In
order to promote transformational change and progress the science of structural
design for natural hazards, this project will focus on understanding how HPFRCCs
can be engineered for the use in entire building systems to improve seismic
performance. By creating a new understanding of how structural systems behave
with HPFRCCs, engineers will be able to design more resilient structures that
enhance the publicâ€™s safety, prosperity, and welfare. The project will integrate
physical experimentation, computational modeling, and risk assessment to create
new methods to evaluate and design reinforced concrete structures. Curricula
will be developed on the applications of novel construction materials. Outreach
activities will promote interest in STEM among female middle school students
across socioeconomic backgrounds and engage high school students within Newark,
New Jersey to study cost-benefit scenarios related to the use of new
infrastructure materials. This award will contribute to the National Science
Foundation (NSF) role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand and
quantify seismic performance of structural systems using highly ductile concrete
materials. The research program will lead to a new understanding of designing
buildings with HPFRCCs, and quantify their impact on performance, life safety,
and life-cycle costs. In order to achieve these outcomes, the research
integrates the following objectives: (1) quantify the plastic hinge response of
HPFRCC components under the combined effects of axial loading and bending
through a targeted set of physical experiments and detailed computational
simulations; (2) create computationally efficient models that account for the
unique response and failure characteristics of HPFRCC components for use in
system-level seismic analysis and design; (3) develop seismic design criteria,
perform risk assessment, and analyze cost-benefit scenarios for HPFRCC systems;
and (4) integrate educational and outreach programs to create research and
learning opportunities for students across age, gender, and socioeconomic
backgrounds. The project will advance the science of highly ductile concretes in
natural hazard applications and provide the foundation for a career in
leadership in research, education, and outreach in the use of novel construction
materials in structural systems. Experimental results will be accessible through
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org), and models will be integrated with
resources from the NHERI Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.