* 2141984
* Improving Student Learning Using a Three-Dimensional Immersive Learning Environment for Foundational Engineering Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Walter Secada, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2024
* USD 299,638.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in an undergraduate statics course using immersive experiences based on
augmented and mixed reality technologies. Statics is a foundational course in
many engineering programs throughout the country. In this course, students find
it especially challenging to solve engineering problems in which forces are
applied to physical objects in a three-dimensional space. Students need to learn
the spatial reasoning skills that are necessary to solve these complex problems.
Without these skills, students can become frustrated with the course, which can
affect student retention and persistence in engineering. This project will
address these challenges by creating a three-dimensional learning environment
that uses interactive software to help students learn foundational engineering
concepts and develop three-dimensional spatial reasoning skills. This project
will study the effectiveness of the learning environment and investigate the
conditions that lead to improvements in student learning. The research has the
potential to change how engineering students are taught in the early stages of
engineering programs. Successful deployment of this technology in coursework
could lead to broader adoption of immersive technology in statics courses. It is
expected that student learning will improve, which would help improve retention
rates in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to systematically build upon a theoretical and practical knowledge base of how a
statics course can be enhanced with immersive technology to improve student
learning, build spatial skills, and enhance student motivation. The three-
dimensional learning environment will be tailored to major course topics such
that students will be able to (a) perform three-dimensional manipulations that
are impossible with only pencil and paper, (b) immerse themselves in an
environment to interact with both real and computer-generated objects, and (c)
learn challenging abstract concepts that are vital for success in engineering.
The project will be conducted as a meta-design experiment where iterative design
of the learning environment and empirical studies will guide continuous
refinement of the technology. While the scope of the project is limited to
engineering, the pedagogical approach can be generalized to other STEM courses
that can benefit from immersive learning experiences. In addition, the software
developed in this project will not be limited to a specific hardware platform so
that it can be shared and adapted by institutions with different operating
platforms. Evaluation of project outcomes will be conducted by an independent
external evaluator. Project results will be disseminated using a website to
develop a community of practice for researchers, engineering education
conference presentations, and STEM education journals. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.