* 2141920
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genomic Investigation of Ancient Pathogens and the Implications of Conquest
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Lars Fehren-Schmitz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 30,044.00

When human groups first come into contact, diseases can be transmitted rapidly
through previously unexposed populations. In the past, diseases during initial
contact are believed to have led to mass mortality and likely influenced the
outcome of colonization attempts. This doctoral dissertation project uses
ancient DNA data to detect pathogens associated with conquest and colonization
and determine how the pathogens evolved and why they were so deadly. The project
outcomes can advance knowledge about the consequences of colonization as well as
the evolution and ecology of diseases, many of which are still a struggle to
treat and control today. The researchers emphasize substantive collaborations
with descendant communities and community stakeholders. Local communities are
actively involved in the project, and the research contributes to educational
materials and museum exhibits in those regions. The project also fosters science
communication and public outreach activities and provides laboratory training
for undergraduates, including students from underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ancient pathogen genomics project aims to
identify which specific pathogens were causing the widespread deaths of
Indigenous people during European conquest, how these diseases evolved in a new
environment, and how different environments and/or cultural practices may have
led to differences in disease spread or mortality outcomes. The study examines
data generated from approximately 200 individuals from four strategically
selected early contact-era sites of differing ecological and cultural
environments. The researchers use gold-standard ancient pathogen genomics
methods to sequence the DNA of these pathogens, determine their evolutionary
trees, confirm their European origin, discover how and when they may have
evolved into modern-day strains, and detect hybridization or diversification
events. Where there is enough data, the researchers also perform functional
analyses to identify variants through specific defining markers such as any gene
loss or gain important for virulence or pathogenicity. In addition to standard
high-throughput genomics and bioinformatics methods, this study incorporates
historical accounts, disease ecology, and archaeological contexts to uncover a
more comprehensive perspective of key events in human
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.