* 2141923
* Improving Software Testing Education through Lightweight Explicit Testing Strategies and Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kathryn Stolee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing tools and pedagogy
that will help students learn how to write better software tests. Software
testing is a critical skill for computer science graduates when they enter the
workforce. A software professional with better software testing skills is likely
to produce more secure, more robust, and less error-prone software. Writing
effective software tests is an open-ended problem that students find very
challenging. The use of checklists has been shown to be an effective practice
for helping students learn other software engineering skills. This project will
investigate the use of checklists to provide a procedure that students can use
to write software tests. Students will learn how to write software tests and use
them to evaluate the quality of software they develop. The project team will
develop a software tool that will run students’ tests on software and provide
real-time hints and feedback on the quality of their tests. The project will
also examine the benefits of testing education for students in terms of their
learning outcomes and code quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to help students develop better software testing skills so that they
will be successful in the computing workforce. This project will develop new
data-driven methods for generating automated testing feedback and hints for
software tests written by students. The project team will conduct a longitudinal
study to assess the impact of using checklists and automated feedback on
students’ ability to write tests using six evaluations over three years. The
project will address three research questions: (1) To what extent does the
checklist intervention improve students’ software testing outcomes? (2) What are
the benefits of automated feedback on test coverage and quality as compared to
less rigorous interventions? (3) What is the impact of writing high-quality
tests on student learning outcomes? The impact of the interventions will be
measured using test quality, implementation quality, improvement between pre-
and post-test quiz scores, self-assessment of testing ability using a survey,
and the time students spend working on each phase of their lab and homework
assignments. The project has the potential to have a lasting impact on how
undergraduate students learn software testing. The results of this project will
be disseminated through conferences and journals that focus on computer science
education. The project team will post project results including tools,
experiments, and educational materials on GitHub. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.