* 2141730
* Collaborative Research: Using Networked Improvement Communities to Scale Up Program  Transformation for Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* W. Gary Martin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,162,362.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of improving mathematics
teacher preparation by studying a networked improvement community (NIC) working
to transform secondary mathematics teacher programs at universities aligned with
national recommendations for mathematics teacher preparation. The U.S. faces a
significant shortage of well-prepared secondary mathematics teachers,
particularly in the highest-need districts. This project has the potential to
impact over 2,500 preservice mathematics teachers during the four years of the
project, meeting the IUSE program’s intent of broadening participation in STEM
education through research. Beginning with 43 secondary mathematics teacher
preparation programs, this project intends to expand to engage and study at
least 65 programs in the Mathematics Teacher Education Partnership (MTEP 2.0)
network, including the addition of 11 under-resourced institutions and/or
minority-serving institutions, by 2025 to increase the number and diversity of
well-prepared beginning mathematics teachers, while foregrounding issues of
equity and access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting a diverse pool of future
teachers and infusing equity and justice are core to the transformation
activities of the programs in this project. The goals of this project include
examination of how a collaborative structure of NICs supports, accelerates, and
sustains secondary mathematics teacher preparation program transformation
efforts. Variations in existing structures related to roles of individuals, the
culture for change, and the decision-making processes for leadership are also to
be investigated. The project will be operationalized through creation of four
types of hubs (Administrative, Research, Support, and Outreach). The NICs use
Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles to iteratively prototype, test, and refine
interventions. The project’s research is intended to identify which supports
within the collaborative structure of NICs enable change agents to effectively
facilitate transformation efforts. Research methodologies will be largely
qualitative with analyses using Dedoose (a web-based application for
organization and analysis of research data), to support systematic procedures
for coding and categorizing data. Interview transcripts and project
documentation data will be analyzed using an approach that closely follows
methods explicated by Miles et al. (Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods
Sourcebook, 2014) and a constant comparative approach based on grounded theory,
starting with the project’s theory of change related to the primary drivers:
Change Agents, Knowledge Building, Knowledge Sharing, Network Building,
Responding to Context, and Outreach. Since each NIC has stated aims and driver
diagrams (representing strategies toward achieving the aim), those dimensions
will frame initial coding efforts. The NICs are categorized as Beginning,
Progressing, Sustaining, or Re-establishing. From each of these four categories,
the project will purposefully select representative cases to target for annual
interviews, rotating the selection of case studies. These qualitative data will
be paired with quantitative data, such as surveys of the number of program
completers and program progress toward meeting the MTEP Guiding Principles, to
create an image of progress and actions. The knowledge generated from this
project is expected to provide a national model for use of school-university
partnerships and the NIC design to transform secondary mathematics teacher
preparation in support of more equitable outcomes for mathematics. The approach
also has the potential to be adapted to other areas of teacher preparation or
educational improvement. Results, including cases, are to be disseminated in
collaboration with the Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators, at
conferences and in newsletters, and research publications in journals such as
Mathematics Teacher Educator and magazines such as Mathematical Association of
America Notes and American Mathematical Society Notices. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.
Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.