* 2141844
* Biological Implications of Gender Roles in Mobile Pastoralist Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Jacqueline Eng, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 170,902.00

Pastoralist communities have played a role in shaping human history over
thousands of years, and as a subsistence strategy, pastoralism continues to be
practiced in many parts of the world. This project tests previous assumptions
about the egalitarian nature of pastoralist societies, using bioarchaeological
methods and data to investigate how factors such as diet, mobility, and social
organization may have impacted people differently depending on age and sex. The
research advances knowledge about the biological impacts of gendered experience
and human adaptive strategies that have been employed by human groups in
shifting social and natural environments. The project includes a comprehensive
program to strengthen education and resources in STEM fields, facilitate public
outreach and conservation efforts in cultural heritage, and provide analytical
training in advanced methods of data analysis including isotope analysis and
dental microwear studies. The investigators also develop strategies for
effective science communication and dissemination of research findings with
international colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators examine
osteological markers of diet, health, physiological stress, and weaning
strategies to test assumptions of egalitarianism among pastoralists, with the
expectation that gendered experience will differ as a result of increasing
social stratification, even among more mobile pastoralist groups. The project
employs analytical chemistry, macroscopic skeletal assessment, morphological
characterization through 3D laser scanning, and dental microwear analysis, to
obtain and compare detailed assessments of diet, health, and stress across a
number of past populations. Comprehensive diet and health indices are generated
for groups living during periods of significant cultural transformation,
including times of increased mobility for some groups and sedentarization for
others, as well as widening social stratification. This research strategy allows
examination of 1) potential variation in biocultural impacts, health profiles,
and physiological stress associated with gender roles to test notions of
egalitarianism; 2) dietary signatures to assess continuity and change among
groups, and 3) the timing and nature of weaning strategies employed within and
between populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.