* 2141017
* PFI-TT: Development of Easy-to-Use Affordable Sensors for Rapid Detection of Environmental Pollutants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create a low cost technology to
detect, screen and quantify per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), an
emerging group of environmental pollutants. PFAS are used in many commercial
products and applications and have recently been identified as posing
significant threats to human health. The proposed technology addresses the
environmental testing needs for low cost detection of PFAS by providing the
tools needed to better estimate their distribution, exposure, and treatment
efficacy. Through partnerships with industry and established advanced technology
and innovation centers, this PFI-TT project seeks to establish the performance,
testing and manufacturing of a portable device for field analysis. Other
activities include the development of a go-to-market strategy, customer
discovery, and validation. The technology developed in this project may provide
broader adoption by non-expert users, providing social and economic benefits in
the environmental sector. The team will work with the Shipley Center for
Innovation and the Graduate School at Clarkson University to develop new
curriculum and workforce development modules covering laboratory management,
team science and intellectual property, and teamwork and collaboration in the
workplace. The team will also organize workshops to train undergraduate and
graduate students in innovation and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to advance the development of programmable receptors that
have the capability to react with PFAS through electrostatic and fluoride-
specific interactions, generating concentration-dependent changes in the status
of the receptors, thus enabling their measurement by low cost spectroscopic and
electrochemical techniques. Fundamental investigations of the interaction of
PFAS with the receptors have led to the discovery of unique candidates that
change their optical and electrochemical properties with the type, length,
structure, and concentration of PFAS. This PFI-TT project may develop protocols
and a manufacturing processes to create portable sensors and establish
performance for quantitative detection of PFAS. The availability and
commercialization of easy-to-use affordable PFAS sensors have the potential
result in more effective, broadly available, and lower-cost analyses that may
translate into improved monitoring of environmental
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.