* 2141205
* PFI-TT: An Automated Platform for Production and Distribution of Engineered Tissue Microspheres
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Elizabeth Lipke, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to advance 3D engineered tissues such
that they can be used commercially for cancer drug screening. Engineered tissues
have long been considered promising models for drug testing since they more
closely approximate human tissue than traditional 2D cell culture systems and
self-aggregated 3D models. These systems can also lower drug development costs.
The problem lies in the inability to create these 3D engineered tissues rapidly
and uniformly. This project works to bridge these gaps and thereby provide more
effective drug screening models. This will advance efforts to eliminate
ineffective drug candidates at an early stage, expediting the anti-cancer drug
development process. Development of safer and more effective anticancer drugs
can improve clinical outcomes. Graduate student, undergraduate student, and
postdoctoral fellow researchers will gain insight into innovation and
entrepreneurship and prepare to lead commercialization of future
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will establish the
ability to produce and distribute engineered tissue microspheres into multi-well
plates on a large scale, which is a critical step for enabling the further
validation of the effectiveness of disease-specific engineered tissue
microspheres in cancer drug screening and eventually to present the pre-plated
engineered tissue microspheres as assay-ready products for customers. The
overarching goal of this proposal is to produce and prepare pre-plated assay-
ready engineered tissue microspheres suitable for colon cancer drug screening
purposes. To achieve this goal, we will: (1) design and fabricate a low-cost
photocrosslinking system for consistent and scalable engineered tissue
microspheres production; (2) design and fabricate a prototype for engineered
tissue microspheres distribution into well plates; (3) design approaches for
fabricating disposable microfluidic device cartridge consistently and rapidly.
The outcome of this project will be a bread-board prototype of our microfluidic
encapsulation platform and an automated dispensing system that enables rapid and
scalable engineered tissue microspheres production and dispensing. This project
will establish the ability to produce and employ more effective 3D tissue models
for drug screening as compared to current 2D cell models and 3D spheroidal cell
aggregates. Compared to competing 3D cell aggregate technology, this engineered
tissue microspheres technology has the advantages of incorporating non-
aggregating cells and multiple cell types and allowing modulation of cellular
microenvironment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.