* 2141198
* PFI-TT:  Soil Nutrient and Moisture Monitoring Probe Sensors to Optimize Fertilizer and Water Use
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Carmen Gomes, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to optimize fertilizer and irrigation
in farming with data collected from novel sensors. These sensors will
continuously monitor soil nitrogen, salinity, and moisture throughout an entire
growing season (up to four months). Currently, farmers usually do not measure
these soil parameters because it requires them to tediously ship samples back to
a laboratory for expensive analysis. These sensors will provide a low-cost, on-
site method to perform these soil parameter tests. This project will improve
soil and watershed health through reduced fertilizer runoff and irrigation
water. The data collected will inform soil parameter models to enable better
predictions of regional soil health. This project's materials and sensors can be
adapted to other monitoring applications, such as chemical pollution in
watersheds and drinking water or remediation efforts at polluted environmental
sites. The system will improve farming profit margins, environmental and public
health, and water scarcity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
advance sensors for agricultural monitoring. The objectives are to: (2) develop
sensors to monitor nitrogen and salt concentration levels in the soil, (2)
integrate the sensors into polymer-based probes that can be buried in a farm
field, and (3) evaluate the completed sensor probe during an entire corn crop
cycle. Anticipated challenges include: the simultaneous sensing of nitrogen,
salinity, moisture, and conductivity; the longevity of sensors to last the
entire growing season; acquiring sensor readings at different soil depths under
different temperatures and pH; and powering and transmitting the sensor data to
a handheld data logger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.