* 2141193
* Acquisition of Flow Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Video Microscopy System to Support Investigation of Nano- and Micro-Particle Transport and Surface Interaction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 316,927.00

Replacement of aging equipment that has served well beyond its expected lifetime
is to be acquired by the investigator. The equipment performs direct real-time
observations of nano- and micro-particle (colloid) transport near surfaces, and
their attachment to surfaces. We care about colloid transport near surfaces
because it governs their transport distance in porous media in contexts ranging
from protecting groundwater resources from pathogens to delivery of novel
engineered nanoparticles for subsurface cleanup of hazardous waste. Despite its
importance in a range of contexts, our current ability to predict colloid
transport distances in environmental porous media is poor, due to the fact that,
under environmental conditions, particles and surfaces tend to repel one another
as both tend to be negatively charged. Colloid-surface repulsion hinders
particle attachment to surfaces (unfavorable attachment condition), except at
locations where nanoscale charge heterogeneity on surfaces locally eliminates
repulsion. The replacement equipment will allow us to determine the properties
of nanoscale charge heterogeneity on surfaces by allowing us to perform arrays
of colloid transport experiments by changing physical parameters such as
solution velocity, colloid size, and colloid density, as well as chemical
parameters such as solution pH, solution ionic strength, and surface mineralogy
and composition. The equipment being replaced has supported five NSF-funded
collaborative research projects, training of two post-doctoral and nine graduate
student researchers, and dissemination of new knowledge and theory via more than
thirty publications, and colloid transport freeware for utilization by
researchers and practitioners (Parti-Suite). The new equipment will allow the
investigator to continue to educate graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers, and contribute to new knowledge through research, publication, and
provision of freeware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system includes a flow chamber
placed on the stage of an inverted fluorescence microscope, with a high-
resolution camera, and a microfluidic flow system for precise pulse-free flow.
The existing equipment will support currently-funded research by the P.I. and
his Ph.D. advisee, as well as a collaborating PI and two of his Ph.D. advisees,
as well as anticipated future collaborative awards. Leveraged transport
experiments and mechanistic simulations elucidate how sizes and spatial
densities of nanoscale attractive domains on surfaces result in the development
of fast- and slow-attaching colloid subpopulations in a population of otherwise
identical individuals. Segregation of otherwise identical colloids into fast-
and slow-attaching subpopulations is thought to cause an ubiquitously-observed
deviation from the conventionally-expected exponential decreases in colloid
concentration with increasing distance from source. Ongoing investigations will
explore the intersecting roles of incomplete pore-scale mixing and colloid-
surface repulson on the interactions of colloids with surfaces under unfavorable
conditions. The equipment grant will also provide a platform for outreach
efforts in the Secondary School Science Teaching (MSSST) graduate program at the
University of Utah, which engages middle and high school biology, chemistry, and
earth science teachers in six-week long summer internships that culminate in a
teacher-developed series of grade-appropriate lesson plans through which
teachers will impact over 600 students. This outreach to middle and high school
students will be conducted by six teachers-in training in summer 2023.
Simulation capabilities will be expanded and provided to the public via Parti-
Suite freeware. This freeware consists of five modules for simulations of
particle transport and surface interaction. All modules utilize a graphical user
interface for data input and simulation output, although all data and
simulations are also output as text and Excel files. Dr. Johnson will continue
to assist researchers in adoption of the freeware via in-person workshops and
Zoom-based instruction. The source codes will be made available to
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.