* 2141560
* Perinuclear Positioning of Active Genes in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Meng Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,004,258.00

The cell nucleus provides a subcellular compartment to harbor the genetic
information, the DNA, and more importantly, to enable precise regulation of
individual genes in response to developmental and environmental stimuli.
Accumulating evidence from studies in yeast and animals indicates that the
nucleus controls gene activity by spatially segregating active and inactive
genes into distinct subnuclear domains. In particular, the nuclear envelope is
divided into two domains, the nuclear pores and the non-pore region, for hosting
active and inactive genes, respectively. However, plants contain significantly
different nuclear-envelope components from those in yeast and animals; as a
result, if and how perinuclear gene positioning contributes to gene activity in
plants remains unknown. The proposed experiments aim to unveil the significance
and mechanism of perinuclear gene positioning in gene activation in plants and
establish a live-cell imaging technology for visualizing individual genes. The
outcome of this project is expected to generate novel insights into both plant-
specific and general principles of spatial genome organization and gene
regulation in eukaryotes and establish an enabling technology to facilitate
studies on the spatial organization of individual genes in plants. Further, the
project will train the next generation of scientists, including underrepresented
minority students, in critical thinking, experimental design and execution, and
scientific communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims
to use Arabidopsis thaliana as a model to understand the significance and
mechanism of perinuclear gene positioning in gene activation in plants. The PI
pioneered the discovery of the nuclear-periphery localization of light-inducible
genes upon activation. Stemming from the previous studies, the PIs will employ
cell biology and genetics approaches to determine the function of the nuclear
envelope in the developmental and environmental control of gene activation and
to elucidate the mechanism of gene recruitment to the nuclear periphery in
plants. Also, the PIs plan to establish a CRISPR-based imaging technology for
labeling single-copy genes in living plant cells. Together, this integrated
approach is expected to provide insights into the function of the plant nuclear
envelope in gene regulation and establish a genetically tractable experimental
model for studying gene positioning in the plant kingdom. The research team will
disseminate the scientific findings and the new empowering technology through
publication and conference presentations to promote research on gene positioning
in plants. This award was co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms and Cellular
Dynamics and Function clusters of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.