* 2141722
* Developing Dynamic and Interactive Materials to Teach Computing Systems Concepts to All Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Tia Newhall, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2025
* USD 485,522.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building a community of
computer systems education experts to develop and contribute to interactive
academic experiences for college students. It will also contribute to helping
reduce the cost of higher education. The significant expense of modern college
textbooks limits availability to those who can afford them. As computational
thinking and programming increasingly become desired skills, the computing
community needs low-cost curricular materials to make computing courses
available to all students. Online curricular materials are readily available for
introductory programming courses. However, such resources for advanced computing
courses do not exist. To address this need, this project's leadership developed
“Dive into Systems,” a free, online textbook for teaching advanced computer
systems topics. The goal of this project is to augment “Dive into Systems” with
dynamic visualizations, interactive exercises, and worked examples making it a
complete textbook with online resource that will include exercises for students
and supplemental resources for instructors. The project’s focus is on resource
development. Its main research questions are related to how the resources are
developed, how well they are working, and how effective they are as aids to
understanding textbook topics. The project has potential to help the field of
computing become more equitable by developing a high-quality, free, online
textbook that can be used by college students
anywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, a collaborative effort between
Swarthmore College and the US Military Academy, will continue development of a
freely available online textbook on computing systems, including systems
software and computer architecture fundamentals. Project goals include four key
areas. A primary focus is to develop interactive exercises for each chapter in a
computer systems textbook that allow students to perform knowledge checks using
an open-source, NSF-funded project called Runestone Interactive. Secondly, the
project will expand the Runestone framework to allow for interactive systems
programming, such as assembly code execution and stack tracing. As a third goal,
the power of the computer science education community will be leveraged to
create a rich assortment of instructor materials. Finally, the textbook chapters
will be augmented with short videos visualizing key concepts and examples. The
project will develop, implement, and evaluate exercises focusing on a subset of
six total topic areas each year. Expert participants from the computer science
community will work in smaller sub-topic focused groups which will include
topics on C programming (e.g., GDB and Valgrind), assembly programming, binary
representation, the memory hierarchy and caching, computer architecture,
operating systems, and parallel computing and code optimization. The evaluation
plan for the project will employ quantitative and qualitative methods. Following
the model of early adopter evaluation in prior work, the PIs will distribute
student and faculty surveys to gather data across multiple institutions. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.