* 2141468
* EAGER: SaTC: CORE: Small: Decentralized Data Assurance by Fair Proof of Work Consensus Federated Ledgers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Yu Chen, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Moving toward the fifth-generation (5G) and beyond 5G (B5G) wireless networks
envisions a pervasively-deployed and data-driven intelligent edge network
integrating machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). One of the
most attractive features of an intelligent B5G network is to share data among
objects to collaboratively make comprehensive decisions and provide better
services to people. A huge amount of data is produced and collected by Internet
of Things (IoT) connected through the BSG edge networks. Breach of integrity,
authentication, or privacy of data may cause disastrous consequences as the
dependence of the economy and societies on the security of data also deepen.
B5G-based IoT applications must meet highly dynamic and diverse requirements in
terms of latency, reliability, data rate, and user-defined performance metrics.
In addition, most of the data is locally significant, which is generated,
collected, processed on-site or near-site for instant decision making.
Transmitting these data to a remote cloud center not only causes unnecessary
delays but also wastes precious resources. Instead, there is a need for
decentralized, online solutions that can proactively adapt to the B5G edge
network dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the research
frontier of data security in B5G wireless network enabled intelligent edge
computing paradigm. Aiming at paving the way to make blockchain an organic part
of future intelligent networks, the investigator proposes a novel Federated
Ledgers Architecture with fair proof-of-work (PoW) consensus enabled by Miner-
twins in the Edge-fog-cloud paradigm (FLAME). Leveraging the Digital Twins (DT)
and Microservices architecture, FLAME is a scale-able, decentralized data
security solution for highly heterogeneous B5G IoT networks. This project
consists of two technical components: (1) a Federated ledgers-based
Decentralized Data Management (Fed-DDM) scheme for data assurance in
hierarchical edge networks; and (2) a novel edge-fog-cloud Miner-Twins (MinT)
architecture to enable a Fair-Mining-as-a-Service (FMaaS) consensus mechanism in
heterogeneous blockchain networks at the edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.