* 2141538
* Collaborative Research: Advancing knowledge of Arctic sea ice interactions with tropopause polar vortices and Arctic cyclones
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 04/30/2025
* USD 401,241.00

In recent decades Arctic sea ice has become more mobile and thinner, leading to
an increasingly important role of Arctic cyclones in sea ice loss, which can
occur at an astonishing rate of 0.5 million square kilometers (about 200,000
square miles) within a 3-day period. This research aims to understand the
critical mechanisms that determine the location, strength, evolution, and
characteristics of Arctic cyclones (ACs) and tropopause polar vortices (TPVs),
and their potential for influencing sea ice break-up and decline. TPVs are an
important precursor to the development and evolution of ACs and are also one of
the longest-lived features in the Earth’s lower atmosphere. Yet their locations
in data-sparse regions of the Arctic and their relatively small spatial scale
make it difficult to observe and understand their detailed structure and
resulting impacts on the Earth’s climate. Fundamental differences exist between
the dynamics of cyclones in middle latitudes and the Arctic. For example,
atmospheric vortices rather than waves play a more significant role in cyclone
lifecycles and radiative processes have increased importance in maintaining and
strengthening TPVs. Thus, the correct treatment of cloud and radiative processes
in models is likely critical to accurately defining the structure and intensity
of TPVs and ACs. The data needed to expand knowledge of these Arctic processes
is currently limited due to the relatively sparse Arctic conventional observing
network and the difficulties in obtaining high-quality measurements of Arctic
clouds and moisture from satellite-based remote sensing. This project will also
assess where new data are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the coupling of TPVs and ACs with the underlying sea surface and sea
ice during the summer and advance our knowledge of how this coupling can lead to
rapid sea ice loss. Researchers will test the hypothesis that an accurate
representation of the vertical distribution of water vapor is necessary to
represent the radiative heating required to evolve and intensify TPVs and ACs.
The researchers will combine observations with state-of-the-art high-resolution
numerical weather models and fully-coupled Earth-System models through coupled
ensemble data assimilation for multi-scale studies. The team will perform
observing system simulation experiments (OSSEs) as well as observing system
experiments (OSEs) using atmospheric data from an aircraft field campaign and
routinely available satellite and atmospheric data to estimate the observation
impacts in a variety of well-defined scenarios. Knowledge gained from detailed
simulations and observations of the processes that cause error growth will lead
to improvements in weather and climate prediction by improving the
representation of these processes in Earth-system numerical models across a wide
range of scales, which is a main priority in the 2022-2026 Arctic Research Plan
by The Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC). Students at all
levels will have an opportunity to work with the data produced in this project,
with a focus towards broadening participation from chronically underrepresented
groups in STEM fields and in Oklahoma, including students identifying as Native
Americans, members of First Nations, indigenous people, and American
Indians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.