* 2141825
* The Simulation Physiology Data Science Model: Engaging STEM  Undergraduates in Data Science Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Melissa Luke, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing and studying an
instructional model in data science education and workforce development. College
undergraduates preparing to enter science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM)-related fields need opportunities to learn how to collect,
analyze, and communicate about complex, human-generated data. This project
provides STEM undergraduates with multiple opportunities to engage with these
three basic data science practices, in a highly structured, hands-on learning
environment that involves real-time, complex data. Learners in different
collegiate learning environments experience stress, indicated by perspiration
and increases in respiration and heart rate. In this project, STEM
undergraduates will be paired with learners engaged in a challenging learning
environment. As each learner experiences specific challenges, each STEM
undergraduate must collect and analyze the resulting human stress data. Later,
the STEM undergraduate practices communicating the analyzed data back to the
person from whom it was collected. Beginning with basic preparation in human
research ethics, this project then advances STEM undergraduates through seven
data collection, analysis, and communication cycles. This project’s fundamental
objective is guiding STEM undergraduates in learning three basic data science
practices associated with human-generated data, an objective that aligns with
the National Science Foundation’s emphasis on developing the 21st century data
science workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Data Science
Education &amp; Training agenda suggests “Support(ing) the Design and
Development of Data Science Pedagogy and Curricula”. In direct response, the
Simulation Physiology Data Science Model (SIM-Physio) serves as a pedagogical
model focused on data science practices as the primary outcome. STEM
undergraduates planning to enter the fields including Biology, Neuroscience,
Psychology, and Data Analytics will need to actively engage and accurately
collect and analyze human physiological data. Additionally, STEM undergraduates
must learn to communicate complex data to the general public. The SIM-Physio
Data Science pedagogical model harnesses the physiological data that learners
exhibit in a challenging learning environment to prepare STEM undergraduate
students to engage in three data science practices – collecting, analyzing, and
communicating human physiological data. In this data science model, STEM
undergraduates will learn and practice their collection and analysis of human
physiological data (i.e., heart rate, heart rate variability, blood pressure,
physical movement, and respiration rates) from learners at seven points in a
semester (baseline, plus six different simulations). Learning to communicate
scientific data to laypersons is critical; therefore, this pedagogical model
further challenges STEM undergraduates to practice communicating those data back
to learners from whom the data were collected. Development and refinement of
this data science pedagogical model holds implications for STEM undergraduate
preparation and opportunities for diffusion to multiple biomedical training
programs and facilities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.