* 2141992
* Implementing a Statewide, Transformative Initiative to Expand Access to Credit Bearing STEM Credentials in Ohio
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Lindsay Daugherty, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2026
* USD 999,050.00

This project aims to improve and broaden participation in undergraduate STEM
education by implementing and investigating efforts to award college credit for
industry certification and licensing, as well as for vocational coursework.
States and community college systems across the country are exploring higher
education policies and models that systematically award college credit for
noncredit learning in applied STEM fields. Statewide articulation agreements
that award credit for noncredit learning aim to expand access to high quality
teaching and learning in credit-bearing STEM programs and to meet the changing
education and workforce needs of a diverse set of learners and workers. In
addition to opening up access to applied STEM programs, these statewide
articulation agreements help students to save time and money on duplicative
coursework, and deliver a message that colleges value and support students with
different sources of STEM learning. Recognizing the growth in these new
initiatives, scarce literature on these efforts, and limited research on
nontraditional students, the project team intends to investigate (1) the
characteristics, educational aspirations, and priorities of individuals with
noncredit STEM learning; (2) the design and effectiveness of strategies for
communicating about educational programs and initiatives with populations of
nontraditional learners; (3) the experience of students with noncredit STEM
learning as they transition into credit-bearing STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Working closely with the Ohio Department of Higher Education (ODHE),
Ohio Technical Centers (OTCs), Ohio community colleges, and industry
representatives (e.g., associations), the RAND team intends to build evidence
that will inform the implementation and scale-up of a statewide initiative
focused on two types of noncredit learning, vocational coursework earned through
a statewide network of technical centers and industry certification and
licenses. The project intends to conduct a mixed methods investigation that
includes both primary and secondary data collection and analyses. First, the
team will conduct a literature review and collect data on individuals with
noncredit learning and their education and training decisions to inform the
design of outreach approaches to these individuals. Then, the team will
rigorously test at least one of these outreach approaches by conducting an
experimental or quasi-experimental study and analyzing administrative data.
Finally, the team will collect and analyze primary and administrative data to
better understand how these initiatives are being implemented within
institutions, to explore whether individuals with noncredit learning are
leveraging these statewide agreements to enroll in college, and to assess how
these individuals are progressing with credit-bearing STEM coursework. This
project is funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education program that
aims to promote and understand innovative and research-based teaching and
learning initiatives and the Advanced Technological Education program that
supports efforts to improve technician education and the technical workforce in
established and emerging STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.