* 2141744
* Collaborative Research: A new appraisal of tectonic mobility in the northern Cordillera using connections between the Coast Mountains batholith and Alberta foreland basin
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Robinson Cecil, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2025
* USD 127,423.00

Western North America is made up of a collage of exotic terranes – blocks of
crust that originated in other locations and were later accreted to the
continental margin. Myriad studies have been performed to reconstruct the
geologic and geographic histories of these blocks and to develop a chronology of
how western North America was assembled. One of the enduring controversies is
how far-travelled are some of these terranes. In particular, researchers debate
the distance that one exotic block – the Insular superterrane – has been
translated. Some argue that it has migrated &gt;1500 kilometers northward – and
perhaps eastward – along the North American margin, while others believe it has
always remained near its present-day latitude. These hypotheses will be
evaluated by looking for connections between zircons crystallizing in the Coast
Mountains batholith (part of the Insular superterrane) and those that have been
recycled into sedimentary rocks of interior Canada. The presence or absence of
the distinctive Coast Mountains batholith zircon fingerprint in rocks at similar
latitudes will either refute or support the idea that the Coast Mountains were
far away at the time of deposition of the targeted sedimentary strata. The
proposed research will support students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels, as well as a postdoctoral scholar. It will broaden and diversify the
STEM workforce through promotion of early career female scientists and the
inclusion of underrepresented minority students from Hispanic-serving
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most critical unresolved
questions in the tectonics of the North American Cordillera concerns the degree
of tectonic mobility of terranes during Late Jurassic and Cretaceous time. End-
member hypotheses posit that terranes presently located in British Columbia and
southeast Alaska were either: 1) translated from the latitude of (Baja)
California, and perhaps outboard of the Mezcalera Ocean basin, or 2) have
remained near their present position and along the continental margin. The
debate between the two forms the basis for the enduring “Baja-BC” controversy,
which has been reinvigorated by discussion in recently published syntheses.
These end-member hypotheses will be tested by determining whether detrital
zircons in foreland basin strata of Alberta, Canada (part of stable North
America) were derived from the Coast Mountains batholith (CMB; part of the
purportedly mobile terrane). This test is enabled by the recent recognition that
zircons from igneous rocks of the CMB are isotopically and geochemically
distinct from other coeval arcs along the margin (e.g. the Sierra Nevada and
Idaho batholiths). The study will: (1) define zircon age, Hf isotopic
composition and trace element trends in plutons of the CMB, (2) generate similar
data for plutons of the Omineca belt (a second suite of Cretaceous plutons in
British Columbia), and (3) compare these igneous records with new studies of
zircons in Cretaceous-Paleogene strata of the foreland basin in the northern
Cordillera. Establishing connections between the CMB and inland foreland basin
strata would provide strong support for models that invoke limited tectonic
mobility, whereas the lack of such connections would support models that involve
large-scale north-south and/or east-west
displacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.