* 2141847
* Collaborative Research: Individualizing Instruction and Improving Research Using Adaptive Testing
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ben Van Dusen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 441,494.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing diagnostic tools
that will help instructors help students succeed in high-enrollment introductory
physics courses. This collaborative project involves investigators at Iowa State
University (Award DUE-2141847) and Purdue University (Award DUE-2142317). The
introductory college physics course often poses a major hurdle for students
working toward a degree in a STEM discipline. Because the course often has a
large enrollment, it is difficult for instructors to provide personalized
instruction and other customized resources to help students succeed. This
project plans to develop a free online assessment platform that provides physics
instructors with measures of individual student-level and course-level learning.
These tools should allow physics instructors to provide individualized
instruction by providing student-specific, actionable feedback throughout the
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The online, adaptive, cognitive assessment platform
is intended to assist instructors in evaluating the effectiveness of their
course and addressing inequities in student outcomes. The platform will provide
analyses and visualizations to highlight skills that need additional attention
for all students in the course and to identify individual students who need help
with specific topics. Working with instructors, the investigators plan to
develop adaptive tests in modules covering a range of topics in mechanics.
Planned workshops should support physics instructors in using the tests in their
courses. Tools developed in the project should also support the future creation
of adaptive assessments for other STEM courses in a variety of institutions. The
investigators intend to address the following education research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What skills do instructors and researchers prioritize
in introductory mechanics courses?&lt;br/&gt;(2) To what extent do existing
assessment instruments measure these skills?&lt;br/&gt;(3) To what extent do
existing instruments provide unbiased measures across demographic
groups?&lt;br/&gt;(4) How, if at all, is the development of these skills
interrelated (e.g., does developing some skills depend on having mastered other
skills)?&lt;br/&gt;(5) What information, if any, about equity in their course do
instructors report as helping to inform their teaching practices?&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.