* 2141135
* PFI-TT:  Developing an integrated platform for high accuracy measurements of viral particle count and infectious titer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Meni Wanunu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 249,829.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to measure viral concentrations in
clinical or research settings. Select vaccines and gene therapies are delivered
via viral vectors, but the precise dosing is poorly known, leading to quality
control concerns. Current measurement techniques are indirect, imprecise, and
nonstandard; and they require time and specialized equipment. Accurate
measurement of viral particles is critical for precise benchmarking of
diagnostics and appropriate dosing of therapeutics. This project develops a new
technology to measure viral concentrations and infectivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses viral quantification
techniques as they suffer from several limitations. Typical infectivity assays
are highly dependent on the specific cell line used for viral infection, leading
to high variability between labs. Furthermore, natural viruses are not
engineered to contain a fluorescent transgene for easy identification, and some
particles will not contain the viral genome - leading to competition between
those containing the gene “payload” and empty vectors. In general, the density,
infectivity, and replication efficiency of viral particles in a given sample is
poorly known. This project advances a technology with three functioins:
quantifying the total number of particles, measuring genome-containing units,
and assessing infectivity of a given sample of the virus. The new method
combines nano-pore technology using biophysical properties to identify viral
particles with single-molecule RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization to
discriminate down to single molecules of viral RNA in infected
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.