* 2141772
* Improving Teaching and Learning in Computer Science Using Structured Post-Exam Interviews and Remediation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Pablo Frank Bolton, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 149,146.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using a two-stage exam
process to identify students’ knowledge gaps and improve student learning in
computer science. Exams are dependable and convenient assessment tools for
educators, however, they can cause student anxiety. Exams are often one-shot
events resulting in no incentive for students to correct any learning
deficiencies. Timely feedback on student exam answers can help students identify
knowledge gaps. This project will develop and assess a two-stage exam process
for an introductory computer programming course. Students will take a multiple
choice exam in which they will provide a justification for each selected answer.
For students who have significant knowledge gaps, an interview will follow,
providing a second opportunity for students to demonstrate their understanding.
After the interview, a plan of action will be provided for each student to help
them achieve the learning outcomes. It is expected that the project will help
improve student learning outcomes in a foundational computer science course,
which will help prepare students for professional practice in the computing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: (1) improve
student learning outcomes, (2) reduce test anxiety, and (3) support academic
integrity. This project builds on previous work on two-stage exams in the
physics education community. In the first stage, an improved multiple-choice
assessment will be used to identify student knowledge gaps. The second stage
consists of a one-on-one interview which will focus on questions related to the
knowledge gaps identified in the first stage. Instructors will then develop a
plan of study that will be personalized for each student. Research questions
include: (1) What additional insights will the improved multiple-choice exam
provide over a standard multiple-choice exam? 2) To what extent does the
interview stage help to improve students’ learning outcomes? To answer these
questions, test results will be compared using traditional versus the improved
multiple choice exam. Student learning gains will be assessed with and without
the interview stage. The results of the proposed project will be disseminated at
computer science education conferences and one computing education community
site organized by Association for Computing Machinery education board. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.