* 2141256
* CNS Core: Small: Schedulability Analysis of Safety-Critical Real-Time Systems: Beyond Pseudo-polynomial Time Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Sanjoy Baruah, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,752.00

Safety-critical systems should be validated correct prior to their deployment;
schedulability analysis is the process of validating timing properties of such
systems. This project will investigate the use of Integer Linear Program (ILP)
solvers for developing schedulability analysis algorithms that are efficient
enough for use in practice. It will do so by identifying the relationships
between the inherent computational complexity of fundamental problems that arise
in real-time schedulability analysis and their suitability for representation as
ILPs that are efficiently solvable by ILP-solvers. A general methodology will be
developed for determining whether particular schedulability analysis problems
can be efficiently represented as such ILPs; this methodology will be applied to
common schedulability analysis problems; and ILP-based algorithms will be
developed and evaluated for those problems that are determined to be efficiently
representable in this manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There have been vast
improvements in the performance of ILP-solvers in recent years. Hence,
successful completion of this project will greatly expand the class of real-time
systems upon which it is computationally feasible to do schedulability analysis.
This will enable the development of safer safety-critical systems, such as
airplanes, cars, and medical devices, which are able to offer more advanced
features than is currently possible. Project findings will be disseminated via
participation in conference workshops and panels and the organization of cross-
disciplinary events with industrial participation. New teaching materials
incorporating such findings will be developed for graduate courses at Washington
University and shared with interested instructors elsewhere. Undergraduate
research based upon this project will be integrated into Washington University's
well-established summer REU program, which incorporates extensive research
engagement with technical and social activities for
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.