* 2141970
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Extracellular RNA Produced By Plants: What, Where, How, Who, and Why?
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Patricia Baldrich, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project investigates the role of secreted RNA in the immune system of
plants. The Innes and Meyers laboratories recently discovered that the leaves of
plants accumulate RNA in the spaces between cells and on their surfaces.
Although we usually think of RNA as a molecule that can direct cells to
synthesize specific proteins (e.g., the mRNA in COVID vaccines directs our cells
to make SARS-CoV2 spike protein), some RNAs serve other functions. Analysis of
the base sequences of plant extracellular RNAs revealed that these RNAs are
diverse in sequence, but do not appear to encode proteins. The discovery of
extracellular non-coding RNA in plants raises two fundamental questions that
this project will address: 1) how do plants secrete RNA? and 2) what is the
function of this RNA? It takes a large amount of energy for cells to secrete
RNA, thus this secreted RNA must benefit the plant in some way. This project
will test the hypothesis that secreted RNA functions to protect plants from
infection by fungi and bacteria. If this hypothesis is correct, the proposed
research will enable generation of crop plants with improved immune systems that
are more resistant to disease. Such crops are needed to feed a growing global
population in a sustainable manner, while reducing the environmental impacts of
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innes and Meyers laboratories recently
discovered that the apoplast of Arabidopsis leaves contains abundant long non-
coding RNAs, including circular RNAs, as well as small RNAs. These RNAs are
bound to protein particles, which protects them against degradation. Notably,
this extracellular RNA (exRNA) is highly enriched in the post-transcriptional
modification N6-methlyadenine (m6A). These discoveries raise fundamental
questions about plant biology: Are there specific exRNAs that are broadly
conserved across plant species? How are exRNAs secreted, and are post-
transcriptional modifications central to this process? And why do plants produce
exRNAs? Do they play a fundamental role in plant-microbe interactions? To answer
these questions, exRNA will be purified from the apoplast and leaf surfaces of
seven diverse species: Arabidopsis, soybean, tomato, lettuce, pineapple, rice,
and maize, which were chosen based on their phylogenetic diversity, genomic
resources, importance as crops, and diversity in physiology. These exRNAs will
be analyzed using both RNA-seq and sRNA-seq, which will allow identification of
RNAs that are conserved between species. To assess whether m6A or other
modifications are required for secretion, transgenic plants that express exRNAs
that lack modification sites will be tested for their secretion efficiency. To
investigate additional requirements for exRNA secretion, the exRNA content in
Arabidopsis and rice plants with mutations in known RNA binding proteins and
secretory pathway genes will be analyzed. Lastly, to assess whether exRNAs
contribute to immunity, mutants compromised in exRNA secretion will be tested
for resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award was co-funded by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Plant Biotic
Interactions Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.