* 2141436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Linguistic Structure in a Family Homesign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Richard Meier, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 15,741.00

What would a language created completely from scratch look like? This question
cannot be answered by studying spoken languages, whose origins extend back into
prehistory. However, sign languages continue to be created in the present day
wherever a critical mass of deaf individuals forms. Thus, newly emerging sign
languages provide researchers the opportunity to observe the process of language
creation directly. This research project focuses on one such sign language,
created by three deaf siblings and four of their hearing family members. This
homesign language began as an idiosyncratic gesture system developed by the
first deaf individual born into the family and was later elaborated into a
shared sign system by later-born deaf and hearing family members. This research
project sets out to document the grammatical structure of the language, focusing
on the ways in the which the sign system of the first-born deaf individual
differs from those of the later-born signers. This approach has the potential to
shed light on how grammatical structure emerges and develops at the earliest
stages of language creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses
on two grammatical structures that have been documented in nearly all sign
languages studied to date: (i) classifier constructions and (ii) directional
verbs. Classifier constructions represent the motion and location of objects in
space and involve a meaningful handshape unit that identifies the category of
the object. The inventory of classifier handshapes is unique to each signed
language. This project uses existing sign language assessment tools to determine
whether the signers have developed conventions for the use of classifier
handshapes. Like classifier constructions, directional verbs also make use of
space. However, rather than marking locative relations, directional verbs use
space to represent the grammatical relations of subject and object—who does what
to whom. In other emerging sign languages, directional verbs have been shown to
develop gradually as the language is passed down from generation to generation.
This research project asks whether the transmission of the language among
members of the family has supported the emergence of directional verbs.
Classifier constructions and directional verbs have been argued to represent the
interface of grammatical structure with non-linguistic gesture. To determine the
contribution of gesture to the emergent structure of the language, this research
project also examines the gestures produced by hearing, non-signing individuals
from the larger community. Altogether, this project aims to tease apart the
contributions of a variety of factors to the process of language emergence,
including: an individual's capacity to create language, transmission of a sign
system from individual to individual, and the role of the gestural practices of
the ambient speech community. This research contributes to our understanding of
the human language capacity and raises awareness about sign
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.