* 2141594
* EAGER: The Geoscience behind Resilient Infrastructure Careers: Unlocking the Intrinsic Value of Diverse Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Vernon Morris, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,085.00

This proposal outlines the Emerging Geoscience Scholars (EGS) model, a novel
approach towards nurturing talent and welcoming identity. The PIs propose to
pilot new approaches to the engagement of professional societies with people in
the cities that host their annual meetings. The PIs propose to start modestly
with 20-30 scholars from historically underrepresented communities, disconnected
youth, veterans, and transitional (unemployed or underemployed) people per year
investigating careers and sharing their findings as emerging professionals at a
major geoscience conference, the Fall Meeting of the American Geophysical Union
(AGU). By sharing their work in a professional science meeting and putting the
weight of a major scientific society and large academic institution behind those
investigations, ideas can grow into a practice that can ultimately transform the
geoscience infrastructure and workforce as well as other scientific and
professional associations. With the emphasis that the Biden Administration has
put on infrastructure and conservation, partnering with AGU, and the many
professions it covers, is an ideal starting point for this experimental
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to increase the capacity for a
resilient and sustainable built infrastructure and advance climate justice, by
ensuring that the geoscience and the wider infrastructure workforce of the
future adopts values and methods that center on and embrace the core values of
equity, justice, and inclusiveness - from diversity comes strength. A
sustainable future workforce for the geosciences must be composed of, and
ultimately led by, people of color, Native Americans, and immigrants. It must
start now with this rising generation. This proposed learning/training ecosystem
is designed to be an open-source model or template that can be adopted by other
professional associations and partnering educational institutions nationwide; it
thus contributes to the common educational and research infrastructure for the
development of a diverse and globally competitive US workforce. By addressing
issues important to urban coastal communities under pressures from climate
change, the effort has the potential to improve the wellbeing of people in
society. By educating and engaging youth and lifelong learners in local
scientific and social issues, it helps develop a more involved and informed
public as well as broadening racial and ethnic diversity in the
geosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.