* 2141867
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of early social adversity on brain structure in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 32,274.00

Early social adversity can shape an individualâ€™s brain and behavior across the
lifespan, but how these negative experiences exert their influence remains
poorly understood. This doctoral dissertation project investigates the
relationship between early life environment and aspects of microscopic brain
anatomy in two nonhuman primate species. The research leverages existing primate
brain collections to advance knowledge about early life stressors, brain, and
behavior, and provides broader comparative context for research on similar
processes in humans. The project supports graduate research and training in STEM
and provides laboratory training and mentoring opportunities to undergraduate
students who will have an active role in the research. The investigators plan to
share these results with broad audiences via publications, conference talks, and
science engagement activities with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In early
life, young individuals of many species rely on their mothers or caregivers to
provide emotional support and to teach them the skills needed to thrive. Past
research has indicated that adult animals who experienced separation from their
mothers or caregivers at a young age exhibit anatomical differences in their
brains such as significant increases in the size of some brain areas and tracts
that connect these structures. Notably, the parts of the brain that are most
affected make up the reward circuit, which functions to promote learning and
motivate behaviors. Consequently, these anatomical differences in the brain
could contribute to the development of social and cognitive deficits associated
with early social adversity. The main objective of this project is to
investigate at the microscopic level how rearing environment in early life can
result in long-term structural changes of the reward circuit. The investigators
use existing primate brain collections to compare individuals with different
rearing histories across two species that are thought to vary in terms of neural
plasticity. In each of these brains, the investigators perform analyses to
visualize and quantify 1. connections made between neurons, 2. morphology of
neurons, and 3. receptor expression of neurons. With these data, the
investigators can begin to describe the mechanisms behind changes in brain
structure as a result of early social adversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.