* 2141839
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social responsiveness in female nonhuman primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Ann Markham, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 29,652.00

In social species, there is variation in the extent to which individuals within
groups use the position or behaviors of those closest to them to inform their
own behavior; this is called social responsiveness. While previous research has
demonstrated that variation in social responsiveness among individuals in a
group influences ways in which the whole group behaves, this research has been
through work in laboratories or using computer simulations. In order to better
understand this phenomenon and how it relates to the evolution of social
behavior, this doctoral dissertation research project examines these
relationships in natural settings. The investigators use new tracking
technologies and advance the field of biological anthropology by introducing
non-invasive, image-based techniques for tracking nonhuman primate movements and
interactions in the wild. Through this project the investigators create
opportunities for both masters’ and undergraduate thesis projects and develop
new educational modules on collective animal behavior targeted toward middle-
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective behavior researchers have
proposed that socially responsive individuals follow cues given by neighbors to
make inferences about environmental conditions and resource locations, while
unresponsive individuals gather information privately through independent
investigation of the environment. Theory predicts that the extent of within-
group variation in social responsiveness produces group-level traits, such as
cohesion and collective decision-making regimes, which in turn have consequences
for individual fitness. This project has three specific objectives: (1) identify
the contexts in which wild female savannah baboons are socially responsive; (2)
examine if variation in social responsiveness affects collective behavior; and
(3) test if group composition affects individual fitness according to its
expected effects on collective movement. To achieve these objectives, novel data
are collected in the field using 3D stereo videography and GPS-accelerometer
collars. Long-term demographic and behavioral data collected over five decades
of population monitoring are used to contextualize results. Furthermore, by
considering the simultaneous “bottom-up” effects of individual variation on
collective behavior and the “top-down” effects of collective behavior on
individual fitness in a highly social primate, this project offers novel insight
into the adaptive value of social responsiveness and its role in patterning
group-level phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.