* 2141988
* Collaborative Research: Improving Biology Undergraduates’ Success by Fostering Positive Beliefs About Intellectual Abilities
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Elizabeth Canning, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 301,013.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
interventions to improve student performance and equity in college introductory
biology courses. Research suggests that students exhibit greater motivation and
resilience to challenges when they believe that their intellectual abilities can
improve. These students ultimately have better academic outcomes than those who
believe their intellectual abilities are fixed. This project will design
interventions to foster positive student beliefs. The interventions will be
customized to the cultural and institutional context in which they will be
implemented. This project will involve developing, implementing, and assessing
the short-term and long-term psychological and academic outcomes of
interventions to help undergraduate introductory biology students adopt more
positive beliefs about their abilities. The interventions’ effectiveness will be
assessed using a new, high-quality measure of students’ beliefs. This project
will answer pressing research questions related to implementing interventions
and the psychological theories underlying this work. The significance of this
project will include advancing the understanding of psychological theory and
improving educational outcomes for all students. Importantly, this project has
potential to improve equity in academic outcomes by being especially beneficial
for students who encounter additional barriers in higher education. These
students include those who are first-generation college students and those from
groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM, among other marginalized groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three of the most pressing
research questions to advance the understanding of how mindset interventions
could be used to improve student success and equity in science. The project’s
research questions include: (1) How do mindset interventions at two different
levels, student and instructor, affect student outcomes independently and in
concert? (2) What are the mechanisms through which mindset interventions at both
the student- and instructor-level influence students’ experiences in the
classroom, academic engagement, and academic outcomes in the short and long
term? And (3) How do students’ racial/ethnic identity and generation in college
moderate any identified effects? These questions will be addressed by carrying
out large-scale, fully-crossed, randomly-assigned field experiments in
introductory biology courses at four sites (N&gt;10,000 students). Growth
mindset interventions have shown great potential to address large-scale
educational inequities in logistically simple, cost-effective ways. This project
will capitalize on this potential by investigating how mindset messages from
instructors enhance the effectiveness of interventions at the undergraduate
level. This work will not only have broad impacts by addressing social
inequities to broaden participation in STEM, but will also have intellectual
merit by generating a more nuanced understanding of how contextual messages
moderate intervention effectiveness. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.