* 2141979
* Developing an Assessment to Address Undergraduate Biology Student Understanding of Genetics and Race
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Amanda Lane, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,736.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the
relationship between knowledge of genetics and beliefs about race. It will
produce a resource in undergraduate biology courses to assess this relationship.
It is common for undergraduate students to think that socially defined human
races are genetically distinct. Undergraduates also may overestimate the
differences between socially defined racial groups and underestimate the
differences within them. This can lead to challenges in understanding how the
environment influences gene expression and how multiple genes can impact a
single trait. The association of such ideas with the misconception that socially
defined racial groups can be categorized based on genetics can result in racial
bias. This project will result in a new assessment that combines a scale for
beliefs about race and conceptual questions related to the biological facts
concerning genetics and race. This assessment instrument will help undergraduate
instructors determine if the way these topics are taught have an impact on
students’ beliefs regarding race. Additionally, this instrument will be used in
the development of genetics lessons that prevent the spread of misconceptions
about human genetics and race. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this
project is to develop an instrument that includes both a test of content
knowledge and a scale for beliefs related to racial essentialism that is
applicable to students enrolled in introductory biology courses. Racial
essentialism is the belief that socially defined racial groups are genetically
distinct and natural. The project will include steps to collect evidence of
construct validity, the internal structure, and of repeatability for this new
combined instrument. This instrument will be widely usable to assess university
instructors’ abilities to teach genetics as it relates to race and to measure
the impact of the curricula on students’ beliefs related to genetic and racial
essentialism. Additionally, the project will also test a model of how students’
race/ethnicity and their conceptual understanding of genetics and race impact
their beliefs about genetic and racial essentialism. The second goal of the
project is to design and pilot an intervention designed to help undergraduates
learn scientifically accurate conceptions of multifactorial genetics and
population thinking in the context of race. The piloting of the new instrument
will take place on diverse campuses, including community colleges, Hispanic-
serving institutions, and a research-intensive university, and hence has
potential to reach a wide audience of practitioners. Project outcomes will be
disseminated through various meetings and publications of interest to
undergraduate biology instructors and science education researchers. The project
intends to reduce the negative impacts (e.g., psychological threat, decreased
persistence, loss of interest in a STEM career) that a traditional genetics
curriculum can have on undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.