* 2141390
* Mechanisms of Nucleolar Stress in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Patrick DiMario, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2024
* USD 524,334.00

Ribosomes are nano-machines within our cells that read the genetic code, carried
by mRNAs, to synthesize all proteins that keep our cells alive and functional.
Failures in ribosome production in cells (referred to as nucleolar stress) have
far-reaching effects on the well-being of cells and the organism. Importantly,
not all cells are equal and various stem cells and progenitor cells show
differential sensitivities to nucleolar stress: while some stem cells and
progenitor cells display acute sensitivities to nucleolar stress and die by
programed cell death, many other stem cells and progenitor cells seem to be
resilient to nucleolar stress. The question is, why are some stem cells and
progenitor cells sensitive to nucleolar stress, while others are not? This
project will use the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. The project tests the
hypothesis that different Drosophila neuroblasts (stem cells) in the developing
larval brain display differential sensitivities to nucleolar stress. Preliminary
data show that “mushroom body” neuroblasts are more resilient to nucleolar
stress than are most other neuroblasts. Mushroom bodies are portions of the
insect brain essential for olfaction and learning in insects. The investigators
induce nucleolar stress in Drosophila by depleting the ribosome biogenesis
factor, a protein called Nopp140. The research determines the mechanisms of
nucleolar stress as it interferes with cell viability and function, especially
during neurogenesis. This is critical, as recent evidence suggests that failure
in ribosome biogenesis is a contributing factor in debilitating neurological
diseases. Broader impacts will introduce basic concepts in genetics and cell
biology to underrepresented students in area high schools, provide an
opportunity for hands-on research training for underrepresented undergraduates,
and train graduate students in advanced genetics and cell biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various stem cells and progenitor cells show differential
sensitivities toward nucleolar stress. Haplo-insufficiency mutations in
mammalian treacle, a nucleolar ribosome biogenesis factor (RBF), deplete
ribosomes in select embryonic neural crest cells that die by apoptosis leading
to craniofacial birth defects. Most other embryonic stem cells and progenitor
cells within the embryo appear resilient to this nucleolar stress. The question
is, why are there differential responses to a systemic mutation in an RBF? The
project will use Drosophila as a model system to answer this question. Nucleolar
stress will be induced by depleting Nopp140, a nucleolar RBF structurally and
functionally related to treacle. Aim 1 tests the hypothesis that mushroom body
(MB) neuroblasts within the Drosophila larval brain are resilient to nucleolar
stress because they stockpile RBFs by translation of maternal transcripts during
a period of continued proliferation, while most other neuroblasts normally enter
a period of quiescence. Aim 1A uses mosaic analyses to determine maternal
contributions of RBFs to MB neuroblasts versus other neuroblasts in wild type
and Nopp140-/- larval brains. Aim 1B uses co-relative light and electron
microscopy (CLEM) to assess RBF and ribosome abundances in MB neuroblasts versus
other neuroblasts in wild type and null Nopp140 genetic backgrounds. Aim 2 tests
the mechanism that JNK is the central nucleolar stress effector in metazoans.
Drosophila JNK responds to various forms of stress, and preliminary data shows
that JNK is activated upon nucleolar stress in Drosophila. However, the upstream
activators of JNK upon nucleolar stress remain unknown. This project identifies
these activators by using RNAi to deplete known upstream JNK activators in the
Nopp140 null (nucleolar stress) background, and then scores for rescued
nucleolar stress phenotypes upon loss of JNK
activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.