* 2141006
* PFI-TT:  Wearable Noninvasive Brain Imaging with Near-Infrared Light Based on Time-Domain Diffuse Optical Tomography
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve clinical outcomes in
neurology through a wearable device. Many studies of the brain require measuring
blood flow, but it is difficult to measure deep within the brain. This project
will develop an imaging system that addresses this concern. This device will
impact both research and clinical applications for improved diagnosis and
treatment of neurological conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will develop new wearable device for time-domain diffuse optical tomography (TD-
DOT). TD-DOT relies on two critical pieces of hardware: short laser pulses
(&lt;30 ps), and time-gated single-photon avalanche detectors (SPADs) with fine
timing resolution (&lt;50 ps). Currently available TD-DOT hardware is too large
for a wearable system and supports only a small number of such detectors, which
limits the ability to perform optical tomography. The proposal aims at creating
the first wearable, high-density array of time-resolved single photon detectors
and combine this new hardware with advanced image processing algorithms to
further improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The result will be the first
real-time functional brain imaging system that delivers fMRI-level performance
within a wearable form factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.