* 2141862
* CAREER: Bioinformatic Resources for Promoting Research and Education of Giant Viruses
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Frank Aylward, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2027
* USD 785,103.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Giant viruses are diverse and
important constituents of ecosystems around the globe. These viruses have
physical dimensions and genome lengths that exceed those of some bacteria and
their genomes often encode components of glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid
cycle, and the protein synthesis apparatus, raising important questions
regarding the limits of viral complexity. Giant viruses can also incorporate
(endogenize) into the genomes of their host, forming Giant Endogenous Viral
Elements (GEVEs) that play an important role in eukaryotic genome evolution.
Despite the intriguing complexity of giant viruses and their roles in many
important biological processes, the bioinformatic infrastructure available for
studying these viruses lags far behind that of cellular lineages, and new
computational resources for their analysis are needed. This project will develop
novel bioinformatic tools and resources for the genomic analysis of giant
viruses, and establish an undergraduate teaching curriculum focused on giant
virus discovery. Both graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdocs
will be trained to analyze viral genomes and develop novel bioinformatic
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Giant viruses are important members of
ecosystems around the globe. Recent advances in cultivation-independent
approaches have recovered a large number of draft metagenome-derived viral
genomes, but at present it is difficult to assess the quality of these genomes
or classify them. These limitations substantially hinder progress in
understanding the diversity and environmental impact of these environmentally-
relevant viruses. Research in this project will develop novel bioinformatic
tools to assess the quality of metagenome-derived giant viruses and integrate
them into a taxonomic and phylogenetic framework. Moreover, given the important
role of endogenous giant viruses in the genome evolution of many host lineages,
tools for quantifying the role of giant viruses in eukaryotic genome evolution
will also be developed. The resources developed in this project will be
integrated into an undergraduate teaching curriculum focused on giant virus
discovery. Results of this work will be posted on the Giant Virus Database
https://faylward.github.io/GVDB/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.