* 2141420
* Cross-disciplinary Workshop on Information Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Akinbiyi Akinlabi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 69,620.00

African languages have much to contribute to our understanding of information
structure, a fundamental aspect of human language that determines how meaning is
conveyed in a conversation. A three-day workshop on information structure will
be held in July 2022 at the end of the African Linguistics School (ALS) 6. It
will feature a series of talks by faculty and students, tutorials on methods of
investigating information structure, and a panel discussion, featuring different
languages and sub-disciplines of linguistics. Participants will be invited to
contribute papers for publication in an open-access volume. ALS is a two-week
institute for graduate students in linguistics, with faculty from the US and
other countries teaching the courses and mentoring the students on a voluntary
basis. Holding the workshop in conjunction with ALS gives students an
opportunity to participate in a research workshop in addition to their courses.
Participating American scholars and students will interact with African scholars
and students, learning about African languages directly from speaker-linguists,
spurring collaborative projects, and training the next generation of scientists
to study this important aspect of language that has potential to inform not only
linguistic theory but also language education, translation, and cross-cultural
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information structure can involve a word or
phrase being emphasized or made prominent. This can be conveyed through word
order, focus words, special pronouns, or prosodic changes (e.g., higher pitch,
longer duration). African languages use all of these methods in complex and
intricate ways, but they have been relatively underrepresented in the scientific
literature on information structure, limiting our understanding. Information
structure can be investigated through the lens of language processing, social
language use, language contact, and in signed languages as well as spoken
languages. The workshop will feature all of these methodologies and domains of
study, along with many others, in order to broaden our scientific knowledge of
information structure. The focus on under-documented African languages will
advance our understanding and will highlight the contributions of diverse
language communities to scientific investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.