* 2141824
* Proton Loading Clusters and Complex Proton Pathways in Proton Pumping Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Marilyn Gunner, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2026
* USD 764,635.00

Living organisms store metabolic energy by having different concentrations of
hydrogen ions (H+), on each side of the membranes of mitochondria or bacterial
cells. The proteins to be studied in this project are embedded in these
membranes, taking H+ from the side at lower concentration and ‘pumping’ them to
the side at higher concentration. H+ from the high concentration reservoir is
used to fuel essential biological processes such as the production of ATP, which
supplies chemical energy for many cellular reactions. The positions of the atoms
in several H+ pumping proteins are known. This project uses computer simulations
to investigate: (1) How the protein interior can switch between having a high or
low affinity for H+ so it can be first bound and then released; (2) The pathway
the H+ take through the protein interior; and (3) How proteins from different
organisms conserve their function, even as the proteins change through
evolution. The project will also develop novel computational tools and these
tools, source code, manuals and video instructions will be made freely, publicly
available. The research projects will be carried out by undergraduates, masters
and PhD students, leading to a broad-based, interdisciplinary training for the
next generation of scientists. The findings of this research will be integrated
into a project-based class for students majoring in all STEM fields, from
engineering to biology, to introduce students on how the structure of a protein
determines its function. The research will be carried out at the City College of
New York, a college that has a long-standing, proven record as a pathway to the
middle class for students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex
I is the first protein, and cytochrome c oxidase (CCo) the last, in the aerobic
electron transfer chain that uses energy-releasing redox reactions to drive H+
ions (protons) from the lower (N-side) to the higher (P-side) concentration side
of the membrane. These proteins use very different structures to accomplish
their task but both contain three proton transfer elements: (1) Water filled
channels, anchored by acidic, basic and polar amino acid side chains, through
which protons move; protons pass via hydrogen bonded connections from one water
or side chain to the next; (2) Proton Loading Sites (PLS) along the path, which
are transient proton binding sites; These site change between having a high
proton affinity to load protons to a low affinity one to release them; (3) Gates
that allow the path to be open to the N-side when the PLS loads and are open to
the P-side when it unloads. Water moving out of a path is one way to close a
gate. Proton pumps are driven by their reaction cycle to move between proton
transfer states with PLS loaded or unloaded and gates open or closed. This
research project will investigate these conformational changes. The multi-
conformation continuum electrostatics (MCCE) method, developed in the Gunner
lab, will be integrated with molecular dynamics and network analysis. MCCE
calculates the distribution of protonation microstates and the side chain and
water hydrogen bonds in Monte Carlo calculations. A protonation microstate
defines the protonation state of every residue. A PLS is identified as residues
that change protonation state and network analysis finds proton transfer paths
in the jumble of hydrogen bonds. Molecular dynamics simulations with different
residue protonation and cofactor redox states change the protein conformations.
Sequence and structure comparisons of Complex I and Cytochrome c oxidase from
different organisms have shown that the residues that make up the PTS and their
location can change. The project will elucidate these elements in multiple CcO
and Complex I that have the same function but low sequence identity. Better
understanding of the range and flexibility of requirements for proton transfer
can provide methods to control the many biochemical reactions that gain or lose
protons at buried active sites. This research is funded by the Molecular
Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.