* 2141754
* CAREER: High-Resolution NMR for Paramagnetic Sodium Electrodes
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Raphaele Clement, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2027
* USD 434,362.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, is centered around energy sustainability through advances in
sodium-based rechargeable batteries and address all aspects of this challenge,
from the underlying materials advances needed, to the training of a diverse STEM
workforce. Batteries are central to securing a reliable, sustainable, and clean
energy supply as demand continues to grow. Current lithium-ion batteries cannot
be used for long-term, cost-effective grid-scale energy storage as they depend
on cobalt supply, which is greatly affected by the geopolitical instability. The
high cost of cobalt and rising costs of lithium and nickel are additional
concerns. The U.S. holds the world’s largest reserves in soda ash (a major
sodium source), and the development of sodium-based devices comprising Earth-
abundant manganese and iron, which this research project uses, altogether
eliminates issues of toxicity, raw materials supply, and cost. The deployment of
sodium-based batteries is hampered by the dearth of cathode materials that store
a large amount of charge reversibly. Here, a new class of sodium cathode
materials with high predicted energy densities are explored at the fundamental
structural level. The study of a range of cathode compositions, while using and
developing cutting-edge nuclear magnetic resonance tools that provide atomic-
level insights into their working principles, could lead to the discovery of
transformative chemistries for large-scale energy storage. Besides direct
societal impacts, the proposed research activities to train a plural and
inclusive workforce. The main educational efforts tied to this CAREER award are:
early STEM education and outreach in underserved communities, broadening
participation in STEM research and developing a competitive STEM workforce, and
empowering students to become environmental citizens. Such goals align with the
NSF’s Big Idea NSF INCLUDES, and the American Jobs Plan that proposes to create
employment in Clean Energy and concurrently addresses persistent racial
injustice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 : Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, advances
the fundamental science of sodium (Na) intercalation compounds. The overall
objective of the proposed research is to reveal and control transport processes
and structural changes upon Na (de)intercalation in weberite-type Na2MM’F7
compounds containing Earth-abundant transition metals on the M and/or M’ sites.
These compounds are excellent candidates for fundamental materials research
because of their compositional variety, which results in wide ranging and finely
tunable chemical and physical properties. It is hypothesized that control over
the local composition, structure, and charge density distribution of Na2MM’F7 Na
intercalation hosts underpin the ability to tune their electrochemical
properties. The principal investigator and her research group carry out
extensive paramagnetic nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies and further new
developments to interpret complex and information-rich paramagnetic NMR data
through the use of first-principles statistical mechanics to enable Ångstrom-
scale structural insights. The overall objective are structured around three
topics: 1) Understand the factors dictating the phase stability and experimental
accessibility of Na2MM’F7 weberites; 2) Unravel the role that the crystal and
electronic structures play in determining Na-ion diffusion, electronic
conductivity and phase stability upon Na (de)intercalation; 3) Apply first-
principles statistical mechanics approaches to predict the finite-temperature
NMR properties of complex paramagnetic solids. Besides paramagnetic NMR
techniques, a suite of relevant tools will be used to provide in-depth and
multiscale insights into structural, electronic and ion conduction
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.