* 2141982
* Supporting Feedback Loop Learning in Natural and Social Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Logan Brenner, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 33,062.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduates’
ability to understand complex systems and how such systems may be "influenced"
towards desirable outcomes. The project focuses on feedback loops, which are
systems in which an initial action triggers a chain of influences that either
amplifies or counteracts the initial action. Feedback loops drive many important
natural and engineered systems. They may foster growth/decay/instability (as in
pandemic disease spread, nuclear chain reactions, or environmental change) or
stability (as in a car’s cruise control system or a predator/prey system). As
feedback loop thinking becomes more common, society will benefit in different
settings. For example, each time an individual is able to discern that they may
be trapped in a damaging feedback loop and strategize a way out; or each time a
leader uses feedback loop thinking to bring stability to a fraught situation; or
each time a professional uses feedback loop thinking to catalyze growth towards
a desirable outcome. This is a Level 1 project, in the IUSE Engaged Student
Learning Track, tackling the challenge of making feedback loop thinking
accessible to all undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's learning
goals are that students will be able to recognize feedback loops when they
encounter them in an unfamiliar context, and use feedback loop thinking to
explain, predict and improve the behavior of systems they care about. An
interdisciplinary team will design, develop, and field test a suite of six mini-
lessons that can be adapted for any undergraduate course in which at least one
feedback loop is currently being taught. These lessons aim to elevate students
from understanding one feedback loop as an explanatory mechanism for one
phenomenon in one course, to grasping feedback loops as a generalizable
explanatory strategy applicable across multiple disciplines. Test beds for the
initial instructional materials are in psychology, race and gender studies,
environmental science, and neuroanatomy courses. To assess the first learning
goal (recognize feedback loops in unfamiliar context), the project team is
developing and validating a new instrument, in which participants read short
narratives and state whether each is or is not a positive or negative feedback
loop. The second learning goal will be assessed via student products from each
lesson and instructors’ reflective journaling after teaching each lesson. An
external Advisory Board will provide evaluative guidance on both the
intellectual merit and the broader impacts of the project through twice-yearly
meetings. Insights and materials emerging from the project will be disseminated
by workshops and webinars for educators, and through a widely-used web-based
portal that serves and reviews undergraduate instructional resources. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.