* 2141916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Primate behavioral adaptations to water stress
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Carson Murray, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,170.00

Water requirements shape the behaviors and ways in which all animals interact
with their environment. Access to sufficient clean water is especially important
for maintaining hydration in lactating mammalian mothers. Many primate mothers
produce a dilute milk over an extended period, which may present challenges to
maintaining water balance in lactating females. This doctoral dissertation
research project explores hydration status and water consumption behaviors in
wild female primates and provides a comprehensive look at the multiple variables
that can influence their water balance. This study also documents water quality,
availability, and location in the context of frequent human-animal interactions
and therefore has important implications for public health. Understanding
hydration, how it varies based on ecological contexts, as well as how primates
meet their water requirements has implications for the conservation of
endangered populations that face changing environments. This project provides
numerous training opportunities and supports capacity building. Results are
shared through scientific journals, social media, and educational efforts in
multiple settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that
lactating female primates are more water stressed than other individuals in
their group and alter their behavior to increase their water intake. It also
tests the hypothesis that high-ranking females are buffered from lactation-
related water stress due to their increased access to better quality food and
water compared to low-ranking females. This project maps spatiotemporal
variation in water availability and quality, both in food and free-standing
water, across the primates’ habitat. Using behavioral observations and
nutritional data, the researchers estimate water intake by lactating females.
Using the collected physiological and behavioral data, the results clarify how
water balance varies in females based on their reproductive state, dominance
rank, and the water quality and availability in their home range. This project
integrates new behavioral, physiological, ecological, spatiotemporal, and
nutritional data to explore water balance and behavioral adaptations to
hydration stress in an endangered primate species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.