* 2141026
* PFI-RP: Low-Friction Durable Coatings for Improving Energy Efficiency in Conveyor Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2025
* USD 565,985.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will significantly reduce the energy
consumption and equipment failure in conveyor systems. The proposed project
advances a new coating technology that is more environmentally sustainable than
currently used petroleum-based oil lubricants. This technology will enable
applications in other fields and produce tremendous savings in multiple
industries. The project will further provide extensive education and leadership
training in innovation and entrepreneurship to graduate and undergraduate
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups. They will gain the
required knowledge and skills for leading high-tech startup
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances a method to bond
graphite coatings tightly to a substrate, which has not been possible
previously. This project will address several technical challenges in the
development of the coating technology for belt conveyor applications. The
specific objectives are to 1) develop and optimize fast coating deposition
processes on conveyor materials, 2) develop scalable coating processes for full-
size conveyor materials, 3) build a prototype belt conveyor for evaluating the
coating performance, and 4) demonstrate the feasibility of the developed
coatings for belt conveyor applications. This research will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of how coating deposition parameters and coating
composition affect coating morphology, thickness, adhesion to the substrate,
cohesion, friction, and durability. The expected technical outcome is the
production of dry-lubricated conveyor belts and slider bed materials that show a
friction and durability improvement of at least 50% over uncoated materials in a
prototype conveyor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.