* 2141349
* Collaborative Research: Stability and dispersion of viscoelastic flows through porous media
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jeffrey Guasto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 286,976.00

Viscoelastic fluids, including polymers and biological materials, exhibit
mechanical properties of both fluids and solids. When driven through porous
materials, viscoelastic fluids exhibit an abrupt transition to chaotic flow,
which is a key feature of enhanced mixing that regulates a vast array of
important geological, biological, and industrial processes. Despite our deep
understanding of viscoelastic flows in simple model geometries, predicting their
flow properties through the intricate, irregular crevices of porous materials
remains an outstanding challenge. The goal of this work is to quantify
viscoelastic fluid flows in a range of model and realistic porous media and
determine how microscopic geometry affects the macroscopic flow and transport
properties of viscoelastic fluids. The outcomes of this project will have direct
implications for extraction and bioremediation efficiency in rock and soil,
minimizing power consumption and cost in polymer processing, and understanding
biofilm mechanics that affect soil ecology and infections in humans. Under this
project, workshops will be organized to promote early career development of
scientists in the field, several undergraduate and graduate students will
receive research training, and aspects of this work will be integrated into
microfluidics and complex fluids courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
stability of viscoelastic fluid flows through porous media strongly depends upon
the disorder and connectivity of successive pores. The memory of elastic
stresses couples advection to pore microstructure making for exquisitely complex
stability criteria, and emphasizing the need to consider the Lagrangian
character of polymeric flows. A dearth of quantitative studies across relevant
two- and three-dimensional flow geometries has yielded often conflicting
outcomes and has inhibited our ability to forecast the dispersive transport
properties of these systems. To resolve these key deficiencies in our current
understanding of viscoelastic flows through porous media, the following
principle aims will be achieved through the integration of microfluidic
experiments and numerical simulations: (1) Determine the role of geometrical
structure, disorder, and porosity on viscoelastic instability in two-dimensional
porous media flows. (2) Establish the effect of geometry and viscoelasticity on
dispersion in porous media through analysis of Lagrangian coherent structures.
(3) Elucidate the role of three-dimensionality in the viscoelastic stability and
resultant transport properties of porous media flows. This work will establish a
direct link between fluid stress, stretching kinematics, and
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.