* 2141293
* Fast Situational Awareness and Reliable Response with Heterogeneous Feedback and Number-Theoretic Control Primitives
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Xu Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 366,083.00

This grant will fund research that enables engineered systems to effectively
rely on and respond to real-time data collected from multiple diverse and
asynchronous sources, with applications to medical device technology and
aerospace manufacturing platforms, thereby promoting the progress of science,
and advancing the national prosperity. Rapid and uniform timekeeping is the
current dogma for building real-time systems. Such systems, however,
increasingly operate in the presence of ubiquitous and diverse forms of data and
asynchronous, often irregular workflows. Foundational knowledge about how to
leverage such data streams in designing and controlling the behavior of the next
generation of critical systems, including those meant to assist humans in data-
intensive situations, is lacking. This project will overcome this knowledge gap
by building a new theoretical and algorithmic framework that demonstrates how
heterogeneous, often slow measurements can be reliably and quickly combined to
achieve fast information retrieval and a robust feedback response. This
framework will enable unsurpassed situational awareness and response agility
beyond existing boundaries of process monitoring. A suite of related interactive
demonstrations and dynamic visualizations will be developed and disseminated
through web applications to foster a mindset of algorithmic thinking in students
of all ages. Additional educational impact will result from integration of
research results in advanced technical coursework and engagement of
undergraduate and graduate students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to make fundamental contributions to a theory of how
asynchronously sampled sensor data may be captured and combined to maximize
real-time information gathering, increase process observability, and design
rapid and robust feedback for closed-loop autonomy. It achieves this outcome by
first developing a number-theoretic collaborative sampling approach for sensor
management that applies to general dynamic systems and a broad range of process
signals with mathematically expressible intra-sample correlations. Next, it
derives conditions on the sampling that preserve observability and enable
probabilistic optimal sampling subject to uncertainty. Finally, an outer loop
controller based on the Youla-Kucera parameterization is tailored to achieve
high-performance tracking beyond the Nyquist frequency of the individual
sensors. The number-theoretic parameterizations and feedback control algorithms
will be evaluated in experiments on laser-material interactions in powder bed
fusion additive manufacturing and automated robotic inspection of complex
metallic objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.