* 2141097
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prefixal Agreement, Verb Classes, and Serialization
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Bobaljik, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 13,104.00

This dissertation project focuses on the detailed documentation and study of an
under-studied language with rapidly decreasing intergenerational transmission.
The language displays a number of structural characteristics which are
relatively unique within its language family; deeper investigation into the
origin of morphological agreement and verb classes has the potential to shed
light on broader issues within theoretical linguistics such as the underlying
representation of lexical items, while also furthering our understanding of the
ways in which languages change and develop over time. In addition, this project
aims to provide a solid empirical foundation for future research into variation
across related languages, contributing to our knowledge of typological patterns
found in and around the region. Finally, it is a goal of the project that the
resulting data, processed in close collaboration with native speaker consultants
and publicly archived, will be multifunctional and suitable for adaptation into
community-facing literary, pedagogical, and reference material, facilitating
local efforts at language maintenance and preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will conduct on-site fieldwork with native speakers in order to
thoroughly document and analyze grammatical structure with particular focus on
the language's morphological systems and their interface with other syntactic
and phonological phenomena from both a synchronic and diachronic perspective. In
particular, this project is built around the hypothesis that there is a
developing incipient inflection class system, wherein the choice of prefix shape
with a particular set of verbs is no longer phonologically or semantically
predictable. By closely investigating sub-systemic alternations in verb class,
valency, voice, and serialization, this project aims to shed light on issues
such as i) the structural status and historical origin of subject agreement and
semi-idiosyncratic verb classes; ii) the distribution of pronominal elements and
their intersection with the development of case and alignment; and iii) the
grammaticalization of valency- and category-changing derivational morphology and
their relationship to the abstract representation of lexical items. Thus, this
work has the potential to contribute to our broader understanding of
morphosyntactic theory cross-linguistically, while also bringing a novel
diachronic perspective to the study of an understudied language
family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.