* 2141382
* Collaborative Research: Coupled flow-geomechanical models applied to assess earthquake triggering in tectonically active regions â€“ The Los Angeles basin, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* John Shaw, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 196,051.00

Induced seismicity, or earthquakes caused by human activities, are a growing
societal concern affecting hydrocarbon and geothermal energy production, gas
storage, and subsurface carbon sequestration efforts in the Unites States and
throughout the world. Distinguishing between tectonic and induced earthquakes is
generally straightforward in areas with little or no natural seismicity. In
tectonically active regions, however, discriminating between natural and induced
seismicity is far more challenging, particularly as the latter may only be
detected by changes in the size, frequency, or geographic distribution of
earthquakes over time. Moreover, induced seismicity in these regions poses great
risks, as human activities may trigger larger and more destructive earthquakes.
This study develops state-of-the-art, physics-based models to investigate how
nearly a century of production and waste-water injection in hydrocarbon fields
of the Los Angeles basin, California, have impacted the stability of faults in
the area. These models will consider stress changes on faults caused both by
tectonic and anthropogenic processes, thus helping to distinguish between
tectonic and induced events. This study will advance methodologies to
investigate and manage triggered seismicity in Los Angeles and other
tectonically active regions, as well as address the growing concerns about
induced seismicity in a tectonically active region with a population of nearly
20 million people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops coupled
geomechanical and multiphase fluid flow models to assess the impact of
hydrocarbon production and wastewater reinjection in petroleum fields over the
past century on seismic activity in the Los Angeles basin, CA. To describe the
mechanical and hydraulic behavior of faults, and the influence of the change in
pressure as well as full stress tensor on fault slip, this project will employ
advanced techniques for modeling coupled flow and geomechanics in faulted
reservoirs with a rigorous formulation of nonlinear multiphase geomechanics.
These simulations will be performed in detailed models of reservoirs embedded in
regional descriptions of the tectonically active fault systems in the basin. The
Los Angeles basin serves as an excellent laboratory to study triggered
seismicity because of its extensive field operations, wealth of fault and
reservoir data, and history of induced seismicity and ground surface subsidence.
We will begin the study with the Wilmington field, which has produced more that
2.5 billion barrels of oil causing up to 9 meters of ground subsidence. The
researchers have gathered the complete production and injection schedules
(1936-2020) for more than 5000 wells to calibrate their models with reservoir
pressure and measurements of ground surface deformation. Simulations will then
be expanded to the basin scale, assessing how field operations have influenced
seismicity on more than 20 active strike-slip and thrust fault systems. This
will include detailed analysis of seismicity patterns, including those recorded
by machine learning-enabled catalogs, as well as focus on large events (e.g.,
1933 Long Beach M 6.3) that occurred in the vicinity of fields. The goal is to
gain an improved understanding of triggered seismicity, along with more capable
modeling tools, that can be used to manage subsurface energy operations in ways
that minimize seismic hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.