* 2141214
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Resumptive Relative Clause Dependencies in the Processing of Second Language English
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Bonnie Schwartz, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 16,731.00

The study of second language (L2) learning has much to tell us about the basic
properties of the human mind/brain. This dissertation project investigates
“resumptive relative clauses” or RRCs - phrases such as “the man that the police
arrested him”, a conspicuous feature of L2 English speech and writing. RRCs are
ungrammatical in some languages including English but are possible in other
languages such as Mandarin Chinese. Surprisingly, RRCs are often observed in L2
speech and writing even when they are impossible in both the native language and
the L2. These "interlanguage" features that cannot be traced to either the
speaker's first or second language offer insight into the nature of the human
language system and its development independent of the properties of individual
languages. Second language learning is of growing importance in our increasingly
globalized world, and an understanding of the L2 learning process and how
interlanguage features emerge is critical to the development of language
teaching methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on recent methodological
innovations in the psycholinguistics literature on native speakers, this project
investigates whether RRCs in English represent a genuine grammatical option in
the L2 learner’s developing language system and/or a subconscious strategy for
managing cognitive load during real-time sentence processing. In addition to a
control group of native English speakers, L2 learners of English whose native
language either has or does not have RRCs undertake a series of experimental
tasks probing the production, comprehension, and acceptability of English
resumptive vs. non-resumptive relative clauses in three increasingly complex
sentence types. The L2 learners complete two versions of the acceptability task
- one in English and one in their native language- so that their knowledge with
respect to the (im)possibility of RRCs can be compared across the two languages.
This line of research addresses key questions related to L2 knowledge, L2 use,
and the development of each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.