* 2141387
* Mechanisms underlying epithelial tube formation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* SeYeon Chung, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 971,585.00

Many organs in the human body, like the lungs and kidneys, are organized as a
single layer of cells surrounding a tube. During organ formation, cells on a
flat sheet change their shapes and positions to form a three-dimensional tube.
The cellular forces driving such cell shape changes and rearrangement are
generated by cytoskeletal proteins that act like motors moving along protein-
based filaments. Therefore, determining the regulatory mechanisms of the
cytoskeletal protein networks is essential to understanding how organs form a
proper shape. Using the developing salivary glands of the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster, this research will fill the gap in our knowledge of the signaling
pathway that controls dynamic cytoskeletal networks during tube formation. A
postdoctoral researcher and graduate and undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds will be trained in techniques of genetic manipulations, advanced
microscopy, and biochemical and cellular assays. Scientific outreach programs,
such as the Student Research Mentorship Program, will encourage local middle
school students to learn about organ formation during development and promote
critical thinking and testing hypotheses. Presentations to the public will be
given on organ formation and human diseases linked to defects in malformed
tubular organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contractile actomyosin structures are
created or polarized in response to cell-cell signaling and regulated by
localized activation of RhoA GTPase. The overall goal of this research is to
define better how signaling at the cell surface by G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) directs RhoA function to precisely control epithelial tube formation.
Conceptually, this project will 1) fill out the gap in our knowledge of the
signaling pathway by identifying and characterizing unidentified salivary gland
GPCRs that reorganize actomyosin networks; 2) reveal the role of new key
components in activation of Rho signaling during epithelial tube formation; 3)
discover the mechanisms of how GPCR-Rho signaling organizes cortical actin
during tissue invagination. By combining genetics, immunohistochemistry,
confocal and super-resolution imaging, timelapse live imaging, computational
image analysis, and biochemical approaches, this research will help us
understand how dynamic cellular behaviors result in precise changes in tubular
organ formation. The resulting data, methods, and findings will be broadly
distributed. This research will provide deeper insights into the molecular
mechanisms underlying tubular organ formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Cell Dynamics &amp; Function Program of MCB Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.