* 2141124
* PFI-TT:  Artificial Intelligence System for Enterprise Performance Management that Integrates Causal Analytics and Human Expertise
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* David Woehr, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to respond to the unmet market need
for explainable prescriptive (i.e., causal) analytics in enterprise performance
management (EPM). If successful, the proposed platform will enable organizations
to solve complex, multi-objective management problems, including financial
outcomes and well-being for customers, employees, and other stakeholders. The
proposed prescriptive analytics solution is expected to optimize decision-making
through improvements in enterprise-wide performance. The market for EPM is
expected to reach $7.7 billion in sales by 2026, but only 11% of large and
medium-sized enterprises currently use some form of prescriptive analytics.
Notably, more than 50% of healthcare systems are unsatisfied with currently
available EPM software, which leads to decreases in patient satisfaction and
operating margins. This project's broader societal impact will help enterprises
visually monitor the trade-offs and synergies between economic performance
(e.g., return on investment) and well-being outcomes (e.g., customer and
employee satisfaction) and identify optimal actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to help organizations deal with the complexity of multi-
stakeholder, multi-objective performance management. It builds the first
commercial use case in healthcare systems, focusing on healthcare organizations'
multi-stakeholder performance management. The technology will develop a
Knowledge Graph-Based Reasoning Artificial Intelligence Network, which will
enable human-machine collaboration to accelerate the synthesis of domain
knowledge from expert documents into causal knowledge graphs and ingest such
graphs into causal inference and data science tools. The intellectual merit of
the proposed project stems from building a high-performance machine reading
system to extract and synthesize causal insights from both academic and industry
documents. The team also seeks to develop the first knowledge graph-based
reasoning system for enterprise management to identify hidden causal relations
and make intervention recommendations. Finally, the project will develop a novel
approach to improving causal inference in data science. By combining causal
knowledge graphs with a large sample of healthcare system data, the product will
create a synthetic counterfactual from observatory data for each healthcare
system and run causal analysis to identify the most effective actions for a
given set of performance objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.