* 2141330
* CAREER: Hypothalamic Tanycytes and Neuronal Plasticity in the Regulation of Energy Balance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kristy Townsend, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2024
* USD 567,987.00

The regulation of energy balance requires communication and coordination with
the hypothalamus, arguably the most important brain region for maintaining
energy balance and where nutritional signals and appetite pathways converge on
energy expenditure circuitry. One specialized cell type in the hypothalamus that
is not well understood at the mechanistic level is the tanycytes, a putative
stem cell population that lines the interface between the hypothalamus and one
of the brain's internal ventricles. Tantycytes are able to sense factors
circulating in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and are important for glucose
sensing and exhibit the ability to change and regenerate, but the signaling
pathways that regulate these characteristics are not well understood. Using
approaches to mark and lineage-trace developing cells in the adult brain, this
project aims to understand tanycytes and their ability to renew adult
hypothalamic neurons in response to varying conditions of energy balance. The
project includes studies to elucidate the role of particular growth factor
signaling pathways in tanycytes in enabling this regenerative ability of
hypothalamic neurons in the adult brain. The broader impacts of this project
include a formal senior Capstone course for students working conducting their
senior thesis research under this project, and, to increase access to scientific
careers in general, a week-long course on in the local community college system
that covers and that can bridge to a summer fellowship in the laboratory of the
principal investigator of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous metabolic
interventions, such as exercise or caloric restriction, are thought to impact
neural plasticity in the hypothalamus, or the brain's command center for
regulating energy balance. In particular, the tanycytes that line the
hypothalamic third ventricle are thought not only to mediate communication
between hypothalamic nuclei and circulating factors in the cerebrospinal fluid,
but also to act as adult neural stem cells, replacing hypothalamic nuclei in
response to various energetic cues. Using adult neural stem cell reporter mice
developed by the principal investigator, this project examines how tanycytes
impact neural plasticity and energy balance regulation in the adult brain. To
determine whether or not bone morphogenetic protein signaling through the type 1
receptor (BMPR1A) impacts neurogenesis in alpha or beta tanycytes, the
investigators use Rax-Cre or Glast-Cre mice to ablate BMPR1A, followed by
assessment of energy status and tanycyte differentiation into hypothalamic
neurons. Collectively, the studies will advance understanding of key mechanisms
involved in hypothalamic plasticity in response to changing energy status. This
project is co-funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) of the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.