* 2141430
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of experience and attitudes on heritage bilinguals' language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Matthew Goldrick, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 13,506.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines how the prior experiences and
language attitudes of heritage speaker bilinguals in the United States
influences their speech perception in both languages. Heritage language
bilinguals speak as a first language a minority language that they have cultural
ties to (e.g., Spanish), but, because of societal reasons, have become dominant
in the majority language (e.g., American English). After English, Spanish is the
most frequently spoken language in the United States. Many Spanish speakers in
the U.S. are heritage speakers (i.e., children and descendants of immigrants),
yet Spanish heritage speakers of Mexican descent are an underrepresented
population in research. Conducting this project broadens the participation of
Mexican Americans in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research has shown
that different experiences with language, such as the language exposure received
in one's early years, as well as throughout one's life, affect a person's
perceptual abilities. Heritage language bilinguals offer unique insight into
this relationship as heritage language speakers exhibit significant variation in
both experiences and attitudes. Although they are mainly exposed to their
heritage language in their early lives, once they begin formal schooling, there
is a shift to more majority language input and interactions, leading to a switch
in dominance. Like many bilinguals, heritage speakers code-switch (i.e., use
both of their languages in one sentence or conversation), and there is variation
in code-switching practices based on experience and attitudes. The project
consists of two experimental studies that examine how variation in language
experience and attitudes affects Spanish heritage speakers' speech perception in
both their languages. The first focuses on better understanding how heritage
speakers' experience and attitudes with Spanish and English affects their speech
perception when they interact with non-native vs. native talkers in each of
their languages. The second investigates how heritage speakers' experiences and
attitudes impacts perception of code-switched vs. single language speech. The
results of these studies will advance the understanding of how social
experiences and attitudes towards language influence speech perception, which in
turn advance the understanding of language and
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.