* 2141578
* Mathematics Leaders Exploring Racial Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,01/31/2023
* David Kung, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the number of and
diversity of successful mathematics and STEM students. Students’ experiences in
higher education mathematics courses take place in departments. Policies and
practices relating to student and faculty experiences, admissions criteria and
other aspects of departmental have too often contributed to longstanding
inequities in representation and outcomes for minoritized students. In the
summer of 2020, amidst the larger national discussion on racial equity, a
grassroots workshop brought together over 100 leaders in the mathematics
community to understand these disparate racial impacts, brainstorm, and explore
opportunities for positive change. Participants built a shared understanding and
commitment to promote greater racial equity for students and faculty in
mathematics departments across the nation. This project looks to expand upon
that initial work with a goal of encouraging further discussions and fostering
wider transformation in the mathematical sciences community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Department chairs, undergraduate and graduate directors,
and national math organization leaders will gather regularly in facilitated
groups to work through shared readings and analyze departmental policies and
practices. Each group will engage in conversations relevant to their experiences
and institutions with a goal of identifying strategies to more equitably serve
their students. Some areas of focus for working groups will include mentoring
and advising, graduate admissions, and both student-facing and faculty-facing
policies. Participants will be asked to select an “Avenue of Change”, which is
an explicit goal to bring about change in their department or at their
institution, and will be held accountable by their peers to carry out this task.
In addition to broader dissemination of workshop outcomes, each cohort of
participants will share their activities through social media, publications,
sessions at national meetings or other means chosen to maximize reach and
potential replication. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.