* 2141789
* A Power of Place Learning Experience &amp; Research Network to Support Community College Student Success and Civic Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2024
* USD 599,781.00

ABSTRACT: A Power of Place Learning Experience &amp; Research Network to Support
Community College Student Success and Civic Engagement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to serve the national interest by facilitating undergraduate
biology students’ ability and motivation to use their science skills in service
of their communities with the ultimate goals of increasing public trust in
science and persistence of students from populations historically underserved
and underrepresented in science careers. National priorities emphasize the need
for more science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) graduates, especially
those from groups historically underserved and underrepresented in STEM fields
(URM students). Concurrently, there is a pressing need for college graduates,
particularly STEM graduates, to have the ability and desire to use their skills
in service of their communities and to increase national trust in science.
Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) increase students’
persistence in STEM fields and increase their research self-efficacy and skill,
especially for those from URM groups. Likewise, efforts to incorporate place-
based learning through engagement in hands-on experiences that emphasize local
history, culture, and service have potential to spark interest for a vast number
of students and often lead to lasting civic engagement. This project leverages
best practices from both CUREs and place-based learning to address the need for
more URM students to persist in STEM and for more STEM graduates to serve their
communities. Specifically, the project will support development and
implementation of place-based CURE modules at both community colleges and four-
year institutions across Colorado and New Mexico. These place-based CUREs will
involve students in research that serves the local community where their
institution is based. Education research for this project will seek to
understand if and how place-based CUREs can increase students’ confidence and
motivation to engage with their communities using their science skills and
whether they increase persistence in STEM, especially for those who begin their
postsecondary education at a community college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the efficacy of a new CURE model that incorporates
place-based research serving a local community as a central design feature.
Project personnel will design place-based CURE modules that can be easily
incorporated into introductory biology courses. These modules will be refined
and revised during professional development retreats in collaboration with
community college and four-year institution instructors who will then implement
them with support from project personnel. The disciple-based education research
associated with this project will investigate this process for students and
instructors. For students, studies will investigate if CURE modules influence
research self-efficacy, sense of belonging to local and scientific communities,
scientific civic engagement, and intent to persist in STEM. Students who
participate in courses with CURE modules will be compared to those who
participate in the same courses without CURE modules or highly similar courses.
Notably, this is one of the first efforts to systematically design and test
CUREs that aim to involve students in community-serving research. The scientific
civic engagement scale, a new psychometric measure, will be used to test whether
students who participate in place-based CUREs increase their self-efficacy,
knowledge, and intentions with regard to scientific civic engagement. In
addition the scale will assess the level of importance they assign to engaging
with a community using science skills. Data will be disaggregated to examine
outcomes for various groups of students who hold URM identities. For
instructors, studies will investigate the degree to which they develop self-
efficacy and technical pedagogical content knowledge related to field-research
based instruction. Together these results will help to elucidate the value of a)
implementing place-based research in modular CUREs, and b) providing pedagogical
professional development for instructors learning to implement modular CUREs.
Both curricula and research results will be made publicly available for
undergraduate biology instructors wishing to incorporate community-engaged
science into their courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.