* 2141943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The conditional independence assumption in juvenile dental age estimation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Lyle Konigsberg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,354.00

Estimating the age of individuals based on skeletal elements can inform our
understanding of human biocultural experiences, identities, and population
dynamics across the history of our species. Methods that use information about
dental development are particularly useful for juvenile age estimation. This
doctoral dissertation research project examines the developmental relationships
between teeth and how these relationships affect error rates in juvenile dental
age estimation. A better understanding of human variation in dental correlations
can improve both methods of age estimation for bioarchaeological and forensic
research as well as clinical understanding of human growth and development. The
project supports graduate training in STEM, the development of open-source
dental age estimation software, and online training workshops for researchers
and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to simplify mathematical
modeling, it is often assumed that dental developmental traits are independent
from one another after accounting for the effect of chronological age. The
problem with this conditional independence assumption is that if conditional
independence is not biologically valid, resulting age estimates will be biased
and have error rates that are larger than expected. This is a problem in both
bioarchaeology and forensic anthropology because biased age estimates can
compromise our understanding of past populations and unknown age interval error
rates do not meet the Daubert standard for expert testimony. These issues are
addressed through three specific aims: 1) characterize the extent of
correlations between developing teeth, 2) characterize the degree of variability
of correlations between developing teeth, and 3) develop, validate, and test an
open-source developmental age estimation program that incorporates the
correlations between teeth. These aims are approached using Bayesian statistical
models and cluster analysis in R. Models are fit to dental development scores of
living children and validated using dental development scores from existing
decedent databases in order to develop the age estimation
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.