* 2141922
* CAREER: Microbial regulation of plant coexistence and invasive dominance: changes with environmental stress
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Emily Farrer, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2027
* USD 900,734.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thousands of microorganisms (e.g.,
fungi, bacteria) live in soil, in and around plant roots. We know that these
microbes impact plant health in both positive and negative ways â€“ some microbes
help plants take up nutrients, others cause disease. Environmental change can
shift plant-microbe interactions in ways that may have negative consequences for
plant diversity and exacerbate species invasions. Wetlands are globally
important for carbon sequestration (removal of CO2 from the atmosphere),
protecting coastal cities from hurricanes, and as nursery habitat for fisheries.
A severe threat to wetlands is saltwater intrusion, where saline water moves
inland due to sea level rise. The biota in these systems may not be adapted to
prolonged, high salinity levels and so this project will investigate how
saltwater intrusion affects plant-microbe interactions with consequences for
plant coexistence and invasion of Gulf Coast marshes. Competitive interactions
among plants also influence coexistence and invasion and will likely shift with
elevated salinity, and so the research will compare the relative importance of
competitive vs. microbial interactions in driving plant community responses to
saltwater intrusion. Data collection and analysis will be integrated with a high
school summer course, an undergraduate service-learning course, a graduate
statistics course, and this project will provide training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate researchers. A deeper understanding of how plant-
microbe interactions, plant diversity, and the growth of invasive species will
be affected by changing environmental conditions is important for managing our
natural resources and making predictions of future change.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will elucidate how plant-microbe interactions
influence biodiversity and invasion under conditions of environmental change. It
utilizes and extends the Plant-Soil Feedback (PSF) research framework which has
become enormously effective for studying plant-microbial interactions and their
effect on plant community coexistence and invasion outcomes. The project studies
the ubiquitous wetland invader Common Reed (Phragmites australis) as its model
invasive species. First, the proposed research will test how salinity affects
plant-fungal and plant-bacterial interactions and feedbacks in coastal marshes
using a field survey and feedback experiment combined with next generation
amplicon sequencing. Second, the proposed work will apply modern coexistence
theory to the PSF framework to partition how salinity alters competitive and
microbially-mediated coexistence mechanisms. Third, the proposed work will
extend PSF theory in a novel way by explicitly modeling microbial taxa in a
three-year, outdoor, mesocosm experiment using linked plant-microbial population
models to assess the timescales over which specific plant-microbe interactions
play out to influence community structure and invasion. New modeling techniques
will be developed to pinpoint the particular microbes that are causing plant
community change, a difficult task due to the incredible biodiversity of
microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.