* 2141221
* Relaxation of Slow Glassy Interphases in Polymeric Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Sindee Simon, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,709.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The glassy interphases in two model
polymeric systems will be studied using two unique techniques: dilatometry to
measure the volume and thermal expansion coefficient, and ultrafast calorimetry
to measure the heat capacity and other important thermal properties. These
complimentary techniques will be used to determine the size, properties, and
dynamic behavior of the interphase in several nanostructured materials. For
example, semicrystalline polymers will be studied since these materials consist
of crystalline and non-crystalline domains. So will the nanoscale-size
interphase between the two domains, whose properties are important for
understanding the overall material behavior. Through characterization of this
interphase the results of the research will provide a fundamental understanding
of nanostructured materials for technological applications including but not
limited to applications in structural composites and nano/microelectronics. The
project includes the training of one graduate student, one postdoctoral
researcher, and an undergraduate researcher in research in polymer physics,
thermal analysis, behavior of interphases, and nanostructured materials. A
strong effort will be made to include minority and female students. The project
will include outreach to K-12 students, including organization of several one-
week long materials modules for the TTU program "Science â€“ It's a Girl Thing"
for junior high school girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two model polymeric systems with slowly relaxing
glassy interphases will be investigated, namely, the rigid amorphous fraction
(RAF) in semicrystalline poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and the immobile
glassy layer at the particle interface in hairy polystyrene-grafted silica
nanoparticles. The properties and relaxation dynamics of the glassy interphases
will be studied as a function of morphology in the PET system and as a function
of graft density, graft chain length, and silica content in the nanoparticle
system. Dilatometry and nanocalorimetry experiments will aim to determine the
length scale, glass transition temperature (Tg), and breadth of Tg for the rigid
or "immobile" interphases, the temperature dependence of the segmental
relaxation times associated with the rigid or "immobile" phases, and in the case
of the semicrystalline polymer, the interplay and competition between structural
recovery and crystallization as a function of material morphology. A unique
temperature perturbation experiment will be implemented to allow structural
recovery to be differentiated from crystallization in the semicrystalline system
during isothermal aging experiments and to allow changes in the immobilized
surface layer thickness to be quantified in the hairy nanoparticle
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.