* 2141742
* CAREER: Assessing local adaptation in the chemosynthetic symbionts of hydrothermal vent animals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Roxanne Beinart, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2027
* USD 893,566.00

Deep-sea hot springs, called hydrothermal vents, are dominated by animals that
obligately rely on bacterial symbionts for nutrition in the otherwise food-
limited deep-sea. These animals farm bacteria in or on their tissues that use
the chemical energy in venting fluid as energy to make sugar, in a process known
as chemosynthesis. Though they require their symbionts for survival, most
symbiotic vent animals acquire their symbionts from an environmental pool at
some point in their development. Especially for long-dispersing marine animals
that are likely to encounter new habitat conditions when they settle, it has
long been hypothesized that acquisition of a locally optimal symbiont strain
after settlement may have ecological and evolutionary advantages. To test this
idea, the PI will evaluate local adaptation in the bacterial symbionts
associated with a foundation snail genus, Alviniconcha, at deep-sea hydrothermal
vents in the western Pacific. Using population genomics methods and high-
pressure physiological experiments, this project will assess whether habitat-
specific symbiont strains differ in their adaptation to different habitat
conditions. The project investigates a fundamental hypothesis regarding
adaptation at deep-sea vents, as well as provides key information in our
understanding of the ecology of Alviniconcha, a genus of important foundation
species that has been assessed as “Endangered” or “Vulnerable” on the IUCN Red
List due to looming deep-sea mining activity. In addition to supporting
undergraduates and graduate students to participate in research, this project
includes the creation of an open, expert-authored and peer-reviewed Deep-Sea
Biology digital textbook that integrates deep-sea media, providing a vital
resource for public use, as well as training the PI as a resource and advocate
for open educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its significance
for understanding the ecology of the dominant fauna at hydrothermal vent
ecosystems, local adaptation in chemosynthetic symbionts is still poorly
addressed. This project will use population genomics and common-garden-like
experiments to assess local adaptation in the bacterial symbionts associated
with a foundation snail genus, Alviniconcha, at deep-sea hydrothermal vents in
the western Pacific. First, high-resolution geochemical surveys of Alviniconcha
will be coupled with symbiont population genomics to investigate genomic
evidence for local adaptation. This will allow for the identification of loci
that may play a role in adaptation to local geochemistry. Second, high-pressure,
common-garden-like experiments will be performed to directly assess the
potential for local adaptation and investigate underlying symbiont genomic
traits associated with observed phenotypes. Finally, Alviniconcha symbiont
populations across the western Pacific will be characterized with population
genomics to identify the genomic traits potentially contributing to local
symbiont adaptation across multiple geographical scales, levels of host
population connectivity, and intensities of site-to-site habitat
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Oceanography Program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Evolutionary Processes Program, and the Ocean
Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.