* 2141860
* CAREER: Reward learning, selection history, and attentional control
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Michael Grubb, Trinity College
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2027
* USD 322,636.00

From a parade of internal thoughts, feelings, and memories, to an ever-changing
barrage of external sights, sounds, and smells, waking life contains far more
information than our nervous systems can handle at any one time. We overcome
this challenge by selectively attending to the world; that is, by prioritizing
the processing of some kinds of information at the expense of others. But how is
attention allocated and how much voluntary control do we have over that process?
The answers to these research questions have vast implications for individual
experience, and for society at large. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project advances our scientific understanding of how an observer’s past
modulates their attention in the present. In addition to informing research in
other core areas of psychology like learning and memory, the research outcomes
have applications to clinical work, as aberrant attentional mechanisms are
hypothesized to play a role in a multitude of mental health disorders (e.g.,
substance abuse, anxiety disorders, autism spectrum disorder). The PI is a
faculty member at a primarily undergraduate institution, and this project
provides unique opportunities for undergraduate research training and for STEM-
focused innovation in the undergraduate classroom. As an additional component of
the education plan, the PI furthers efforts to raise the visibility of
established scientists from underrepresented communities and promotes inclusive
mentoring in the service of retaining underrepresented students in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual attention can be allocated to specific
locations in the visual field or to features of objects like color, orientation,
or motion direction. Sometimes, shifts of attention are voluntarily generated to
support goal-directed behavior. Other times, attention is “captured” by
physically salient objects (e.g., those that suddenly appear or are visually
unique). While framing attention in such dichotomous terms has been the dominant
theoretical approach for many decades, the literature now makes clear that non-
salient stimuli can also capture attention. Such attentional biases rely on
one’s unique history (e.g., if objects have been frequently attended in the
past, or if they have been associated with receiving reward). Using behavioral
and eye-tracking methods, the first research goal of this CAREER project is to
disentangle the impact of two such historical factors on attentional control:
frequent attentional allocation (selection history) and receiving of rewards
(reward history). The second goal is to use functional brain imaging to examine
the neural systems involved in selection-history-derived attentional biases and
to test the hypothesis that information prediction errors generated by the
ventral striatum modulate the allocation of visual attention. Whereas Aims 1 and
2 of the project focus on physically non-salient features that bias attention as
a result of former experience, Aim 3 shifts the focus to physically salient
stimuli and examines how saliency and history interact. Extending recent work
from the PI’s laboratory, the third goal is to use psychophysical methods to
model the temporal dynamics of visual processing when attention has been
reflexively allocated by abrupt onsets that predict the presence or absence of
available reward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.