* 2141188
* PFI-TT: Three-Dimensional Printing and Magnetic Assembly for Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Joseph Tracy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a minimally invasive, catheter-based
approach for repairing heart valves. Currently, the standard surgery for valve
repairs is an open-heart surgery, which is only available to patients who are
acceptable surgical candidates. Open-heart surgery has significant risk and
recovery requirements. The proposed prototype integrates three-dimensional
printing and magnetic assembly to make possible deployment of implants through
thin tubes known as catheters that can place the replacement valve in the heart,
addressing the need for open-heart surgery and potentially providing more
effective treatment of blood back flow into the heart. This new approach will
expand access to heart valve repairs, specifically the mitral valve, to patients
for whom the risk of open-heart surgery is too high. The need for heart valve
replacement is growing, and this new approach will further increase the market
by addressing unmet needs. Three-dimensional printing can provide implants with
different sizes for custom fits to individual patients, and magnetic assembly
inside patients is an under-explored concept that has potential for wider
surgical and interventional applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will result in a prototype for a novel annuloplasty ring that is
fabricated through three-dimensional printing and includes magnets, allowing for
magnetically guided assembly within the mitral valve. The annuloplasty ring is
designed for percutaneous delivery through a catheter and manipulation with
catheter-based tools. Following assembly, the ring will be anchored to the
annulus of the mitral valve, and an internal mechanism will be engaged to reduce
the diameter of the ring, thus improving coaptation of the leaflets and treating
mitral valve regurgitation. The capability for tunable diameter reduction, while
the heart is beating, is a unique advantage over the standard open-heart
surgery. Mechanisms for magnetic assembly and diameter reduction will be
investigated by designing, fabricating, and testing structures on tissue
phantoms and pig hearts. The interdisciplinary team of materials researchers,
clinicians, and entrepreneurs conducting this project will choose designs that
simultaneously meet requirements for manufacturing and material properties, have
a compact design for delivery through catheters, and are straightforward to
translate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.