* 2141034
* PFI-TT:  Naturally Derived Safe Adjuvant-Active Pesticide Formulations to Protect Crops from Fungal Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Richard Gross, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of effective/safe
pesticide systems to protect crops from fungal diseases. The demand for crop
protection chemicals is expected to reach $77+ B by 2027. Despite interventions,
fungal diseases cause the loss of 10–23% and 10–20% of crop pre- and post-
harvest, respectively. This research will identify safe, naturally produced
molecules that provide enhanced fungicidal activity. The system will be
developed to address Botrytis cinerea, which causes devastating diseases on 500+
plant species, particularly fresh fruits and vegetables, and results in economic
losses ranging from $10 billion to $100 billion worldwide; the project will then
address Phakopsora pachyrhizi, the cause of Asian soybean rust (SBR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the fundamental difficulty
that, while agricultural adjuvants can improve the efficiency of agrochemicals
against plant pathogens increasing crop yields and productivities, achieving
this goal is dependent on fungicide-adjuvant relative doses, crop type, and
physical characteristics of spray formulations. The latter is critical to
facilitate the sticking of active-adjuvant formulations onto leaves. This
project develops capabilities in sophorolipid (SL) modification chemistries to
generate a library of compounds. Then, a high-throughput screening assay will
allow rapid assessment of adjuvant-fungicide beneficial synergies. In parallel,
to assess the potential for topical and systemic toxicities, selected adjuvant-
fungicide combinations will be evaluated on fibroblast and kidney cell lines. SL
analogs will also be tested for growth inhibition of a representative panel of
non-pathogenic rhizobacteria. Also, in planta phytotoxicity will be studied
using the detached leaf assay method. Fundamental interfacial and physical
characterizations of the spraying formulation will determine the extent that
active-adjuvant formulations stick onto leaves. Natural component and MSL
structural characteristics that lead to compatibility with fungicides for crop
protection will provide a foundation to inform expanded studies on a wider range
of plant pathogens and crop types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.