* 2141056
* PFI-TT: A Green and Sustainable Approach to Optimize and Scale-up Reusable Materials for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jordan Poler, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 281,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop materials to purify water
for drinking. This project advances materials that can be used for advanced
filtration. The research is focused on the removal of many classes of compounds
from drinking water, such as heavy metals and polyfluoroalkyl substances. These
pervasive substances have been linked to adverse human health effects and they
are persistent in the environment. This project will develop a point-of-use
solution that will have significant impact on providing access to drinking
water. These materials are safe for drinking water since they are based on
natural materials and polymers already used in water purification
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The propsoed project will focus on (1)
Optimization of ion exchange (IX) materials, and (2) Scaling-up the production
of these materials to pilot scale or higher. Optimization of adsorption
capacity, and water flux will be done while minimizing the cost of
manufacturing. The technology is a very thin layer of IX resin attached to a
nanoscale support. The support material provides structural rigidity and
eliminates the need for cross-linking, which leads to degradation of the
traditional IX materials. The proposed technology increases surface area,
binding site accessibility, and improves adsorption kinetics to make these
materials cheaper and more efficient than the competing products. The polymers
are permanently bound to the support materials using "click chemistry" to ensure
their retention in the filter modules over time and with repeated
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.