* 2141337
* Monitoring, Mitigating, and Leveraging the Long-Term impact of COVID-19 on the Future Careers of Women in STEM: A Workshop
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Ashley Bear, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Previous reports and convening activities of the National Academies and other
groups have examined the immediate impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as
the longstanding inequities in the scientific enterprise that existed before the
pandemic. While these initiatives are critical to building a comprehensive
understanding, there has been minimal effort to bring a group of experts
together to outline the future-looking research agenda that could provide
answers and guidance over the long-term to specific, important questions about
how the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic will manifest over time. Additionally,
insights into how colleges, universities, and other research centers, government
agencies, and professional societies could be monitoring the impact of new
approaches to work in STEM (e.g., virtual vs. hybrid vs. in-person) to ensure
that they are not exacerbating inequities are also
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring a group of experts
together to take an intentionally intersectional approach to articulate and
inform the research agenda that is needed to monitor and mitigate the long-term
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on women in STEM fields, while also considering
how post-pandemic approaches to working, collaborating, and networking may serve
either to support or hinder equity, diversity, and inclusion in STEM. The
project activities have the potential to spur transformative research and
forward-looking efforts to inform policies and new practices to monitor and
mitigate the long-term negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the career
trajectory, job stability and leadership roles of women, especially for women in
rural communities and women of color in STEM. Additionally, the project will
give attention to the innovations that have emerged from the pandemic that serve
as positive disruptors to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in the
scientific enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be conducted by the
Committee on Women in Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine under the Policy Theme
of the Policy and Global Affairs Division of the National Academies. It is
anticipated that the virtual workshop will take place in March 2022 and a
Proceedings in Brief will be widely released to the public in June
2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.