* 2141896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring the Origins of Malaria Using Ancient DNA
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* David Reich, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,190.00

The human species has been shaped by many biological and cultural processes,
including the infectious diseases we have experienced over the millennia and our
responses to those events. Given the ongoing threat of emerging infectious
disease, understanding the ways in which humans and pathogens impacted one
another in the past can inform infectious disease research in the present. This
doctoral dissertation project examines the origins and evolution of the disease
pathogen responsible for the deadliest form of human malaria (P. falciparum).
This pathogen is thought to have evolved through the transfer of a gorilla
parasite to humans, but the timing and anthropological context for this event
and malaria’s subsequent global spread remain poorly understood. The project
traces malaria’s evolutionary history through analysis of both ancient P.
falciparum genomes and related great ape parasites. The project also generates
new methods and tools that can be applied in other genomic research projects,
fosters student training and international research collaborations, and
generates new resources for public science education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is part of an international collaborative
effort of geneticists and primatologists to reconstruct genomes from ancient
Plasmodium falciparum and related great ape parasites. Using genomic analyses to
estimate when P. falciparum first emerged as a human parasite, the co-PI and
colleagues explore whether specific ecological and/or cultural factors,
particularly the adoption or diversification of agriculture, may have favored
this zoonotic event. Comparing ancient and modern parasite genomes, the
investigators explore the timing and route of malaria’s global dissemination to
understand the impact of human mobility on pathogen dispersal in the past. This
project is anticipated to generate valuable, concrete resources for the broader
scientific community, including genome-wide data from ancient Plasmodium
falciparum and wild-living gorilla Plasmodium
parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.