* 2141898
* CAREER: Reconstructing Parasite Abundance in River Ecosystems Over the Past Half Century
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Chelsea Wood, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2027
* USD 897,324.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under
the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Are the parasites that cause many infectious
diseases increasing or decreasing in abundance through time? This simple
question is surprisingly difficult to answer because few data exist to document
parasite burdens in the past. To circumvent this problem, parasite ecologists
have developed and validated a new technique: they can now extract information
on parasite burden from liquid-preserved specimens held in natural history
collections. This innovation opens a massive opportunity to understand how the
infectious disease landscape has shifted in the past 100 years, because millions
of suitable liquid-preserved specimens exist that can provide snapshots of
parasite burden at particular times and places. In this project, the researcher
will use liquid-preserved fish to reconstruct long-term data on the abundance of
parasites in river ecosystems of the US South and Southwest. This project will
answer a long-standing question with pressing implications for society’s ability
to manage infectious disease in wildlife, while simultaneously opening training
opportunities for students to participate in, contribute to, and deeply engage
with research on a fascinating group of organisms, the parasites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three fundamental questions in
parasite ecology: (Q1) How has the abundance of parasites in river ecosystems
changed over the past half century? (Q2) What roles have industrial pollution
and urbanization played in shaping change in parasite abundance through time?
(Q3) How do industrial pollution and urbanization affect the stability (i.e.
resistance and resilience) of parasite communities as they experience other
disturbances (e.g., drought)? The retrospective control–impact study design
(i.e., before–after–control–impact study in which time is continuous rather than
discrete) will allow the researcher to test for long-term temporal change in
parasite burden and to identify the influence of anthropogenic impacts (e.g.,
industrial pollution, urbanization) and other disturbances (e.g., drought) on
that long-term change. The researcher will incorporate these data into a newly
redesigned course in Parasite Ecology that will be shared as an open educational
resource and integrate eight undergraduate researchers into her research team,
providing many opportunities for students to participate in hands-on research.
This project will also result in the development of an open-access learning
module that introduces concepts of parasite ecology to elementary-aged
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.