* 2141917
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The influence of plant secondary metabolites on diet selection, nutrition, and health in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Erin Vogel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 23,147.00

The behavior, health, and digestive physiology of humans and non-human primates
have evolved to meet the demands of acquiring adequate nutrition. Primarily
plant-eating primates must reach nutritional requirements while coping with
noxious plant compounds (plant secondary metabolites: PSMs) that are often
produced in plants. Although these compounds are thought to be a strong
selective force on primates, and even responsible for technological innovations
in food processing and domestication in humans, we lack a clear idea of how
these compounds influence the foraging, health, and digestive adaptations of
wild primates. This doctoral dissertation research project examines the
behavioral and physiological strategies that a wild primate species uses to cope
with PSMs while reaching nutritional goals. This research will promote the
conservation of a critically endangered species by maintaining a research
presence on productive conservation land and providing local field assistants
with alternative livelihoods to logging. The investigators will also provide
training in laboratory and field methods to underrepresented students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it has become clear that the foraging behavior
and health status of wild primates is linked to the nutrient composition of
their foods, PSMs should also be a primary determinant of primate diets and
health because of the negative effects that they can have, including reduced
nutrient intake, toxicity, or even reduced reproductive success. This study uses
a model system to explore how both nutrients and tannins, a common class of PSM,
guide food selection through variable periods of preferred food availability and
nutritional status, and throughout the course of development. Tannins are
thought to be detrimental to consumers because they bind and reduce dietary
protein, and the primates studied in this project depend on protein-derived
energy to meet energetic demands during periods of preferred food scarcity.
Tannins may thus be particularly detrimental to their health, and they may
therefore have behavioral or physiological strategies to deal with them. The
investigators use data on food availability, feeding behavior, nutrient
composition of plant foods, and results from a qualitative assay of the
effectiveness of tannins in food, to test how tannins and nutrients affect food
selection and preference. The investigators also measure biomarkers of health in
urine samples, including C-peptide of insulin and creatinine, to see if health
status is related to intake of tannin-rich foods. Finally, they quantify tannin-
binding proteins in saliva, which are thought to be produced as an adaptation to
cope with dietary tannins. Overall, the results of this project provide
important knowledge regarding food availability, preferences and nutritional and
health related consequences in primates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.