* 2141564
* CAREER: Kinetic Theory of Irreversible Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Anna Tenerani, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 254,995.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). This CAREER award supports bringing together theory, numerical
simulations and spacecraft data analysis to advance our understanding of
fundamental plasma processes. Plasmas are gases made of electrically charged
particles, and they can be found everywhere in our universe. Neon lights,
lightning, auroras, stars and the interplanetary space are all examples of
matter in the plasma state. Electromagnetic interactions play a crucial role in
the dynamics of plasmas, including plasma energization and heating. For example,
such interactions are responsible for heating the outer solar atmosphere, the
solar corona, to temperatures in excess of one million degrees. The wind of
plasma continuously emitted by the sun into the interplanetary space, the solar
wind, is also heated to temperatures higher than what current theories predict.
One of the open questions in plasma physics is how the energy stored in the
electric and magnetic fields can ultimately heat a plasma. This problem will be
investigated with the support of this award by developing cutting-edge numerical
tools complemented by theory and analysis of data from past and current space
missions. The research will be integrated with an enhanced space physics
education plan that will target underrepresented minority groups in STEM
disciplines at all levels of education. Engaging activities will be organized
through summer camps and showcase lessons to enhance student awareness about
space physics and its impacts on life and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award establishes a research program that addresses the interplay between
kinetic effects and the dynamics on the large scales in turbulent systems such
as the natural plasmas of the heliosphere. Most of the plasma environments
encountered in nature and in the laboratory may be classified as weakly
collisional or collisionless, in the sense that the timescales associated with
collisional relaxation are orders of magnitude longer than the typical dynamical
ones. As a consequence, plasmas are most often far from thermodynamic
equilibrium, and transport models based on weak perturbations from such states
do not apply. Instead, kinetic mechanisms such as wave particle interactions
play a crucial role in the processes of energy dissipation and plasma
energization. The research effort supported with this award aims to understand
the two-way feedback between kinetic physics and large-scale dynamics to advance
knowledge of the processes that govern the turbulent cascade, dissipation and
particle energization in weakly collisional magnetized plasmas. To this end, an
extended hybrid collisional kinetic model will be developed and used to
investigate, for the first time, turbulence in weakly collisional magnetized
plasmas. In-situ spacecraft data analysis from past and current space missions
will be analyzed and compared with numerical and theoretical results. Results
from this work will find application in heliospheric environments, but also in
more exotic astrophysical systems such as stellar and pulsar winds, accretion
disks around widely different central objects, and the interstellar
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.