* 2141957
* CAREER: Precipitation Pathways and Deformation Micromechanisms of Refractory Superalloys (RSAs)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,09/30/2022
* James Coakley, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 09/30/2022
* USD 0.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The disruptive potential of a superior class of
high-temperature structural materials is immense, and would revolutionize the
energy sector and aerospace industry while advancing our military technologies.
For example, such materials would enable stationary gas turbines (which produce
40% of all U.S. electricity) and aerospace gas turbines (which account for 5% of
man-made global warming) to operate at higher temperatures. Higher engine
temperatures provide greater engine efficiency and boost power output from
powerplants and aviation, contributing to a stronger economy while reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and enabling tactical superiority for military
aircraft. The recent discovery of refractory high entropy superalloys (RSAs)
that possess excellent combinations of high strength and ductility at room-
temperature and elevated temperature is extremely promising, especially as
normal refractory alloys are typically brittle under ambient conditions. The
proposed research identifies knowledge-gaps regarding deformation mechanisms,
microstructure stability at high temperatures and addresses these gaps through
advanced materials characterization, mechanical testing and simulation,
including National Laboratory facilities. Such analysis and understanding are
critical for accelerated materials development to realize next-generation
powerplants and aerospace engines. This project not only meets demands for
advanced materials but synergistically reduces talent gaps in science and
engineering. The University of Miami College of Engineering is collaborating
with the Phillip and Patricia Frost Museum of Science, which receives
approximately 700,000 visitors annually. The collaboration serves to increase
awareness and interest in metallurgy, and its impact on lowering CO2 and energy
footprints of air travel and electricity production, through integration of
ongoing research and education initiatives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to study the
precipitation, strengthening and deformation mechanisms of refractory high
entropy superalloys (RSA) by specifically testing the hypotheses that (i) the
precipitation formed on quenching is due to spinodal decomposition, which raises
concerns regarding long-term stability of the two-phase microstructure, and that
(ii) the excellent mechanical properties are due to co-deformation of both
phases via activation of the a&lt;111&gt; slip system, given the preferred
a&lt;001&gt;{001} mechanism does not satisfy the criterion for polycrystalline
ductility. The application of in-situ small-angle x-ray and neutron scattering
to determine the time dependent Fourier transform of the composition variation,
and thereby directly test for spinodal decomposition, while simultaneously
monitoring for phase transformations in a wide-angle detector, significantly
contributes to the understanding of precipitation pathways in alloys. In-situ
neutron diffraction during elastic loading provides fundamental data (such as
phase stiffnesses) necessary for phase field simulations regarding
microstructure evolution. In-situ diffraction during plastic deformation
combined with TEM dislocation analysis probes the deformation micromechanics and
reveals why RSAs exhibit a combination of strength and ductility, whereas
refractory (single-phase) alloys are typically brittle at ambient temperature.
The fundamental research regarding phase evolution, spinodal decomposition and
slip systems within body-centered cubic alloys is significant across multiple
alloy systems, essential for the development of RSAs, and necessary to advance
high-temperature metallurgy. The STEM talent gap is addressed through a tight
integration of research and education. The development of an undergraduate
course that offers an educational opportunity to perform research alongside
faculty and industry engineers enhances materials education in South Florida.
The lack of diversity in STEM is addressed through a multi-step program, where
U. Miami is ideally located in a majority-minority city and educates a highly
diverse student body. Significant awareness and understanding in metallurgy is
generated through partnership with the Frost Science Museum, where statistical
surveys monitor success of these education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.