* 2141555
* CAREER: Using Otolith Chemistry to Reveal the Life History of Antarctic Toothfish in the Ross Sea, Antarctica: Testing Fisheries and Climate Change Impacts on a Top Fish Predator
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Cassandra Brooks, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 04/30/2027
* USD 422,142.00

The Ross Sea, Antarctica, is one of the last large intact marine ecosystems left
in the world, yet is facing increasing pressure from commercial fisheries and
environmental change. It is the most productive stretch of the Southern Ocean,
supporting an array of marine life, including Antarctic toothfish – the region’s
top fish predator. While a commercial fishery for toothfish continues to grow in
the Ross Sea, fundamental knowledge gaps remain regarding toothfish ecology and
the impacts of toothfish fishing on the broader Ross Sea ecosystem. Recognizing
the global value of the Ross Sea, a large (&gt;2 million km2) marine protected
area was adopted by the multi-national Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources in 2016. This research will fill a critical
gap in the knowledge of Antarctic toothfish and deepen understanding of
biological-physical interactions for fish ecology, while contributing to
knowledge of impacts of fishing and environmental change on the Ross Sea system.
This work will further provide innovative tools for studying connectivity among
geographically distinct fish populations and for synthesizing and assessing the
efficacy of a large-scale marine protected area. In developing an integrated
research and education program in engaged scholarship, this project seeks to
train the next generation of scholars to engage across the science-policy-public
interface, engage with Southern Ocean stakeholders throughout the research
process, and to deepen the public’s appreciation of the Antarctic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major research priority among Ross Sea scientists is to
better understand the life history of the Antarctic toothfish and test the
efficacy of the Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA) in protecting against the
impacts of overfishing and climate change. Like growth rings of a tree, fish ear
bones, called otoliths, develop annual layers of calcium carbonate that
incorporates elements from their environment. Otoliths offer information on the
fish’s growth and the surrounding ocean conditions. Hypothesizing that much of
the Antarctic toothfish life cycle is structured by ocean circulation, this
research employs a multi-disciplinary approach combining age and growth work
with otolith chemistry testing, while also utilizing GIS mapping. The project
will measure life history parameters as well as trace elements and stable
isotopes in otoliths in three distinct sets collected over the last four decades
in the Ross Sea. The information will be used to quantify the transport pathways
Antarctic toothfish use across their life history, and across time, in the Ross
Sea. The project will assess if toothfish populations from the Ross Sea are
connected more widely across the Antarctic. By comparing life history and
otolith chemistry data across time, the researchers will assess change in life
history parameters and spatial dynamics and seek to infer if these changes are
driven by fishing or climate change. Spatially mapping of these data will allow
an assessment of the efficacy of the Ross Sea MPA in protecting toothfish and
where further protections might be needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.