* 2141892
* CAREER: Sensory Innovation and The Ecological Diversification of Snakes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Alison Davis Rabosky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2027
* USD 367,215.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some groups of animals have been
spectacularly successful at moving among major habitats during their evolution,
while other groups have diversified only within single habitats. However, the
causes of these transitions remain poorly known, especially when animals use
novel strategies that do not follow expectations that seem logical from their
anatomy. By using new 3D technology to nondestructively visualize the bones and
sensory systems of preserved specimens in natural history collections, this
project will create a unified framework for understanding the relative
importance of different anatomical traits that facilitate shifts to new
habitats. These insights are especially important when organismal systems work
together in a way that is more than the simple sum of their parts. The project
then uses a student-centered ambassador model (“Project: MORPH!”) to leverage
research products into 3D biodiversity education resources and experiences for
the public and students at all levels. These components broaden participation in
science through outreach programs and exhibits in a natural history museum that
serves the Detroit metropolitan area, facilitating 1) experiential learning
opportunities with innovative 3D technology and 2) the role of community
scientists in providing foundational biodiversity data (“Story of the
Specimen”). Additionally, this work provides advanced training in “big data”
analysis and science communication to prepare early-career scientists from
diverse backgrounds for future research in biodiversity science. Together, this
project provides powerful insight into the drivers of successful invasion of
major habitats across an iconic group of vertebrates and leverages emerging
technologies towards comprehensive integration of biodiversity research and
teaching in the 21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
phylogenetic comparative methods to test how sensory systems have integrated
with each other, and with trophic and skeletal innovation, to facilitate
ecological diversification in snakes. Using non-invasive computed tomography
(CT) scanning of soft tissue in museum specimens, this project tests a set of
hypotheses for diversification across at least 60 independent invasions of
subterranean, arboreal, and aquatic habitats. These tests are particularly
important for understanding the processes underlying evolutionary convergence.
Furthermore, tests of sensory evolution will fundamentally advance how classic
locomotor and trophic traits are contextualized across ecological
diversification in a major vertebrate radiation. Additionally, the educational
components offer assessment-driven use of digital specimens that will provide
innovative pedagogical insights about and uses of natural history collections,
especially for future remote or informal learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.