* 2141007
* Informing Interventions: improving the measurement of children's vocabulary knowledge and caregiver input in the Deep South
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Janna Oetting, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 365,766.00

The current project seeks to improve how researchers measure and characterize
the type of language input children throughout the Deep South hear in their day-
to-day lives. The project will also characterize how variability in this input
contributes to children’s vocabulary knowledge. There are well-established
associations between caregiver linguistic input and children’s vocabulary
development, resulting in extensive intervention efforts focused on modifying
the home language environment. To date, most research on this topic has been
conducted in urban cities in the northeast and midwest United States; however,
the language children hear and speak in the Deep South varies based on
differences in culture and dialect. By understanding the sources of variability
underlying vocabulary differences among low socioeconomic status (SES) children
in the Deep South, this project can inform existing interventions which seek to
close academic achievement gaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is also critical that
assessments are sensitive to community-based and dialect-based differences.
Children in rural, low SES communities, and children who speak nonmainstream
dialects, such as African American English (AAE) and Southern White English
(SWE), are frequently classified as language delayed or disordered when really,
they are language different. The current proposal seeks to reduce these
misclassifications by a) identifying which standardized assessments most
accurately measure children’s vocabulary knowledge (static versus dynamic), b)
characterizing variability in the type of language caregivers in the Deep South
provide to their children, and c) determining which aspects of the language
input children hear are most likely to promote vocabulary learning. Determining
the best approaches to measuring vocabulary in this population and considering
how differences in language input contributes to vocabulary variability will
reduce disproportionate discrimination against the characterization of their
language abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Developmental Sciences Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.