* 2141804
* RAPID: Addressing the wind and water erosion knowledge gap in Drylands: Fire as a driver of erosion in cheatgrass invaded Sagebrush Steppe
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Robert Washington-Allen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project responds to a June 9, 2021, wildfire that burned 283 hectares of
the 999-ha Jacks Valley Wildlife Management Area (WMA) in south Carson City,
Nevada. It explores soil erosion processes occurring subsequent to fires induced
by cheat grass invasion. It will quantity the factors influencing wind and water
erosion using modern instruments, including terrestrial laser scanner, unmanned
autonomous vehicle, ground penetrating radar, and satellite imagery. The project
team includes members of groups historically underrepresented in science.
Students will be supported on the project through paid internships that leverage
existing programs at the University of Nevada, Reno, and connections with
federal partners. The data generated could be useful to tribal communities whose
lands are at high risk to degradation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on an
established United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Research
Service (ARS) study, this project addresses a critical knowledge gap in our
fundamental understanding of wind and water erosion rates in dryland landscapes
that are undergoing abrupt change. The wildfire event that is the focus of this
study presents a time-sensitive opportunity to collect perishable data on the
wind- and water- driven soil erosion that occurs subsequent to fires induced by
increased cheatgrass fuel loads in sagebrush steppe. The investigators will
address research questions related to the relative contribution to the annual
sediment budget of various factors influencing erosion. These factors will be
quantified using terrestrial laser scanning, unmanned aerial vehicles, ground
penetrating radar, and satellite imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.