* 2141002
* PFI-TT:  Inline Particle Monitoring in Sterile Liquid Filtration Systems via Holographic Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jiarong Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 249,532.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to detect contamination in filter
systems used in the food and beverage sector. The project will develop an inline
monitoring system for detecting particle contaminants (e.g., bacteria, fungi) in
the sterile liquid filtration systems of food &amp; beverage product lines to
provide timely process analysis, which prevents unplanned excursions and
downtime while maintaining 24/7 compliance. The method can be readily adapted
for applications in the pharmaceutical industry, as well as air quality
monitoring in surgical operation/organ transplant rooms, asbestos monitoring at
construction sites, etc. The envisioned system is a low-cost, compact setup
requiring minimal maintenance as it can remain calibrated for years.
Entrepreneurship training will be provided to underrepresented students,
including native Americans and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
advances digital holographic image sensing to capture diffracted patterns of
particles in a three-dimensional sample volume and machine learning-based image
processing to characterize them (e.g., concentration, type, viability) with
single particle sensitivity. The method can achieve real-time, high-throughput
analysis of contaminants, particularly spoilage microbes, impossible with
existing inline monitoring techniques using microscopic imaging. It can be used
as an alternative rapid label-free microbial test to the conventional offline
cultivation methods which take several days. Moreover, this approach can
distinguish between a number of microorganisms and test the viability, which
other rapid tests, such as polymerase chain reaction,
cannot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.