* 2141660
* CAREER: Integrative Pathway Analysis for Cancer Subtyping, Patient Stratification, and Risk Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Tin Nguyen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 490,039.00

Cancer is an umbrella term that includes a range of disorders, from those that
are fast-growing and lethal to indolent lesions with low potential for
progression to death. In recent decades, important clinical advances in cancer
treatments have been attributed to molecular subtyping and targeted treatments
aiming at specific genes. However, a significant percentage of patients do not
respond to targeted therapies or develop resistance over time. This implies that
current methods for tumor characterization and therapeutic interventions are not
sufficiently accurate. This project aims to develop novel technologies able to
better differentiate among patients diagnosed with the same cancer type.
Fundamental to this personalized analysis approach is the capability to explain
why patients with similar cancer can greatly differ in terms of treatment
success. The approach will also feature an effective integration methodology of
multiple types of data. This work will enhance our ability to distinguish among
patients who are in immediate danger and need the most aggressive treatments and
those whose disease will progress slowly. This will lead to reduced health care
costs and personal suffering while improving patient care by identifying the
correct personalized treatment for each patient. This research will pave the way
for future projects in identifying clinically applicable biomarkers that can be
used in diagnosis, risk prediction, and monitoring treatment response and
outcome. The project also has an extensive education and outreach component,
including curriculum development, undergraduate research, museum exhibits for
children, and outreach activities to community colleges and K-12 schools in
Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address two important
challenges commonly faced in cancer subtyping: (1) incorporation of pathway
knowledge in cancer subtyping, patient stratification, and risk prediction, and
(2) efficient integration of multi-cohort and multi-omics data. To address the
first challenge, the project will develop novel machine learning technologies to
identify impacted pathways and compute personalized pathway profiles in
individual patients. The innovation of this idea stems from combining classical
probabilistic components with important biological factors that are not captured
in existing techniques: i) all gene-gene interactions as described by each
pathway, ii) topology among multi-omics layers, and iii) the crosstalk among
pathways. The approach will transform all molecular data to a common pathway
space, making it possible to efficiently address the second challenge:
systematically integrate multi-omics and multi-cohort data. This will be
realized by a non-negative-kernel, variational autoencoders. The non-negative
kernel will effectively accumulate consistent signals of biomarkers while
shrinking random noise of non-relevant components. The goal of this project will
be achieved by three thrusts: 1) compute personalized pathway profiles that can
be used for subtyping, 2) integrate multiple patient cohorts to increase sample
size and statistical power of subtyping methods, and 3) validate the proposed
methodologies using 10 subtype discovery methods, 6 patient stratification
techniques, and 6 risk prediction models that will be tested on more than 70
cancer datasets. The investigator will make the methodologies publicly available
via a Bioconductor package and a web-based platform, thus increasing their
potential for wide adoption by the research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.