* 2141655
* CAREER: Situating Computational Learning Opportunities in the Digital Lives of High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* David Weintrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 12/31/2026
* USD 451,788.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;This project is also funded through the CS
for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer science and
data science are important topics with applications in many STEM disciplines.
Data science can bring together computer programming and the data students
produce and use in their daily lives as a way to help them understand the
impacts of computing on the world. The project will design and study a
curricular unit that introduces learners to the powerful ideas of computing by
having students pose questions based on their interests and answer them by using
programming to gather and analyze large data sets from publicly available
platforms. The curriculum will be designed through a partnership with an urban
school district to integrate programming in a new data science course. Teachers
and researchers will collaborate to develop the curriculum so that it can be
shared with other schools. This new course provides a unique and timely
opportunity to situate innovative computer science instruction in a district-
wide initiative specifically designed to reach students from populations who
have historically had little opportunity to learn computer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a multi-year design-based
research study in high school classrooms and use participatory design, classroom
case studies, and a multi-school implementation to develop and research this new
CS curricular unit. There is a particular focus on the experience of learners
from populations historically excluded from computing. The research is guided by
questions about the design of the curriculum and the experiences of the
students. For example, how can a curricular unit designed to have learners pose
questions based on their interests and answer them using publicly available
datasets produce the co-expression of interest and computer science knowledge?
How do such educational experiences help learners understand the impact of
computing on their lives? How do such educational experiences increase learners’
knowledge of and abilities in computer science? How do such educational
experiences impact confidence and self-efficacy for learners historically
excluded from computing? The project will gather data from teachers and students
using qualitative and quantitative sources. For instance, to capture students’
learning experience, the project will gather video of students’ working and the
written artifacts they produce. Participatory design sessions with the teachers
will be used to design and revise the resources for classroom use and understand
teachers’ perspectives. Field notes and artifacts will be gathered from the
participatory design sessions with teachers. Overall, the project will develop
knowledge about how to create data science learning experiences for students
using a participatory process with teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.