* 2141621
* CAREER: Network Centrality and Its Applications in Detection, Dynamics, and Load Balancing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sayan Banerjee, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2027
* USD 184,977.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to develop a mathematical
understanding of networks that evolve over time and the processes that take
place on them. The key idea is to identify network attributes that carry a
footprint of a network's past and to exploit them in reconstructing the early
stages of a network from its current configuration. This can be used to detect,
for example, the origin of a rumor spread, popular individuals and their
influence in a social network, or a source of a disease outbreak. The results
are expected to have significant applications in national security and public
health. Another key research direction is to develop a systematic understanding
of how local interactions in a large network influence its global geometry. This
knowledge can be used to increase the overall efficiency of a network of servers
through cooperative local interactions, with potential applications in improving
routing schemes for airport security, supermarket distribution systems, and
distribution of vaccines and other medicines. The project aims to develop a
robust toolbox across many disciplines in science and engineering. The project
involves significant educational activities and integration of research and
education. The activities aim to prepare a diverse STEM workforce through long-
term research and career mentoring for undergraduate and graduate students.
Course material and review papers emerging from this research will be freely
available online to students and researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Centrality
driven networks connect the fields of dynamic random networks and reinforced
processes. The first part of the project investigates centrality driven
networks, in which incoming vertices attach to one or more existing vertices
with probability proportional to their centrality scores. Centrality measures
like PageRank, which interpolate the global and local network geometries, will
be used to study network archaeology questions. Novel dynamic networks driven by
PageRank and opinion dynamics will also be analyzed. The second part of the
project explores centrality-driven routing policies for networks where each
vertex has a server with a unit service rate. Jobs arriving at a subset of
vertices designated arrival nodes myopically explore the network in search of
less busy servers to minimize their waiting time. Optimal placement of the
arrival nodes will be analyzed using a new notion of load centrality. Diffusion
limits and load balancing based on Dirichlet energy functionals will be used to
study systems in heavy traffic. The techniques used in the research will rely on
a delicate interplay between discrete time and continuous time dynamics to move
beyond model specific computations. As a byproduct, the project aims to provide
new characterizations of branching process limits and rates of
convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.