* 2141858
* CAREER: Dissecting the Molecular Regulation of Septin-Mediated Plant Invasion by the Blast Fungus Magnaporthe Oryzae
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Martin Egan, University of Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2027
* USD 343,931.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fungus Magnaporthe oryzae
causes a highly destructive disease of cultivated rice and wheat, called blast,
which poses an ongoing threat to food security around the world. In the field,
blast is combatted using a limited range of fungicides, and the emergence of
resistance to these chemistries is a looming threat. Thus, there is an urgent
need to develop new strategies to control blast, but this demands a more
complete mechanistic understanding of M. oryzae infection biology. To infect
plants, M. oryzae produces a specialized pressure-generating infection cell,
called an appressorium, which it uses to break inside of leaves. This research
focuses on gaining a better understanding of how these infection cells are built
and how they work, and therefore the outcomes may help to safeguard global food
security and enhance agricultural productivity. The proposed activities will
provide improved training and education in bioimaging for the study of plants,
microbes and their interactions, and will provide enhanced opportunities for
low-income, and first-generation high school students to gain hands-on research
experience in cutting-edge fungal cell biology, therein promoting their
participation in higher-education and science. Communication of these research
outcomes at local events will provide enhanced opportunities for public
engagement, leading to increased scientific literacy and awareness and greater
trust in science and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appressorium-mediated
plant invasion by M. oryzae requires the regulated assembly of a toroidal ring
structure, composed of a class of cytoskeletal filament-forming GTP-binding
proteins called septins, within its base. How this infection-specific septin
ring forms in the right place, and at the right time, within the developing
appressorium to enable plant invasion, remains largely mysterious. Indeed,
understanding how septins are assembled and dynamically remodeled into different
functional architectures in diverse cell types is a current frontier in the
field. Critically, improved mechanistic understanding of septin ring assembly
and function in M. oryzae may inform the development of new fungicides to
control blast, and other fungal crop diseases, especially given that plants do
not contain septins. The goals of this project are to gain new insight into the
molecular mechanisms by which incipient septin disc-like structures form in the
base of appressoria and are remodeled into rings, and how these cortical
structures organize the penetration interface for plant invasion. This project
combines the use of time-resolved proximity proteomics, live cell imaging, and
reverse genetics to functionally map the septin-organized appressorium basal
cortex and penetration interface and employs a novel fluorescence microscopy-
based genome-wide chemical mutagenesis screen to identify novel regulators of
septin ring assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.