* 2141385
* EAGER: ADAPT: Optimizing Chemical Reaction Networks With AI
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Todd Gingrich, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Todd Gingrich of Northwestern University is supported by an award from the by an
award from the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Artificial
Intelligence Program, and the Division of Chemistry, to develop and assess AI
algorithms for optimizing reaction-diffusion chemistry. As an example, the
combination of reaction and diffusion enables living systems to regulate
essential processes, e.g., how signals are processed and propagated in the
brain. Rather than functioning with electrons flowing through computer chips and
wires, biological systems perform functions by molecular interconversion
(reactions) and molecular diffusion through space. It is not, however, clear how
to best mix the necessary reactions and diffusion to achieve a desired function.
A significant barrier to designing reaction-diffusion chemistry is that the
individual reactions and diffusion events occur with some randomness, and
computational simulations must optimize the chemistry in the presence of noisy
stochastic fluctuations. Dr. Gingrich and his research group are pursuing
computational approaches to mitigate the noise by developing new algorithms that
utilize a mathematical construction called a tensor network, to effectively
average over the noise. As another example, some chemical reactions can be
generated that act as a clock with a molecule oscillating between low and high
concentration. The methods being developed are AI tools that would identify
strategies to modulate the reaction-diffusion chemistry to regulate the
oscillations. Those technical advances, built upon the iTensor software library,
will be openly and freely disseminated. The research will be done in
collaboration with the group of Tal Kachman, specializing in artificial
intelligence (AI) at Radboud University (NL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop AI algorithms that identify rate constants to optimize an
objective function by gradient-based search, where the gradients measure
improvements (e.g., in a chemical oscillator) due to small changes in the
elementary reaction rates. The core technical challenge is to compute those
gradients, a problem that demands accurate and efficient numerical solutions,
for chemical kinetics in exceptionally high-dimensional space. A naïve approach
utilizes deterministic, coupled differential equations for the mass-action
kinetics, but it is well-known that emergent chemical reaction network phenomena
are only captured by algorithms that incorporate the stochastic nature of
chemical kinetics. Algorithms like the Gillespie algorithm generate stochastic
realizations of chemical kinetics and achieve accuracy by averaging over many
noisy trajectories. By utilizing the Doi-Peliti formalism’s analogies with
quantum dynamics, Dr. Gingrich and his research group are developing and
analyzing an alternative method that uses tensor networks to effectively average
over all possible trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.