* 2141176
* PFI-TT: Embedded Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) to secure the semiconductor supply chain
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Robert Patti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,767.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to protect the integrity of
electronic devices. Counterfeit integrated circuits are a national security
threat as they can appear in mission-critical systems, such as a nuclear
submarine. The current supply chain has many potential weaknesses. This project
advances a technology to address counterfeits. Inserting the proposed wireless
identification circuit enables a semiconductor chip to be interrogated at any
point in the supply chain where tracking is valued. This tracking can be
validated by manufacturers, customs, and end users, leading to a real-time
“trust but verify” ecosystem that guarantees authenticity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will demonstrate a complete embedded radio
frequency identification (RFID) block, including a unique identification number
to cryptographically generate a query response from a reader at a range of
approximately 0.5 cm. It can be read in under 0.2 s with minimal sensitivity to
alignment. The project goals include: (1) design of a suitable antenna, (2)
incorporation of a Non-Volatile Memory to store the semiconductor chip’s unique
identification number, (3) removal of a voltage bias circuit, and (4) design and
integration of a cryptographic identification communication system. The
prototype will be built using validated circuit design techniques using a
semiconductor foundry-provided design kit, fabricated into a demonstration
semiconductor chip at an existing commercial foundry, and then assembled into a
test and validation station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.