* 2141991
* CAREER: Impacts of Incorporated Metals on Dissolution Rates of Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Jacquelyn Bracco, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2027
* USD 254,747.00

Certain toxic and radioactive metals, such as lead and radioactive strontium,
can cause environmental and health concerns when they are dissolved in surface
waters or groundwater. One way to remove or prevent them from entering the
environment is to incorporate them into solid minerals, where they can be
immobilized for long term storage. However, incorporated metals can directly
affect the rate at which these minerals dissolve and thus release contaminants
back into the environment. It is not well known which metals are most likely to
increase or decrease the rate at which these minerals dissolve, but that
information would be helpful for designing more effective remediation
strategies. The proposed project will determine how incorporated metals affect
mineral dissolution rates and develop a model to better predict the stability
and lifetime of minerals precipitated during environmental remediation. The
project will also support, train, and promote the retention of a diverse group
of undergraduate students through development of a collaborative research
experience and inter-college seminar series with students at Queens College and
two local community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this
project is to determine the molecular scale mechanisms that drive differences in
dissolution of minerals with incorporated metals as compared to their pure end-
member phases. While the thermodynamic solubility of mineral phases can be used
to determine the likelihood of dissolution, the rate of dissolution can be
equally important, since solubility does not always correlate with reaction
rates. Dissolution rates can be predicted using kinetic models, but these are
typically parameterized for pure mineral phases rather than for minerals with
incorporated metals. In this research plan, overall dissolution rates of
minerals with incorporated metals will be measured using batch reactors while
surface specific dissolution rates and molecular-scale mechanisms will be
measured using atomic force microscopy. These measurements will then be used to
parameterize a process-based dissolution model that accounts for molecular-scale
attachment and detachment reactions at specific sites on mineral surfaces. The
project's educational goals are to introduce non-traditional and diverse
transfer students as well as native undergraduate students to collaborative
research experiences, and to train future mineral surface geochemists. All
students will participate in a summer research experience, attend an inter-
college seminar series, and present their findings at an undergraduate research
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.