* 2141095
* EAGER: Social Media Based Early Cybersecurity Threat Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Chang-Tien Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Societyâ€™s ever-increasing reliance on the complex digital world with a huge
repository of highly confidential and private data has made maintaining
cybersecurity an uncompromising task for organizations. The loss incurred by the
US healthcare system due to ransomware attacks has exceeded 157 million dollars
since 2016. Traditionally, cyberattack detection techniques leverage network
traffic data to detect certain types of attacks. However, this kind of approach
is difficult to generalize. Furthermore, the requisite data is too expensive to
obtain and information about organizational compromise can often originate
outside the institution. Hence, open source indicators like social media
platforms, which propagate rich security-related discussions for ongoing
cyberattacks, can be inexpensive yet effective sources of data for an early
cyberattack detection system. This project aims to implement a social media
based multitask active learning framework for early cybersecurity threat
detection. Its reliance on open source data will generalize the application of
the research across different target entities. The project will produce a
theoretical framework for teaching cyberattack detection or social media mining,
providing academia and the industry a broader understanding of fundamental
methodological approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will design the
solution through different interconnected research thrusts. The key challenges
in social media based cyberattack detection are lack of comprehensive ground
truth data and expensive labeling effort. The project tackles this problem by
innovatively incorporating both dynamic query expansion and active learning. The
dynamic query expansion component provides an effective procedure to collect
domain specific labeled data while the active learning module interactively
updates the training dataset by labeling the data collected outside the
constraints of the dynamic query expansion. Furthermore, to address the problem
of generalizing over various types of cyberattacks, the project explores a novel
multitask learning framework with message passing mechanism to model varied and
distinctive types of cybersecurity events. Additionally, the investigator
intends to implement a visual interface which explores novel deep learning-based
storyline generation techniques for the detected security events which will
provide an interpretable visual analysis of cybersecurity related incidents for
different organizations across time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.