* 2141047
* RAPID: A Community Test of Distributed Acoustic Sensing on the Ocean Observatories Initiative Regional Cabled Array
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 132,500.00

In recent years, there has been interest in the potential of offshore
distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) in the Pacific Northwest and a test in this
region would be of widespread interest to the oceanographic community. DAS is a
relatively new observational technique in academia that interrogates an optical
fiber with repeated laser pulses and utilizes changes in the phase of
backscattered light to measure the strain rate along the fiber. DAS can work to
distances of up to ~100 km, has a spatial resolution of a few meters and a broad
frequency sensitivity. There is still a lot to be learned about how the DAS
signal responds to strain. On land, DAS has been demonstrated for a wide variety
of applications including earthquake monitoring and rapid response aftershock
studies etc. DAS experiments in the ocean are more challenging. It wasnâ€™t until
2019 that the potential of seafloor DAS for academic research was demonstrated.
The Oregon margin is one of the most energetic coastlines in the world and an
excellent location to test the DAS capabilities and is thus, an ideal site to
study the role of storms in generating seismic noise near coastlines and
potentially understanding if and how DAS could be used for measuring sediment
exchange. DAS has also been identified as a new technology that might form an
important component of future offshore earthquake and tsunami early warning
systems in Cascadia and elsewhere. The scheduled shutdown provides a great
opportunity to test DAS in this region. A Caltech graduate student will get
experience leading data acquisition and two UW graduate students will gain
experience in DAS/DTS data acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are taking
advantage of a rare scheduled shutdown in early November 2021 of the Ocean
Observatories Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array (RCA). With the RCA cables
disconnected from all RCA shoreside equipment, the distributed acoustic sensing
(DAS) and distributed temperature sensing (DTS) systems will be connected to the
OOI fibers and will undergo testing to determine the potential of submarine DAS
to observe seismic, oceanographic, acoustic and geodetic processes. DAS is
potentially of great importance for efforts to develop offshore earthquake and
tsunami warning systems in Cascadia and this experiment represents an important
step in developing protocols that can support the use of DAS for science and
hazards mitigation in the Northeast Pacific while meeting national security
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.