* 2141551
* Creating the Federal Judicial Database and Research Agenda
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Christina Boyd, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 483,086.00

Federal district court and circuit court judges serve as the face of law and
justice for many citizens in the United States. Because of their importance,
there is interest among scholars, students, the media, the public, and
policymakers to understand who these judges are and what decisions they make as
judges. In aid of improving societal understanding and perceptions of the
federal judiciary, this project will develop, make public, and use the Federal
Judicial Database. When complete, these data will include detailed background
information on all federal district and circuit judges serving from 1789 to the
present selected to their positions through presidential nomination and Senate
confirmation. The data will be presented to the public through an interactive
website designed to facilitate broad user
accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Federal Judicial Database will provide
detailed biographical, attribute, and background data on the thousands of
federal district and circuit judges selected into their positions under Article
III of the U.S. Constitution. Compiled from federal judges’ nomination
documentation presented to the Senate, along with other congressional, judicial,
and biographical sources and updates of prior data collection efforts, the
Federal Judicial Database will include extensive data on each federal judge,
including information on nomination, confirmation, departure, demographics,
biography, prior judicial and legal employment, and pre-appointment writings and
speeches. The Investigator will design, develop, and produce a public website
for the consumption and distribution of the Federal Judicial Database. The
website design will accommodate information about the research project and data
(project background, codebooks, data sources, citations, and publications),
interactive search and display abilities, and access to pre-prepared datasets
for download. The public web interface will be designed to make the data
attractive and accessible to a broad set of non-scholar users and will highlight
both individual judge profiles and cross-judge profiles based on interactive
searches conducted by the user. Using the newly collected Federal Judicial
Database, the Investigator will undertake two research applications. The first
of these is an examination of whether district court judges with different legal
backgrounds manage civil cases in distinct ways (such as in holding settlement
conferences) and whether they vary in their successful encouragement of case
settlements. Relevant judge factors from the Federal Judicial Database will
include, for example, a district judge’s prior experience as a civil litigator,
arbitrator, or mediator and the number of cases she took to trial during her
legal career. The second research project using the Federal Judicial Database
will be a study of how much variation exists in federal courts of appeals judge
professional backgrounds (for example, prior service as prosecutors, public
defenders, and corporate lawyers) across time and whether these different
judicial backgrounds affect decision making on the federal bench. Beyond these
two research projects, the Federal Judicial Database will permit rigorous
inquiry into the patterns and effects of judges’ writing, trial experience,
education and training, group membership, and more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.