* 2141285
* RUI: SG: Source or Sink? Do Plant-Microbial Interactions Determine the Direction of Carbon Flux During the Wet Phase of Northern Peatlands?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Kevin Wyatt, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2025
* USD 199,895.00

Biofilms are communities of microorganisms, which include algae, fungi, and
bacteria - organisms that grow in close association in aquatic environments.
Compared to our understanding of biofilm ecology in most other environments, our
knowledge of microbial interactions within wetlands is lacking. This knowledge
gap is particularly evident in peatlands, a common landscape feature at northern
latitudes. In part because of thick organic soil layers that lock up significant
amounts of nutrients, northern peatlands are rich in carbon and poor in other
nutrients. Plants such as mosses that can tolerate low nutrient availability
produce a large fraction of annual biomass accumulation in peatlands, and this
decomposes slowly. Over time, an imbalance between plant growth (primary
production) and microbial decomposition leads to the accumulation of organic
matter as peat. This small grant (SG) project will study peatlands at the
Bonanza Creek Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site in Alaska during periods
when they are inundated with water. The research will assess how between plant-
and microbial biofilm-mediated activities impact the amount of carbon that gets
stored in peat under this wet phase, and how much carbon is released into the
atmosphere. In addition to charting new conceptual ground in ecosystem science,
this project will provide research experiences for undergraduate students from
under-represented groups and train two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial biofilms are comprised of autotrophic
(algae) and heterotrophic (bacteria and fungi) microorganisms that play a key
role in aquatic ecosystem function. Heterotrophic biofilms are responsible for
releasing carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere, whereas autotrophic biofilms
take up CO2 during photosynthesis. The overall influence of biofilm composition
on ecosystem carbon (C) emissions is determined by the exchange of resources
among microorganisms, including algae, bacteria, and fungi. Autotrophs rely on
heterotrophs to recycle nutrients, and heterotrophs rely on autotrophs for C
that is fixed during photosynthesis, unless energetic requirements are met by
outside sources. In peatland ecosystems with high water content, vascular plants
and mosses have the potential to shift the metabolic balance of the microbial
biofilm in favor of heterotrophy by providing C subsidies that allow
heterotrophs to outcompete autotrophs for available nutrients. Given that some
plant subsidies are more easily used by heterotrophs than others, the ability
for plants to facilitate microbial activity may depend on plant community
composition. However, the impact of plant community structure on microbial
biofilms has not been widely studied in peatlands. As a result, it is difficult
to predict how shifts in plant communities, such as those occurring with climate
change, influence the C balance of northern peatlands. This project will use a
combination of nutrient and organic matter manipulations at the Bonanza Creek
LTER site to determine the extent to which organic C subsidies from plant
communities govern ecosystem C flux by regulating the composition of microbial
biofilms in northern peatlands. It is predicted that shifts in plant composition
that favor labile C subsidies will increase CO2 emissions by promoting
heterotrophic activity and reducing algal photosynthesis. In this condition,
algae are no longer able to mitigate the effects of heterotrophic respiration
leading to greater CO2 flux from the system. Alternatively, in the presence of
less labile plant subsidies, heterotrophic microorganisms rely on algal sources
of organic matter for metabolism within the biofilm. In this condition, algal
photosynthesis mitigates CO2 emissions associated with heterotrophic
respiration. Nutrient-rich plant subsidies, by contrast, could alleviate
nutrient limitation of the biofilm resulting in greater algal biomass and CO2
uptake. The project will provide training opportunities for two masters students
and several undergraduates, including members of underrepresented groups in
science recruited through the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Consortium in Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.