* 2141227
* PFI-TT:  Enhancing the Mass Production of Advanced Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project aims to develop new technology to bridge
the knowledge gap in the generation of new high-power light sources that are
required to increase the speed of mass production of the advanced integrated
circuit (IC) chips. The high-volume manufacturing of ICs is one of the world’s
most economically important industrial activities, enabling data communication,
information technology, medical diagnostics, and transportation. The project
will improve semiconductor lithography, the process of printing the circuit
patterns onto silicon chips during production. This is the most critical and
capital-intensive step in high-volume manufacturing of advanced ICs. The
printing of smaller features to allow for more transistors per chip depends
strongly on better light sources. Improvements in the efficiency and power of
these light sources will improve the productivity and cost of lithography tools,
reducing the fabrication cost of advanced ICs.

The proposed project aims to improve the efficiency in the machines used in EUV
lithography, a new projection lithography technique that uses dramatically
shorter wavelength light. EUV lithography entered high volume manufacturing in
2019 after 3 decades of development. In advanced lithography machines, EUV light
is produced by laser heating of liquid tin micro-droplets from which highly
charged tin ions emit the EUV radiation at wavelengths near 13.5 nm. While the
EUV light power presently achievable from laser-created plasmas is sufficient to
initiate high volume manufacturing of a new generation of more powerful ICs,
significantly higher EUV power is still required for high-throughput and cost-
effective manufacturing. An increased understanding and control of the micro-
droplet plasma evolution in EUV lithography sources can potentially increase
their EUV conversion efficiency and average power. Taking advantage of previous
work conducted at CSU, the plan is to demonstrate the technology and methodology
to image the evolution of the tin targets plasmas using an EUV laser probe to
benchmark models. The EUV probe can penetrate regions of the plasma inaccessible
to visible laser probes and detect concentration of neutral atom invisible to
visible light, gaining the understanding necessary to improve the printing of
the most advanced semiconductor circuits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.