* 2141281
* Evaluating the Dynamics of Speech Accommodation: Evidence from Mixed-reality and Naturalistic L1-L2 Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Susan Bobb, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2026
* USD 340,493.00

In an increasingly global world, people in healthcare, education, and business
progressively need to communicate with people whose primary language is not
their own. Breakdowns in communication and trust can harm patient care, limit
educational outcomes, and can be costly to businesses. In conversations where
English is used as the common language, dominant English speakers often change
their way of communicating to facilitate comprehension, a phenomenon described
as communication accommodation. While research has documented these changes,
very little is known about their impact on the listener, and more data is needed
on the mechanisms by which accommodation facilitates rather than hinders
communication. For instance, communication accommodation could either strengthen
relationships or increase stress during interactions. This research project
explores the dynamics of communication accommodation through several
experiments. The aim is to advance basic knowledge on accommodation between
dominant and non-dominant English speakers and to promote successful
intercultural communication. A primary outcome of this research will be an
educational training module that can be used to instruct future clinicians and
other professionals on cross-language communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research on communication accommodation has
predominantly relied on measuring how dominant speakers implement it. This
project uses a virtual reality tool to capture conversational dynamics between
dominant and non-dominant English speakers while controlling for variables such
as speaker characteristics. For instance, the studies will control for the
speaker's physical appearance and measure participants' implicit biases. A
second experiment will examine the effectiveness of speech accommodation in a
naturalistic setting by recording participants while they play a cooperative
game. A third experiment will evaluate the perception of accommodative speech by
measuring biophysiological stress in response to high or low accommodative
interactions. In the context of a growing and understudied population of non-
dominant English speakers, this project will inform best practices in
communication strategies. These findings will apply to adults from a variety of
linguistic backgrounds to better navigate healthcare and social interactions,
with broader applications to civic life, academic success, and
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.