* 2141963
* Collaborative Research: From Magma to Vents: Monitoring Hydrothermal Fluid Temperature and Upflow-zone Permeability in Relation to Magma Movement at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Guangyu Xu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 197,243.00

Most of the volcanoes on Earth are located on the deep ocean floor and serve as
heat reservoirs that boil sea water and give rise to hot springs on the
seafloor. These deep-sea hot springs are the source of energy for many unique
creatures on the seafloor far from any light. Knowledge of these deep-sea
environments is still limited and there is much to be learned about how the hot
springs change with time as a volcano’s heat reservoir grows and shrinks. This
study will use specially designed gauges to measure the temperatures inside
multiple hot springs located on an underwater volcano called Axial Seamount in
the Northeast Pacific Ocean. Axial is one of the best studied volcanoes in the
ocean. Using sensors that monitor the rise and fall of the seafloor on the
volcano, scientists forecast that Axial will erupt in the next few years. By
analyzing the temperature variations at Axial Volcano’s hot springs, this
project will learn more about how the springs and their deep roots inside the
volcano change during its buildup towards the next
eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magmatic activities along the mid-
ocean ridge system related to seafloor spreading account for most of the earth’s
volcanic output. The associated hydrothermal systems provide a key linkage
between the lithosphere and the hydrosphere, transferring heat and nutrients
that ultimately support the biosphere. Seafloor hydrothermal systems are
primarily regulated by their subsurface heat supplies and hydrologic properties
such as permeability that regulate crustal fluid flow. The considerable
difficulties in establishing concurrent, long-term monitoring of those sub-
seafloor properties within young oceanic crust in conjunction with surface
venting have greatly limited our understanding of hydrothermal variability in
relation to submarine magmatic processes. This project will fill this knowledge
gap by 1) conducting long-term, high-resolution, time-series measurements of
hydrothermal effluent temperature at multiple high-temperature, focused vent
sites across the summit caldera of Axial Seamount, 2) using a one-dimensional,
multi-layer poroelastic model to derive time-varying estimates of effective
upflow-zone permeability from tidal modulation of vent-fluid temperature, and 3)
interpreting observed temperature and permeability variations within a broader
context constructed from the geodetic and seismic monitoring established at
Axial as part of the Ocean Observatories Initiative’s Regional Cabled Array
observatory along with other complementary geophysical observations such as
state-of-the-art three-dimensional seismic imaging. The planned long-term
monitoring of vent-fluid temperature and upflow-zone permeability across the
summit-caldera of Axial Seamount will provide valuable insights into the
variability of hydrothermal activity in relation to magma movement and
associated changes in crustal permeability on a volcanically active spreading
ridge segment. Additionally, should an eruption occur at Axial during the
timeframe of this project, the proposed vent-fluid temperature measurements and
analysis will provide a rare opportunity to investigate magma-hydrothermal
interaction during the period of major magma movement immediately before and
after the onset of an eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.