* 2141287
* Exploring Transdisciplinary Approaches to STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Christopher Jensen, Pratt Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,097.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving teaching practices
in areas of integrated STEM. As STEM industries move and grow rapidly into
integrated and transdisciplinary arenas, disciplinary knowledge will only
partially fulfill workforce needs until higher education provides a
transdisciplinary alternative. This project responds to and directly addresses
the recommendations of the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and
Medicine. Their recent report on integrated learning in higher education calls
for the “professional development of faculty who are capable of teaching
integrative [transdisciplinary] courses”. The participating faculty in this
project will take part in a year-long training program. Participating faculty
will become better equipped to train undergraduate students with the critical
21st Century STEM skills, including those at the human-technology interface. The
training program’s approach draws on a recent framework on Transdisciplinary
Epistemic Practices (TEPs) that helps transdisciplinary researchers and
educators justify, evaluate, and legitimize knowledge claims about their work.
The TEP framework is a powerful explorative tool for understanding, explaining,
and modeling effective learning practices. Through applying this framework to
their own transdisciplinary undergraduate courses, and developing a modified
version of it and associated rubrics, specifically for higher education,
participating faculty will become more adept at supporting and assessing student
learning. Overall, this project will provide educational development for ten
faculty members, who will in turn teach over 2,000 undergraduate students from
non-traditional STEM backgrounds, and help develop a more general model for
further faculty development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual goal
of the project is to validate a novel conceptual approach to teaching integrated
STEM fields-- a new transdisciplinary epistemic framework. The project aims to
achieve this through the creation of a novel professional development model that
is grounded in the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, within the context of a
Faculty Learning Community, and evaluated through phenomenological methods. The
project aims to bring together established tools to address new integrated
learning needs in higher education, and address the following two research
questions: 1) How can TEPs provide a conceptual framework for faculty
development in a higher education art and design context? 2) How can faculty use
this conceptual framework to design and execute transdisciplinary STEM learning
opportunities for all students? The project’s broader impacts include the
potential validation of a novel model for broadening participation in STEM,
targeting students with a strong interest in non-STEM disciplines such as art,
design, or architecture. The hypothesis being that transdisciplinary STEM
courses with components that are recognizable or familiar to students with a
strong interest in art, design or architecture, will be more equitable,
accessible and engaging to them, since they are more aligned with the students’
learning identities than traditional STEM courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.