* 2141084
* PFI-TT:  A Fiber-Optic Sensing System for Multiplexed Gas Detection
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Ratnesh Kumar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/29/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to design gas sensing applications
for farming and industrial operations. The National Academy of Engineering has
identified “Managing the Nutrients” as a Grand Challenge. The proposed project
will develop a field-deployable and portable gas sensing system for reliable and
affordable assessment of farm health and safety, improving the real-time
monitoring of environmental impacts. The gas sensor has commercial applications
in industries such as steel, cement, and chemical manufacturing. The project
will also train a new generation of workforce trained towards environmental
hazard monitoring and taking research to practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will advance a novel fiber-optic, field-deployable, wireless,
multiplexed gas sensing system for monitoring field/farm and industrial
emissions. This project will develop a first-of-a-kind optical sensing system
capable of detecting field-released potent greenhouse gases CH4 and CO2, and
farm-emitted health hazards NH3 and H2S, which are produced in
agriculture/animal-farming operation as well as in industrial setting. Unlike
the existing sensing methodologies (e.g., gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy,
infrared spectroscopy, electrochemical sensors, commercial artificial noses, and
existing state-of-the-art optical gas detection technologies), the proposed
sensing system is low-cost and provides the ppm-level limit-of-detection
required of the target gases. The intellectual merit includes: (1) an integrated
and reusable gas sensing system with higher selectivity through a 2-tiered
approach of target specific functionalization together with coupled design-
diversity and data-analytics for cross-sensitivity reduction and
sensitivity/specificity improvement, and (2) Data analytics for dynamic runtime
calibration together with time-division multiplexing to support continuous
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.