* 2141535
* Emergent Linkages Among Dissolved Organic Matter Composition, Microbial Assemblages and Respiration in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Amy Marcarelli, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Stream ecosystems store, process, and transport organic matter produced in
adjacent terrestrial ecosystems, particularly in northern temperate zones
dominated by deciduous forests. The most stable, year-round source of organic
matter to streams is dissolved organic matter or DOM, which is both transported
by and transformed in these streams. Much of the organic matter is broken down
by bacteria and other microbes, releasing carbon dioxide as part of the process.
As a result, streams are important sources of carbon dioxide efflux to the
atmosphere, with consequences for the global carbon cycle. Linking the supply
and characteristics of DOM with dynamics of microbial assemblages is necessary
to mechanistically integrate streams into global models of carbon cycling.
However, DOM is a complex mixture of molecules with different structures and
degradability, and microbial assemblages are complicated mixtures of species.
This project brings together a team bridging ecosystem science, microbial and
molecular biology, environmental chemistry, and data science to conduct
controlled laboratory experiments to ask: How do complex microbial communities
work together to process complex mixtures of DOM molecules in the environment,
and can relationships between microbial communities and DOM characteristics
explain rates of carbon dioxide emission? The broader impact activities expand
data science training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
through a combination of research internships and guided
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in analytical and computational
techniques have accelerated research characterizing the composition of DOM and
assemblages of microbes that degrade DOM in aquatic environments. Methods to
characterize these mixtures vary in resolution and can generate vast amounts of
multi-dimensional data that are a challenge to interpret independently, let
alone together or through time. The project builds simplified experimental
systems using model DOM and enriched microbial assemblages to build machine
learning models that predict carbon dioxide emissions. Microbial assemblages are
being characterized with 16S sequencing, metagenomics, and metatranscriptomics,
while DOM mixtures are characterized using high-resolution mass spectrometry,
along with fluorescence spectroscopy. This project is unique in placing equal
analytical weight on DOM composition and microbial assemblages, and overcomes
the challenge posed by multidimensional datasets by weaving tools and
disciplinary understanding from ecosystem ecology, computational biology, and
environmental chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.