* 2141930
* Undergraduate Research Training Through Replication Team Science with the   Collaborative Replications and Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jordan Wagge, Avila University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2025
* USD 267,741.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing and evaluating
the effectiveness of an enhanced Collaborative Replications and Education
Project (CREP) model for undergraduate student research. The current version of
CREP supports students with undergraduate research training through replicating
published experiments. In this model, CREP selects recent psychological studies
that could be replicated independently by students, and then organizes and helps
instructors who want to supervise these projects as part of their courses. This
project expands on the current CREP model by engaging selected students from
across the United States in twice-monthly cohort meetings where they can present
their work, as well as have opportunity to serve as peer mentors for future
cohorts of students. Another goal of the project is to evaluate CREP as a tool
for improving research skills, research literacy, critical thinking about
psychology, and to provide a range of students with research experience. This
project could impact psychology and other STEM disciplines by providing
instructors with a model for involving students in authentic research within the
context of their coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to evaluate
the pedagogical effectiveness of an enhanced CREP model for undergraduate
student research projects. The standard CREP project, outlined in Wagge and
colleagues (2019), supports students and their instructors in the completion of
direct replication projects as part of the undergraduate curriculum. In this
project, the CREP team selects studies for students to choose from, and student
teams complete replications of these studies at different institutions around
the world. They interface with the CREP team when the projects are reviewed by
CREP both before and after data collection, and potentially again in the future
when a pooled or meta-analysis is written based on data collected from all
teams. The project expands on the CREP model by adding -- for selected students
in the United States -- twice-monthly cohort meetings with other teams under the
supervision of a Graduate Assistant, CREP Executive Director, and/or peer
mentors who completed projects the previous year. Participants will be recruited
for the study through their instructors, who will be recruited from Listservs
and social media to sign up to be randomly assigned to either a CREP or standard
(non-CREP) research project class. Instructors will give students information
about how to sign up to participate in the study. Pretests and posttests will be
conducted online through Avila's system using survey software. The NSF IUSE:EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.