* 2141180
* PFI-TT: Enabling Affordable Titanium Foil and Sheet by Machining-Based Deformation Processing
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Srinivasan Chandrasekar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a highly-efficient
manufacturing process for production of lightweight titanium alloy in thin gauge
formats. Conventional multistage flat and pack rolling processes for titanium,
although mature and large-scale, are highly energy-intensive, with large
emissions, and costly infrastructure. This project will produce sheet, foil and
wire formats in a single step, with novel mechanical property combinations of
higher strength and formability not achievable by current sheet rolling
processes. The property combinations are expected to enable improved structural
performance and lightweight materials for the aerospace, automotive, and energy
sectors. The machining-based processing will provide a sustainable manufacturing
system for sheet, foil and wire from a range of commercial lightweight alloys
such as titanium, aluminum and magnesium. Importantly, the new process requires
lower energy (&gt; 50% reduction) and compact infrastructure compared to current
rolling facilities. The Partnership will also contribute to broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in innovation, and positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a
new energy-efficient process alternative to current multistage rolling processes
characterized by large energy usage and emissions, and high cost. To realize
this goal, the project will address three objectives. First, hybrid-machining
process parameters will be optimized by systematic study of how deformation
plasticity conditions influence sheet-metal structure and properties. Second,
process attributes will be characterized in terms of product quality (surface
finish, properties), process energy, and production rate and cost. Last, by
integrating the results, a systems framework will be defined in a pre-commercial
production process for titanium and titanium alloy foil/sheet formats. The
manufacturing benefits will be quantified in terms of process energy savings,
material property enhancements, production cost, and applicability to varied
material systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.