* 2141763
* RAPID: How Critical Zone Processes Mediate the Impacts of Severe and Sustained Drought
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2022
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 49,989.00

The extreme heat wave and drought that is currently gripping the western United
States is unprecedented, having led to record-high temperatures and/or record-
low precipitation volumes across large geographic areas. The ongoing
“megadrought” has been described as the West’s driest period at least 1200
years, having enormous societal consequences. This project rapidly mobilizes to
characterize the impacts of the unprecedented and severe drought conditions,
where there is a unique opportunity to observe hydrological responses during
this event. It explores how three watersheds in northern California respond to
prolonged drought. Water storages will be measured during the drought in soils,
underlying weathered rocks, groundwater, and stream water, and compared with
long-term records of observation under other climatic conditions. The study will
reveal how moisture storage in the critical zone (which extends from the
vegetation top, through the soil and the underlying weathered bedrock to fresh
bedrock) mediates the effects of droughts, and the consequences for stream flow
and vegetation survival. Results will be shared with the scientific community
and with local stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes place at
the Eel River Critical Zone Observatory in northern California, which is
equipped with instrumentation to observe coupled hydrological, ecological, and
geological processes. The study will identify how watersheds respond to multi-
year drought and wet season shortening, patterns that are predicted for
California’s future. Seasonal depletion of rock moisture (moisture stored in the
weathered bedrock) by plants leads to a delay in the onset of winter runoff as
the first rains restore moisture levels before passing subsequent rains to
recharge and runoff. It is hypothesized that forest resilience to drought in
summer dry environments depends on the annual rainfall relative to the
subsurface moisture storage capacity. The current drought presents a new
opportunity to test storage capacity hypotheses because the winter rains ended
months earlier, initiating subsurface draw-down sooner, effectively extending
the summer dry period. Field sampling campaigns will be conducted to measure
water storages at selected locations representing variable critical zone
properties, spanning a range of conditions and potential drought sensitivity.
The exceptionally dry conditions facilitate sampling of the oldest, least mobile
waters released to streams and trees. Using these new data, hypotheses will be
tested about the sensitivity of water storage to the style of climate
variability predicted in California, informing how watersheds respond to
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.