* 2141157
* Biopsy-free, label-free 3D virtual histology of intact skin
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Aydogan Ozcan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

Over 2 million skin cancers are diagnosed annually in the United States, with
&gt;80% being basal cell carcinoma. The current standard of care remains
invasive biopsy followed by assessment, resulting in unnecessary scars, multiple
patient visits, and added costs to the healthcare system. Non-invasive imaging
of the skin at the microscopic level could allow for immediate triage of skin
cancers. This project will develop a machine learning-based technique to
transform 3D images of intact skin into high quality virtually stained images
that can be easily interpreted. The technology developed in this project can
allow dermatologists to obtain accurate and rapid diagnosis of skin lesions and
improve clinical care. Furthermore, this technology may improve patient access
to dermatologists and dermatology clinic workflow. It may also provide tele-
dermatology solutions during times with limited patient interactions. This
project will also advance a complementary education and outreach program which
will involve public interviews and popular science articles in news media and
internet; research opportunities in the investigator's laboratory for
underrepresented undergraduate students; and graduate student training through
the organization of workshops, seminars, and conferences. These activities will
serve undergraduate and high school students to interact with a cutting-edge
research environment, increasing their scientific curiosity and shaping their
career goals in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to develop deep learning-based digital staining
technology that can fundamentally improve dermatologists’ ability to accurately
diagnose skin lesions without requiring skin biopsy or any chemical processing
of tissue. Deep neural network-based computational approaches will be used to
train the virtual histology algorithm for obtaining accurate, virtually stained
images of intact skin corresponding to normal skin and neoplasms suspicious for
basal cell carcinoma, the most common type of skin cancer. Furthermore, various
tests will be used to determine and quantify whether the virtual histology
format can improve diagnosis. These will include comparisons with actual
histology of the skin and objective performance measures of diagnostic accuracy
(sensitivity and specificity) by dermatologists who are trained in reflectance
confocal microscopy when compared to the gold standard for diagnosis:
histological processing. Once successful, these studies will provide a leapfrog
advancement towards biopsy-free histologic assessment of the skin, which has the
potential to transform the practice of clinical
dermatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.