* 2141067
* PFI-RP: Development of Novel Inverter Technologies and Prototypes for Enhanced Power Generation from Renewable Energy Resources
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Shuhui Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2025
* USD 605,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to increase dependable power
generation from renewable energy resources and to improve the reliability and
stability of the nation’s electric power grid. Technical problems in connecting
and controlling renewable energy resources have resulted in many large-scale
failures and the interruption of energy production from these resources,
jeopardizing the safe and reliable operation of the nation’s electric power
system. The proposed technology seeks to overcome the limitations of existing
systems, increase reliability for connecting the inverter-based resources to the
electric power grid, and allow more renewable energy to supply American homes
and businesses. Attaining these goals will increase customer adoption of
electric or plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. The technology may increase the
competitiveness of US companies in the global inverter, artificial intelligence
(AI), and renewable energy markets. The commercial impacts of the project are
augmented by an educational outreach plan that will engage student researchers
in engineering design problems that integrate and address business-relevant
constraints and customer needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims
to translate AI inverter control innovation into a commercial product, process,
and/or service. There are two main gaps to overcome in the proposed project. One
is a knowledge gap to extend the previous neural-network control technology to
practical grid-following and grid-forming applications supporting the operation
of inverter-based resources in grid-tied, islanded, and standalone conditions.
The other gap is a technical barrier to move the proposed innovation out of the
laboratory into real-world systems. Regarding the knowledge gap, research will
equip the neural-network control innovation with modules that can support the
inverter operation to meet various grid needs. Regarding the technical barrier,
research will be performed in this project to enable the developed neural
network inverter to satisfy the industry standards. The expected results include
prototypes that can be applied to practical electric utility systems and AI-
driven inverter technology that can meet strict reliability requirements of the
electric power industry. The commercialization plan consists of a set of guided
technology assessments and staged milestones with industry partners on
commercial potential and business plan iteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.