* 2141114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Development of Colonial Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Richard Leventhal, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 24,948.00

Questions about how unequal power relations emerge and are transformed across
time and space are central to the social sciences. Scholars studying colonial
expansion are particularly interested in how novel configurations of land,
labor, and capital structured asymmetrical power dynamics across colonial
contexts. Assessing dynamics of power through specific relations of production
is especially important within colonial borderlands, where diverse social
networks, contested jurisdictions, and disputed resource control shaped the
development of borderland institutions. Archaeology is particularly well suited
for examining the political economy of colonial borderlands, through its ability
to document the infrastructure and production strategies that characterized
particular places. This project will explore political-economic relations in a
colonial borderland. Through the investigation of the specific relations of
production that supported local colonial institutions, this research will
contribute to the political economy of colonialism. Focused on power dynamics in
the decades leading up to a violent conflict, this research also enriches
understandings of the conditions which lead to rupture and violence in colonial
contexts. This research is part of an interdisciplinary heritage project that
explores the relationship between cultural heritage and local community
identity. Research will contribute to ongoing, community-driven efforts to
uncover and preserve histories about life before, during, and after a violent
conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation is primarily
concerned with examining the political-economic relations that structured local
power dynamics within a colonial borderland. More specifically, this research
investigates local iterations of one colonial institution, the landed estate,
and the role of local landed estates in the economic, political, and social
networks of this region prior to violent conflict. The researchers assess
evidence for estate control over the production of commercial goods, the
organization of labor, and the distribution of scarce commodities by assessing
the presence and distribution of infrastructure features (water management
systems, sugar refining areas, laborer housing, storage features, roads) across
four landed estates. The archaeological investigation of estate infrastructure
will elucidate the specific production strategies that shaped the distribution
of power within this colonial borderland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.