* 2141112
* PFI-RP:  Micellar Nanofluids to Reduce Use of Harmful Solvents in Oil and Gas Production
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Sibani Biswal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2025
* USD 549,733.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the production of a nanofluid with
aggregated colloidal nanoparticles that can significantly reduce the use of
harmful solvents in oil and gas production. Substantial quantities of benzene,
toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX) solvents are currently being used to
remediate asphaltene deposits in plugged pipelines and wellbores for flow
assurance. This remediation method is costly and environmentally polluting;
thus, many oil and gas operators are making a concerted effort to reduce BTEX
solvents from their operations. This research project develops a novel micellar
formulation that utilizes multifunctional chemistries to deliver solvents
directly to the organic deposits. The proposed direct replacement nanofluid
seeks to reduce harmful solvent use in asphaltene remediation by over 40%, thus,
significantly reducing their environmental impact. Entrepreneurship and
leadership training for students involved in the project is also
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will determine the
scalability and applicability of the micellar nanofluids for asphaltene
remediation. The technical challenge is the variability of the conditions,
including oil type, temperatures, pressures, and surface chemistries. This
project aims to evaluate the performance of the nanofluid under conditions
expected in oil and gas fields. A three-pronged approach is proposed. The first
uses a microfluidic method to screen a variety of asphaltene deposition and
remediation conditions to identify which will be the most effective. The second
uses a core-flood setup to scale up testing to field conditions and the third is
a flow loop setup to mimic pipeline conditions that can be piloted in the field.
The team has explored the vast parameter space to identify which conditions
should be used to optimize the nanofluid. The result of this project is both a
technical and economic assessment of implementing this nanofluid technology in
the oil and gas industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.