* 2141547
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Rethinking the Fundamentals of Tunneling Technologies for Security, Privacy, and Usability
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jedidiah Crandall, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 302,709.00

Virtual Private Networks, or VPNs, are an important and integral part of the
security and privacy practices of tens of millions of Americans, and of
activists, journalists, and NGOs around the world that protect U.S. interests
and help to carry out U.S. foreign policy. Despite the fact that the VPN
ecosystem has expanded into a multi-billion dollar industry, there are many
aspects of VPN security and privacy in practice that remain severely
understudied and unvetted. How well does a VPN protect users against an attacker
who can make educated guesses about what traffic is hidden behind the VPN? How
feasible is it to hide VPN traffic so that it is not blocked? Do VPNs meet
users' privacy and security expectations? How often do VPN providers follow
security and privacy best practices? What are the other security and privacy
best practices that should be put in place? This project is answering these
questions through technical assessments, carefully designed measurements, and
detailed quantitative and qualitative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual
Private Networks, or VPNs, effectively form an encrypted tunnel to protect user
traffic. This project aims to develop both intellectual understanding and
technical and practical solutions for VPN security and privacy through four
concurrent efforts: (1) building methods to ethically measure what is contained
in users’ metadata and unencrypted data that needs protection; (2) analyzing how
the layers of a tunnel technology interact in vulnerable ways, akin to the much
better-studied theoretical limitations of network intrusion detection systems;
(3) mapping out the evolving tunneling ecosystem by automating methodical
exploration of different tunneling tools; (4) using quantitative and qualitative
research to understand the stakeholders’ (users, providers, recommenders) needs
to find the best ways to facilitate desired outcomes. These efforts combined
will improve the security and privacy of tunnel technologies in all layers of
the OSI network stack, from physical, link, and routing all the way through
application into the human layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.