* 2141291
* Deciphering Mechanisms of Mechanotransduction in Astrocyte Reactivity
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Pamela VandeVord, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 446,411.00

This award will support research to better understand the long-term effects of
traumatic brain injury. Traumatic brain injury represents a significant burden
in the United States. While there are many treatments available, there are no
proven therapies to mitigate the long-term effects of these injuries. The
results of this work will ultimately lead to new treatments. This work will look
specifically at astrocytes, which are a specific cell type in the brain and
spinal cord. Astrocytes are responsible for many critical supportive functions.
Astrocyte dysfunction occurs in conditions as Alzheimer’s disease and cancer.
The role of astrocytes in responding to mechanical injury is not well
understood. This project will use engineered three-dimensional model brain
tissues to better understand the contribution of specific cell types to brain
injury response. These models provide a realistic view of how the brain cells
respond to injuries such as blast trauma. This work will revel how astrocytes
sense and respond to mechanical trauma. The results may lead to new ways to
determine patient susceptibility to damage, or improve patient outcomes
following injury to the brain. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will
also include educational outreach opportunities for a diverse group of students
in rural southwestern Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrocytes play a vital
role in brain tissue homeostasis through modulation of metabolites,
inflammation, and the extracellular microenvironment. They are also the major
effector cells in both prolonging and resolving pathologic processes following
brain trauma. Mechanobiology studies of brain development and function have been
limited to analysis of how mechanotransduction mediates neuronal signaling and
plasticity. The few studies that have examined astrocyte mechanobiology have not
focused on the cellular effects following traumatic brain injury. This project
will incorporate aspects of tissue engineering and cellular mechanobiology to
understand how force transduction via cell-matrix interactions may contribute to
complex sequelae that occur after high-rate insults associated with brain trauma
secondary injury cascades. This work may ultimately reveal novel therapeutic
avenues to interrupt the cell-microenvironment mechanical interaction feedback
loops that amplify secondary damage mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.