* 2141893
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Oxygen transport and the evolution of high-altitude adaptation in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Tom Brutsaert, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Several human populations, each with distinct histories, have adapted to harsh
high-altitude environments over the course of thousands of years. This doctoral
dissertation research project compares the physiologies of two high-altitude
populations and assesses the extent to which they have adapted similarly or
differently to the same environmental stressor â€“ low oxygen. Using the same
methods, measured in populations thousands of miles apart at the same elevation
thousands of feet above sea level, the project takes a new approach by measuring
how high-altitude adaptations work in people during physical activity. The
results of the research build on a large body of previous research on this topic
and provide important information about how the high-altitude adaptations in
both populations have contributed to their survival over time in low-oxygen
environments. The project investigators provide scientific outreach among a
local community and incorporate feedback and ideas from study participants into
the project. This project also provides training for undergraduate and graduate
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some highland populations have resided in
hypoxic environments for thousands of years, promoting stable evolutionary
changes in aspects of their biology related to oxygen transport and delivery.
Though exposed to the same selective pressure, these populations exhibit some
distinct physiological adaptations, suggesting that certain historical
contingencies have shaped different trajectories of trait evolution across
geographic space and time. The overall objective of this project is to compare
the mechanisms of improved oxygen delivery at high altitude. The central
hypothesis that this study tests is that one population improves oxygen delivery
primarily through increased blood oxygen content, while the other improves
oxygen delivery primarily through increased blood flow. Using refined and
carefully matched protocols, this project employs exercise testing, respiratory
gas analysis, and hematological measurements in 70 individuals from each
population to test this hypothesis. The results of this research contribute to a
large body of research on human biological variation in relationship to
environmental stressors, importantly through the added perspective of oxygen
delivery during the stress of physical activity at high-
altitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.