* 2141102
* Influence of shared experience on relational dynamics and vicarious learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Marie Monfils, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 261,102.00

The world’s social order is highly dependent on relational dynamics between
individuals. The ability for individuals to organize in social groups is crucial
to the good functioning of the collective, as well as each member. But, how do
individuals decide who they should affiliate with, or when information is
important vs. when it can or should be discounted? In social species, including
rats and humans, there is a strong relationship between our ability to form
social bonds with one-another, and our reliance on information that acquired
from social interactions. The Monfils lab employs procedures in which rats can
acquire fear, or information about food safety, via social transmission. Simply
stated: rats, like humans, are social creatures. But whereas humans are
exceedingly complex, and whereas some of our behaviors are contaminated by
layered and conflicting intentions (owing, in part, to our large prefrontal
cortex), the behavior of rats is complex enough to be interesting and to yield
variability, but it yields variability that one can actually understand and have
the potential to readily explain. Social group dynamics in rats provide a lens
via which one can understand fundamental principles of behavior, stripped down
to the basics, and devoid of layered filters. From whom, and under what
conditions, do individuals acquire information by-proxy?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers’ objective is to examine the intersection
of socio-environmental stability and affiliative kinship. They specifically ask
whether shared experience affects how individuals relate to one another, and in
turn affects how they learn via social transmission. First, they will examine
whether individuals’ shared experience, that is, one that they undergo together
simultaneously, leads to an increase in their propensity to rely on socially
acquired information. Second, they will test whether the shared recounting of
similar experiences strengthens affiliative bonds between conspecifics, and in
turn, increases their propensity to rely on socially acquired information.
Third, they will examine whether the shared recounting of differing experiences
leads to erosion of affiliative bonds between individuals, and in turn,
decreases their reliance on social transmission of information. The researchers’
efforts will yield a comprehensive understanding of the impact of shared
experiences on the individual, small group affiliations, as well as large group
dynamics. The rat model will give the researchers the opportunity to study
relationship dynamics in groups and subgroups over an extended period of time—a
significant portion of the rats’ lifespan. Attempting to do a similar study in
humans would literally take a (human) lifetime. As such, addressing the
researchers’ research questions in rats will enable them to extract lifespan
principles of relational dynamic stability and their impact on individuals’
propensity to learn from one another, as well as the impact of shared experience
on those relational dynamics over a meaningfully long period of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.