* 2141345
* Threat is Distinct from Valence as a Source of Biased Shoot Behaviors toward Black Men
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* David March, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 413,000.00

Black men confront a higher relative risk of being shot by police officers than
do Latinos, Asian-American men, or White men in the US. Addressing negative
beliefs about Black men is an overly simplistic solution because negative
beliefs exist about many groups, and yet police shootings disproportionally
affect Black men relative to men of other races and ethnicities. This project
examines whether the act of shooting occurs quickly and frequently against Black
male targets because of an automatic mental association linking Black men and
threat, rather than because of a general negative bias. This idea is guided by a
model that distinguishes the role of threat (risk of harm) from negative valence
(disliking) in reactions to others. The threat vs. valence distinction provides
a more nuanced understanding of the maintenance, pervasiveness, and ultimate
expression of reactions that contribute to anti-Black shooter behavior. A
greater understanding of race-based shooter bias is vital in the present where
recent events have made clear the potential deadly consequences of anti-Black
prejudice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a series of studies that
assess automatic mental associations that people have by using state-of-the-art
judgment tasks, physiological responses, and shoot behaviors as assessed in an
immersive virtual reality shooting task. Several of the studies measure the
associations that people have of Black vs. White with threat vs. negativity and
test how the relative strength of these associations directly predict shooting
behavior. One study relies on the creation of novel associations about
unfamiliar target groups to determine if threat associations drive shooting
behavior more generally, beyond associations with Black men. A final study
disrupts mental associations of Black men with threat (vs. disrupting general
Black-negative associations) to determine whether this reduces race-based
shooting behavior. The PI has established connections with several police
stations to involve officers as research participants and to disseminate
findings and feedback among police departments. The project provides a firm
understanding of how threat associations contribute to race-based shooter bias
and suggests a means by which to begin to redress the negative repercussions of
such biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.