* 2141878
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring Localized Relationships Between Age-related Bone Loss and Cortical Expansion in Diaphyseal Bone
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Benjamin Auerbach, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 30,017.00

As humans age, the density of the mineral content of long bones declines, and
bone geometry changes so that thickness of the bone wall decreases but overall
diameter increases. It is expected that local mechanical loading from habitual
activity will mediate both mineral loss and bone wall changes, which should be
observable in comparisons of bone cross-sectional images between different
bones. This doctoral dissertation project seeks to establish whether age-related
changes in bone mineral density (BMD) and bone wall geometry co-occur locally
within limb long bone cross-sections among living adults between 40-80 years of
age. A localized relationship would suggest that geometric adaptation of bone to
loading persists into advanced age despite overall loss of bone mass, which has
implications for the interpretation of aging from archaeological contexts as
well as for prevention of age-related fragility fractures. The project supports
undergraduate and graduate training and research opportunities in STEM. In
addition to scholarly dissemination of results in the form of conference
presentations and journal publications, this research will be presented to
project participants, as well as at public research forums, community centers,
and other accessible settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Age-related bone loss has
been attributed to a host of interrelated systemic factors (e.g., hormone
decline, loss of muscle strength) and is thereby treated as a global process
throughout the body. With age, bone wall diameters expand and become thinner
through the removal of bone from the internal surface and addition on the
external surface. The resulting expansion of bone cross-sectional diameter
bolsters resistance to bending under mechanical loads and, due to roughly
concurrent timing with BMD decline, has been characterized as compensatory to
bone loss. Earlier in life, bone wall geometry and microstructure adapt to
mechanical loading. If this ability to adapt extends into late adulthood, it is
possible that age-related wall expansion and BMD decline vary locally according
to typical loading patterns within a bone cross-section, along the length of a
bone, and between bone elements. If, in addition to local variation, results
indicate that these processes exhibit local covariation, this research can
provide further support to the compensatory relationship between the expansion
of bone walls and BMD decline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.