* 2141162
* PFI-TT: A Rapid Multi-Contaminant Degradation System for Water Wells
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Kevin McPeak, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 282,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve the quality of well water
for drinking. As of 2019, 43 million Americans do not have access to public
water and rely on private sources. Unlike public water systems, private wells
are not regulated, placing these Americans at an increased health risk from
waterborne contaminants. This lack of access results in socioeconomic health
disparities. Treating odorous water and other organic and biological
contaminants requires multiple treatment systems that add significant complexity
and costs. This project will develop a new water treatment system that
simultaneously treats odorous water, recalcitrant organics (e.g.,
pharmaceuticals), and biological pathogens without the addition of
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the
understanding of inhibiting agents in photocatalytic water treatment systems.
Understanding these fouling mechanisms is critical to developing a robust
photocatalyst for water treatment. This project will identify the primary
photocatalyst inhibitors in groundwater sources and determine the mechanism for
their inhibition, e.g., bulk quenching or surface fouling. Analytical techniques
to study the binding between fouling agents and photocatalyst surfaces include
several surface-sensitive spectroscopy methods, such as nano-Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (nano-FTIR) and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(TERS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.