* 2141201
* PFI-TT: Commercialization of advanced bipolar membranes for applications in water treatment, carbon-dioxide capture and utilization, and environmental remediation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Shannon Boettcher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 258,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve existing industrial
processes using bipolar membranes (BPMs), such as the production of acid and
base for water treatment, and enable new ones, such as capturing carbon dioxide
from the ocean and air and using it to form fuels and chemicals. The global
market revenue expected to increase from $90 M to $240 M by 2027, with greater
growth possible if BPMs are used in emerging carbon dioxide capture and
utilization applications. This project will enable commercial BPM processes to
durably operate 10x faster than existing processes, therefore dramatically
lowering cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address key
challenges to: (1) develop adhesive processes that maintain or improve upon the
electrochemical performance in current small-scale research BPMs made without
adhesive, which is essential for applications and long-term durability; (2)
characterize and optimize the BPM ion selectivity and demonstrate improved
performance in commercially relevant electrodialysis systems, (3) develop and
use accelerated stress tests to forecast end-of-life electrodialysis performance
for optimized BPMs and compare the performance and lifetimes to current
commercial BPMs, while mitigating the identified degradation modes to implement
designs that yield a lifetime of a minimum of two years, and (4) develop a
scalable roll-to-roll process for scalable BPM
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.