* 2141925
* Generating a Research-Informed Transition to a Mathematical Proof Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kyeong Hah Roh, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a research-
informed curriculum for mathematics transition to proof courses. Proofs and
logical reasoning are tools used in mathematics to solve advanced problems. Many
STEM majors, especially those in the mathematical sciences, need support in
learning how to read and produce mathematical proofs. This skill is a primary
means of learning and doing mathematics in third- and fourth-year college
mathematics courses. Unlike most existing curricula, the new curriculum will
focus on guiding students to read, understand, and appreciate mathematical
proofs through several intertwined project activities. Rooted in prior research,
the project's curriculum will support students in learning mathematical logic
through reading and comparing proof texts. In conjunction with this, the project
team will partner with several mathematicians to produce rich mathematical proof
texts for students to study. As it is the case that students most often learn
literature by reading great works, the curriculum will help students to learn
about mathematical proofs by reading rich, challenging, and engaging proofs. The
curriculum will include biographical stories of the mathematician authors to
humanize mathematics. Project team members will collaborate with mathematicians
of color and women mathematicians. The curriculum will provide an opportunity
for students to see broader representation in the mathematical sciences. The
three underlying components - reading, understanding, and appreciating - are
designed to empower students to learn about and from mathematical proofs. They
will support students in experiencing mathematics as a human activity in which
they can participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue several
goals related to enhancing student experiences and successes in transition to
proof (TTP) courses. Because there has been relatively little clarity about the
specific learning goals for TTP courses, a primary project goal is to build on
prior research to establish clearer learning goals for TTP courses. A second
goal is to incorporate the learning goals in the process of designing,
developing, implementing, and refining a research-based curriculum for TTP
courses in mathematics. The project aims to generate new knowledge and fill gaps
in the TPP literature through the projectâ€™s research findings. An additional
goal is to disseminate project outcomes and curriculum resources nationwide,
particularly to mathematical sciences departments working to enhance student
learning and success in TTP courses as well as subsequent courses and scenarios
that rely on problem solving, proofs, and proving. The researchers will employ a
rigorous research design to pursue efforts for establishing a curriculum while
developing a theory regarding how learning occurs in this teaching and learning
space. The project hypotheses is that: comparing proofs will support students in
learning abstract logical concepts and proof techniques; analyzing and
discussing complex proofs of non-trivial claims will support students in
learning from proof texts; and reading stories from a diverse set of
professional mathematicians will help humanize proof-based mathematics while
envisioning their participation in the discipline. The project will employ
research-based measures of understanding of logic, proof comprehension, and
belonging in mathematics to study implementation of these hypotheses in the
curriculum. The researchers will compare these outcomes to TTP courses taught
with standard curricula, and, in the process, will study the learning activity
fostered in the classroom to gain insight into these learning processes.
Curriculum materials will be freely available to faculty and students online.
These resources will also be disseminated through workshops, journal
publications, professional conferences, and professional communities of
mathematics instructors. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. This
project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which seeks to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.