* 2141326
* SBP: Collaborative Research: The impact of naturally occurring and experimentally manipulated interracial contact on social cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jasmin Cloutier, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 420,931.00

Persistent racial tension in the US has led to renewed interest in reducing
prejudice along racial lines. A prominent paradigm to address racial bias has
been to create opportunities for people of different races to have contact with
each other. Interracial contact can be an efficient intervention, but it is
unlikely to work as intended without a firm understanding of the exact
conditions that reduce racial bias. How deep must contact be? Is it sufficient
for people in one group to merely see those of other groups, without any effort
to recognize each person (i.e., mere exposure)? Is it necessary to see
individuals frequently enough to recognize them without knowing anything else
about them (i.e., perceptual individuation)? Or is it essential to interact with
someone enough to acquire personal information about them (i.e., knowledge-based
individuation)? This project provides a rigorous analysis of these three forms
of interracial contact to test whether the extent of contact – while holding
constant positivity of contact – can influence peoples' perceptions and
evaluations of others, which can have downstream consequences for reducing
racial prejudice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this project is to
examine how different forms of contact shape racial bias on visual perception of
faces, spontaneous judgments, evaluations, and beliefs. Study 1 tests how
naturally occurring experiences of interracial contact over a lifetime account
for the categorization and evaluation of racial information and for beliefs
about other racial groups. Study 2 examines the same categorizations,
evaluations, and beliefs, while experimentally manipulating the type of exposure
to others. Study 3 utilizes pupillometry and eye-tracking methods to indicate
the salience of others' faces after having different forms of contact. Together
these studies stand to transform our understanding of whether, how, and why
interracial contact could be an effective way to reduce racial
prejudice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.