* 2141302
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Speech perception in younger and older adults: Cue-weighting and contextual information
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Ruoqian Cheng, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 10,578.00

The way listeners process speech sounds changes across the lifespan. A better
understanding of the aging effect in its early stage (55-65 years old)
contributes to the advancement of speech technology (e.g., hearing aids, voice
user interfaces) to better fulfill the needs of an aging population. This
dissertation investigates the influence of aging on speech perception by
comparing speech perception in older vs. younger adults. The experiments
investigate listenersâ€™ use of the acoustic signal and contextual information,
and test how listeners adapt to ambiguity in speech sounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Listeners integrate multiple acoustic cues when
identifying speech sounds. When the primary acoustic cue is ambiguous, listeners
may rely more heavily on a secondary cue to ensure speech understanding. As
older listeners experience reduced temporal processing abilities, it is possible
that they compensate by weighing non-temporal acoustic cues more heavily in
speech perception. Experiment 1 tests whether the age-related cue-weighting
shift found previously in the perception of the difference between /b/ and /p/
extends to the /d/ vs. /t/ distinction. Listeners may also adjust their cue
weighting depending on the nature of the input. Experiment 2 tests whether
younger and older listeners use different cue-weighting adjustment strategies.
Additionally, listeners may access stored information about words to help
resolve ambiguities in the acoustic signal. Older listeners were previously
found to use this lexical information to a greater degree than younger
listeners. Experiment 3 explores whether younger and older adults differ in
their use of lexical information when learning to interpret utterances that are
ambiguous. A final goal of the dissertation is to test whether younger and older
adults differ in how they handle changes in speaking rate. In Experiment 4, the
effect of speaking rate is examined by embedding /d/ vs. /t/ contrasts in slow
and fast speech contexts and presenting these syllables to younger and older
listeners to compare their performance in identifying the sounds. The results of
the four experiments contribute to our understanding of the human aging
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.