* 2141790
* CAREER: Accounting for Measurement Bias and Error in Integrative Data Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Hok Chio Lai, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2027
* USD 116,096.00

This CAREER project will develop a robust and efficient framework for
integrative data analysis (IDA). Data sharing activities mark one of the most
significant trends in science for the past two decades, establishing many rich
public data sets in the social and behavioral sciences. Leveraging diverse data
sets allow researchers to obtain stronger statistical power and ask broader
research questions. Using IDA, researchers can pool multiple data sets to obtain
more accurate statistical results. However, in the social and behavioral
sciences, different instruments usually are used to measure the same concept,
which presents a significant challenge for IDA. This project will develop
statistical methods and open-source software to address this challenge. The
tools to be developed will allow researchers to harmonize and adjust
incompatibility and biases across data sources. In terms of educational
activities, the investigator will (a) develop training workshops for applied
researchers to increase proficiency in IDA, (b) create an open-access course on
psychological measurement to increase public knowledge, and (c) develop a
training curriculum to increase the data literacy of high-school educators for
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
enhance IDA infrastructure by proposing a robust and efficient latent variable
framework that reduces labor and computational time for combining multiple data
sets. Despite immense potential, existing IDA approaches do not provide a
unifying framework to address major measurement issues. These issues include the
use of incompatible measures across studies, the unreliability of measured
scores, and the violation of measurement invariance across different subgroups
and time points. The new data harmonization algorithm to be developed will be
the first robust optimization procedure that simultaneously accounts for
measurement incompatibility and measurement bias. The project also will develop
and validate a statistical procedure, two-stage random-effect path analysis, for
analyzing harmonized scores that correctly accounts for measurement error. Open-
source and accessible software will be developed for these new statistical
tools, and methodological guidelines will be created that inform when these
methods perform well and when cautions should be applied. The methodological
tools and guidelines to be developed will allow researchers in the social and
behavioral sciences to answer new research questions in many
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.