* 2141593
* Revealing Quaternary evolution of North American tectonics with geologic block models
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Eileen Evans, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 12/31/2024
* USD 291,922.00

This project will reconstruct tectonic motion in western North America over the
last 2.6 Million years. This will be accomplished by combining geologic and
satellite-based data with modern mathematical modeling techniques. The
distribution of tectonic motion in the Earthâ€™s crust is directly related to the
potential size and location of future earthquakes and is therefore a critical
component of the United States National Seismic Hazard Model, which is used by
insurance companies, government officials, and land use managers, as well as in
public outreach. This project will advance tectonic modeling and also help
identify potential limitations of geologic and satellite-based data, ultimately
improving seismic hazard for the benefit of society. The project will support
the full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM and
improve college-level STEM education: results from this project will be
incorporated into a new laboratory exercise for all Geology and Geophysics
majors at California State University Northridge (a Minority Serving
Institution) that will be made publicly available, and the PI is committed to
recruiting student research assistants from underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate discrepancies between geologic
and geodetic fault slip rates in western North America to interrogate the
fundamental nature of Quaternary tectonic deformation in space and time. Fault
slip rate can be estimated at points along a fault using tectonic geology
(geologic slip rates), or by using models based on satellite-based geodetic
measurements such as Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) including the
Global Positioning System (GPS) (geodetic slip rates). Discrepancies between
geologic and geodetic slip rates may reflect true spatial or temporal
variations, limiting interpretation in terms of contemporary tectonics and
seismic hazard. To address slip rate discrepancies, the research team will
create the first fully geologic block model of the Pacific-North America plate
boundary. Typically, block models are constrained by GNSS data; however, the
team will update the block modeling methodology to constrain the models
exclusively with geologic slip rates. This work represents a significant advance
in tectonic block modeling, including an innovative automated block closure
algorithm that will fundamentally improve how block models are developed,
tested, and interpreted. Geologic slip rate constraints will be subdivided based
on the age range to reflect North America tectonics over geologic time. Directly
comparing geologically-constrained block models with traditional GNSS-based
block models will isolate the role of geologic vs. geodetic observations in
inferring plate boundary-scale tectonic
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is provided by NSF
EAR Tectonics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.