* 2141118
* PFI-TT:  Development of a new patterning system for accelerated innovation and advanced manufacturing of microchips
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Geoffrey Beach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be the development of a new
technology that enables innovation in microchip design, development, and
manufacturing by providing a platform for rapidly imprinting the elementary
features on the chip. The proposed research will provide new insights into
reconfigurable materials whose properties can be altered electrically at very
short length scales. These materials will be applied to control the transmission
of light that is used to write features in microchips, allowing microchip
patterns to be designed and adapted on demand. If successful, the resulting
technology will reduce production costs and enable rapid design, manufacturing,
and customization. The technology may accelerate innovation in the production of
microchips that underpin applications including information systems, healthcare,
military systems, and the automotive industry. These activities will result in
substantive training opportunities in advanced technology, commercialization,
entrepreneurship, and innovation. Outreach efforts integrated into the program
will increase the participation of underrepresented groups in the innovation
process by including community college participants as well as involving high
school students in the innovation process through seminars and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will introduce a new
approach to reduce microchip fabrication cost and achieve faster turnaround
time, through an advanced manufacturing technology that enables flexible and
rapid patterning and prototyping with high throughput. Microchip manufacturing
is based on using light to transfer a pattern from a master photomask to a
semiconductor wafer, which allows for the building up of complex, interconnected
device architectures in a scalable way. The currently available photomasks are
static so each new chip design requires a new mask set. However, these sets can
cost upwards of a few million dollars with a long lead time. The research
objectives focus on developing a technology that allows individual pixels on a
mask to be lightened or darkened so that the transmitted pattern can be adapted
on demand. The work includes engineering to optimize materials whose optical
properties depend on an applied voltage, enhancing the performance of these
materials, understanding the origins of their properties to aid in their
engineering, and integrating them into mask structures to test and improve the
pattern transfer process in lithography systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.