* 2141650
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Copy Number Alterations and Xenobiotic adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Justin Pritchard, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2025
* USD 410,392.00

Understanding evolution is fundamental to understanding life on earth. Evolution
also creates some of the greatest challenges to human health. Viruses, bacteria,
fungi, and cancer cells all evolve resistance to xenobiotics. These xenobiotics
are molecules that are not found naturally but that influence evolution in the
natural world. This project aims to create new theory and experiments to
understand xenobiotic evolution. The results of this project would have
applications across many different fields such as bacteria resistant to
antibiotics, malaria parasites resistant to antimalarial drugs, tumor cells
resistant to cancer drugs, plants resistant to herbicides, and insects resistant
to insecticides. The award provides support to train STEM graduate students that
will eventually become part of the workforce. The project also provides research
opportunities for undergraduates and develops new educational games that teach
K-12 students about science, using xenobiotic evolution as an
example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to discover novel
aspects of xenobiotic adaptation that result from the interactions between
mutations and gene amplifications. The project examines the complex, nonlinear
evolutionary pathways that lead to xenobiotic adaptation in the context of
antibiotic resistance evolution induced by Rifampin in E. coli. Mathematically,
the project would model resistance evolution as a function of plasmid copy
number with the use of a stochastic process that accounts for tunneling rates
and spatial structures of the community of evolving cells. The project makes use
of an incoherent feed forward loop that gives synthetic control for providing
variation in plasmid copy numbers in cells while keeping biochemical levels
constant. Synthetic biology experiments are designed with a view to
parametrizing the models under development and exploring the effects of specific
parameters that have been indicated as important by the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.