* 2141399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Determining the mechanisms of spoken language processing delay for children with cochlear implants
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Jan Edwards, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 16,051.00

This research project seeks to better understand how children with cochlear
implants (CIs) understand spoken language in real time. CIs have transformed the
lives of children who are born Deaf, enabling them to hear via electrical
stimulation of the auditory nerve. However, the CI does not deliver the same
signal to the brain that a typical ear does. In fact, the transformation of the
acoustic input into electric hearing degrades the speech signal, making it
harder to understand. The objective of this project is to determine how the
degraded CI signal impacts spoken language processing by children with CIs in
order to better understand how the quality of speech input impacts the
development of speech perception and spoken language. The findings from this
research will be shared with researchers in the field as well as schools,
clinicians, families, and other parties who regularly work with children who are
Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing. This communication will promote translational
applications such as the development of more accurate assessment protocols,
targeted treatment approaches, and policy recommendations related to pediatric
cochlear implantation. By helping explain how children acquire language with the
speech input they perceive, the results will help parents better understand how
to interact with their children to support spoken language learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses eye-tracking and
electroencephalography (EEG) to identify the cognitive mechanisms underlying
observed delays in spoken language processing by children with CIs. The first
objective is to determine the source of observed delays in spoken word
recognition by distinguishing between two hypotheses: 1) Delays are the result
of increased competition between words, specifically for phoneme distinctions
relying on spectral cues (e.g., sip vs. ship) that are not transmitted well by
the CI; or 2) Children with CIs adopt a "wait-and-see" strategy for all words,
regardless of how well the CI conveys the acoustic features of any particular
word. The second objective is to determine how delays in spoken word recognition
hinder access of semantic information by distinguishing between two hypotheses:
1) Children with CIs exhibit cascading processing of spoken words, meaning
ambiguities in speech perception would result in less robust activation of a
more distributed network of similar-sounding words and their semantic
associates; or 2) Children with CIs demonstrate more serial processing of spoken
words, in which ambiguity at the speech sound level delays activation of higher-
level language networks. These findings will provide an important step forward
in understanding how the quality of speech input impacts processing mechanisms
underlying language comprehension, advancing theories of spoken language
processing along with informing spoken language intervention for children with
CIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.