* 2141905
* CAREER: Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing of Molybdenum Alloys for High-temperature Applications: Residual Stresses and Porosity Considering Ductile-to-brittle Transition Temperature
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Duck Bong Kim, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2027
* USD 526,186.00

Refractory metals such as Molybdenum (Mo) based alloys have a great potential
for applications in harsh environments, because of their high melting point.
However, Mo alloys have several inherent drawbacks such as low ductility and a
tendency of oxidation and cracking, which are adversely augmented when they are
produced by additive manufacturing, due to non-equilibrium processing phenomena.
This results in several complex technical blockades that hinder a broader
adoption of additive manufacturing of Mo alloys in the industry. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims at fundamental research of wire
arc additive manufacturing (WAAM) for Mo alloy structures, and will explore and
elucidate the root causes of processing defects and their effects on part
thermomechanical performance. If successful, the research will directly impact
the Nation’s economic welfare and energy security. For example, the energy
efficiency of land-based power plants could be improved and their carbon
footprint decreased by using Mo alloys for turbine blades. In addition, the
project will enhance the existing manufacturing curricula with data analytics
components, provide undergraduate/graduate student with internship opportunities
at national laboratories, and run hands-on manufacturing experiences for K-12
students. The outreach activities will enhance the education and training of
next-generation STEM leaders in advanced manufacturing and foster inclusions of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research goal of
this CAREER award is to understand the underlying mechanisms of process-induced
residual stresses as well as pore generation and investigate thermomechanical
performances of WAAM processed Mo-alloy structures, focusing on titanium-
zirconium-molybdenum alloys. The core research challenges lie on the lack of
data in the physicochemical properties and complex defects development from non-
equilibrium thermal cycles in layer-by-layer stacking. A combination of
computational and physics-informed, data-driven models will be pursued for
process understanding with experimental verifications and validations, including
multi-scale material characterizations, process imaging and fatigue testing,
etc. The research is expected to gain fundamental knowledge of the residual
stress development and pore formation while considering the ductile-to-brittle
transition temperature, and elucidate the deformation behaviors and
thermomechanical performances from room to elevated temperatures, as correlated
with heterogeneous microstructures, pores and oxidation. In addition, the
project intends to establish a quantitative relationship between the process,
signature, microstructure, property and performance, called the “design rule,”
for WAAM that will ensure satisfactory fabrications of refractory alloy
structures. The linkage may serve as an effective tool to potentially tailor
microstructures and properties of WAAM structures with controlled and improved
thermomechanical performance of final products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.