* 2141819
* Task-Specific Languages as Scaffolding for Programming in Discrete Mathematics Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Mark Guzdial, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,439.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing and implementing
task-specific programming (TSP) languages in classrooms. Programming is a
powerful tool that scientists, engineers, and mathematicians use to gain insight
into their problems. Educators have shown how programming integrated into other
subjects can be a powerful tool to enhance learning, from algebra to language
arts. However, less than 5% of high school students in the US learn programming.
Most students do not have an opportunity to use programming to support their
learning. TSP languages are not typically universal languages. Additionally,
considering the specific domains of a language’s syntax, semantics, and
interface, few languages fit smoothly into a given learning context. TSP
languages are explicitly designed for integration in specific classes, to meet
teacher needs, and to be usable with less than ten minutes of instruction. TSP
languages can make the power of programming to enhance learning more accessible.
This project will use TSP languages in ebook combinations to study undergraduate
student learning of counting processes. The project will test the value of TSP
languages in discrete mathematics, which is a gateway course in some computer
science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the use of two
different TSP languages and contrast the TSP languages with a traditional
programming language such as Python. The proposed work has the potential to
advance knowledge about (1) the role of programming in learning in discrete
mathematics, (2) the value of task-specific languages to scaffold learning, (3)
how alternative representational forms of programming will influence student use
of TSP languages, and (4) how the use of TSP languages alone or in combination
with traditional languages will enhance students’ sense of authenticity and
ability to transfer knowledge. Students working in pairs will think aloud as
they solve counting problems using TSP languages. The think aloud data will be
analyzed to assess students’ understanding of combinatorics and the languages.
The results of this project will be disseminated through national and
international computing education and mathematics education conferences. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.