* 2141682
* Online Site Visits using 360-degree Panoramic Collaborative Spaces
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Lok, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by pioneering a transformative
online virtual learning approach to simplify student's access to real-world site
visits and the practice of collaborative communication skills. This project will
open up new educational applications for online delivery of field trips that
heavily rely on dangerous, or financially prohibitive locations. In this
project, multi-user 360-degree panoramic collaborative spaces (360PICS) will be
used to create digital field trip experiences that illustrate the real sites
where geographically-dispersed students can connect and interact with each
other. This project will advance the understanding of the site visit experiences
for STEM students and investigate the conditions under which improved student
learning occurs through online, easy-to-access, digital site visits. Students
will be able to engage with other students within the 360PICS environment while
staying focused on practicing the skills required on those site visit
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is to
present civil, architectural and construction engineering students with
opportunities to enable online location-independent site visits, using real-
world occasions where situated learning is dangerous, unsafe, or difficult to
achieve. The specific objectives of the project are to (1) characterize student
communication and collaboration during digital site visits, (2) capture,
develop, and define 360PICS affordances that are most conducive to enhance
student communication and collaboration during digital site visits, and (3)
assess the influence of 360PICS on student communication and collaboration
during digital site visits. Web-based virtual reality techniques will be
employed to develop 360PICS and create the required communication and
collaboration affordances. The uses and effects of 360PICS will be assessed
using a mixed-method approach, collecting qualitative and quantitative
measurements to specifically understand the influence of 360PICS on student
communication and collaboration during digital site visits. In connection with
this project, educational and outreach efforts will be integrated into several
online courses, workshops, webinars, and outreach activities. This project will
also provide the opportunity for online project-based learning for undergraduate
students as a part of a 360PICS-based course module. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.