* 2141836
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-ENSA: Forest function from genes to canopies: disentangling the fine scale spatio-temporal variation in gene expression and tree growth
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Nathan Swenson, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jason West
* 06/30/2023
* USD 246,410.00

Forests play a key role in regulating climate due to their ability absorb and
store CO2 from the atmosphere. While often treated as a whole, the properties of
forests are the aggregated outcome of processes happening on the level of
thousands of individual trees. Individual trees within and between species in a
forest vary in their physiological and growth response to the environment.
Quantifying this variation is critical for understanding how forests regulate
the carbon cycle and therefore for improving models that project how forests
will respond to future fluctuations in climate. The present research project
uses cutting edge genetic technology coupled with detailed measurements of
individual tree growth and physiology to address these outstanding grand
challenges in forest biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forested ecosystems are key
players in the global carbon cycle. A grand challenge for those investigating
current and projecting future forest functioning is linking processes occurring
at the level of a leaf to those occurring at the level of a forest. Critical to
these efforts is an understanding of where variation exists and the degree to
which knowing that information improves projections. Individuals interact with
their environments via their phenotypes and the resulting performance ultimately
scales up to provide emergent ecosystem-level properties. Thus, acute and
chronic changes to the environment are inherently an individual-level
phenomenon. Rich assays of leaf level functioning and linkages of such
information to individual tree and whole forest carbon flux are rare in tree
ecology due to logistical constraints and a focus on a handful of leaf
properties. The present project assays leaf level functioning throughout several
growing seasons through the quantification of leaf physiological traits and gene
expression. The sampling is performed at two NEON sites where significant
infrastructure exists allowing us to link these leaf level properties to forest
scale measures of carbon flux and the environment.