* 2141949
* ECCS-EPSRC: Superlattice Architectures for Efficient and Stable Perovskite LEDs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Seth Marder, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal will develop thin-film metal-halide perovskite light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) with high efficiencies. Standard inorganic LEDs, such as blue
indium-gallium nitride, rely on the ability to p-dope and n-dope the hole- and
electron-injecting layers, and to construct multi-quantum-well structures within
which electrons/holes are confined and emit light, all in a heteroepitaxial
structure. This allows close to thermodynamic efficiency operation for red and
blue, but not yet for green (where nitrides show substantial losses). In
contrast, organic LEDs (OLEDs) are assembled as stacks of different molecular
materials, with band-edge positions selected to allow electron or hole transport
to the recombination zone. ‘Doping’ through charge-transfer reactions with
redox-active additives is used to assist injection from electrodes, but is not
possible in the bulk. Though commercialized for displays, OLEDs require drift
fields to overcome injection barriers, show very low carrier mobilities, and
operate at voltages well above the emission bandgap. As outlined in our ‘track-
record’ above, the team successfully adopted the OLED architecture for thin-film
LEDs made with metal-halide perovskites. The critical components in this work
will be developing: (a) a 2D/3D superlattice that confines e-h pairs, but with a
tuneable “well depth” in order to minimize drive voltage requirements will be
used in these to achieve good charge trapping, (b) spacer layers of perovskite
that keep charge carriers away from the transport layers to avoid quenching; (c)
and (d) hole- and electron-transport layers engineered to give ohmic injection
at the perovskite interfaces, through chemical tuning and doping (ensuring that
trap/quenching states associated with doping are far enough away from the
emissive perovskite zone) and designed to give ohmic contacts at the two
electrodes. This requires advances across a range of materials chemistry,
materials processing, and semiconductor engineering tasks, underpinned by
advanced characterization techniques. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) are devices that are used in many of today’s displays, such as
those used in televisions and cell phones, and can also increasingly in
lighting. For these applications red-, green-, and blue-emitting LEDs are
needed. However, green-emitting LEDs that are energy efficient and that are
stable are particularly challenging to develop. This proposal is focused on
developing efficient green-emitting devices based on a class of materials known
as metal-halide perovskites. In particular, teams at the Universities of
Cambridge (UK), Oxford (UK), and Colorado (USA) will collaborate with one
another to solve engineering problems facilitating such devices. This work may
result in new commercially viable LED technologies, as well as other new
applications for metal-halide perovskites. As well as having potential impacts
on the emerging semiconductor industry in the UK and USA, this project will:
provide a US postdoctoral researcher with experience in organic and metal-
organic synthesis and a range of physical characterization methods, and with the
opportunity to participate in a close international inter-institute
collaboration; and help support the education and training of women and
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.