* 2141721
* RUI: Where does all the molybdenum go? Evaluating the role of iron sulfides in molybdenum accumulation in marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Katherine Plass, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 318,711.00

The project will study the role of sediment iron sulfides in removing dissolved
molybdenum from the ocean. Molybdenum (Mo) is a trace metal found in ocean
sediments. It is used as an indicator of low-oxygen and high-sulfide conditions
in the past. Understanding the history of ocean oxygenation is important for
monitoring low-oxygen “dead zones” in modern coastal waters and predicting the
impact of climate change on the oceans. However, the processes by which Mo
accumulates in sediments are not well understood. This project will use
laboratory experiments to study the interactions between solution Mo and solid
iron sulfides. The research will be carried out at an undergraduate institution.
The study will provide a structured progression of experiences for students from
historically underrepresented groups in STEM. It will include a cohort-mentor
approach to support students before they arrive on campus and throughout their
introductory science courses. Summer Research Students (rising juniors and
seniors) will be engaged in every aspect of this project. These juniors and
seniors will also serve as peer mentors for Research Cohort students (rising
sophomores), forming an effective research team. Student exposure to graduate
school opportunities will occur through meetings with research groups at the
Pennsylvania State University. Finally, interest in geochemistry will be
fostered by developing an environmentally-themed laboratory module within an
introductory General Chemistry course.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
work is to clarify the relative importance in marine sediments of: (1) sorption
of Mo to iron sulfides, (2) retention of Mo during the formation of pyrite
and/or exclusion of Mo upon growth of crystalline pyrite domains, and (3)
possible formation of a distinct FeMoS product. Recent work established that Mo
removal from sulfidic waters occurs with the initial formation of metastable
iron sulfides and Mo is retained during the transformation of these precursor
phases to the thermodynamically stable form of pyrite. With this groundwork, it
should be possible to conclusively determine the role that iron sulfides play in
the accumulation of Mo in marine sediments by: 1) synthesizing metastable iron
sulfides and evaluating Mo adsorption to these species under various conditions
to determine the impact of Mo thiolation, iron sulfide surface chemistry, and
redox behavior; 2) monitoring the transformation of these materials to pyrite to
determine how various initial conditions alter the retention or incorporation of
Mo; and 3) developing a model that traces the fate of Mo through these processes
and reconciles the disparate literature evidence. Understanding the role that
iron sulfides and their phase transformations play in Mo accumulation will
provide a strong foundation for work that employs Mo as a
paleotracer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.