* 2141845
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Weaning practices, subsistence strategies, and skeletal growth and development
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Noreen von Cramon-Taubadel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,197.00

The human skeleton is capable of plastic responses to biomechanical pressures,
including those associated with chewing. This doctoral dissertation project
examines relationships between dietary patterns and skeletal characteristics
through analysis of pre-industrial populations with various weaning and
subsistence practices. The research advances insights about biocultural factors
that may influence skeletal growth and development in our species, including
factors affecting dental alignment and function. The project fosters graduate
student training of a female scientist, dissemination of findings including to
clinical audiences, science education and curriculum development for students,
and public science communication through popular science outlets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While researchers have found differences in face and jaw
shape with differing subsistence strategies, the effects of weaning practices
and the biomechanical effects of suckling are not well understood. Additionally,
modern infant behavior such as thumb-sucking, bottle-feeding and early
termination of breastfeeding are implicated in the rise of dental malocclusions,
suggesting that shifts in weaning practices that are thought to have occurred
with the advent of farming may be partially responsible for the increase in
modern dental occlusion problems. This project investigates associations between
facial morphology, weaning practices, and subsistence strategies, using cranial
and mandibular 3D scan data. The project also seeks to assess the association
between weaning/subsistence behavior and dental occlusion patterns by
quantifying dental occlusion using modern orthodontic
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.