* 2141192
* CAS-Climate: Crowd-Sourced Just-in-Time Inlet Maintenance as an Urban Strategy for Climate Resilience
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Franco Montalto, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2025
* USD 449,633.00

The research will explore the possibility that in an era of increasingly
decentralized infrastructure investments, urban residents purposefully engaged
in maintenance of urban drainage systems can significantly enhance
infrastructure system performance. Working in two different cities, the research
team will execute an experiment in which crowd-sourced cleaning of storm drains
and green infrastructure (GI) inlets is incentivized in advance of forecasted
precipitation events, aided by development of a new mobile app. The premise is
that inlet conditions largely determine the percentage of tributary area runoff
that is captured by stormwater management infrastructure, and thus also the
functional capacity of the stormwater system, a key determinant of flooding and
indicator of urban resilience to extreme precipitation. The first hypothesis
motivating the work is that existing storm drains and GI practices can be
operated at higher efficiency if debris is removed immediately before
precipitation occurs, and that this kind of just-in-time maintenance can be
reliably crowd-sourced, increasing the value of existing storm drains and GI
practices for attenuating runoff from both routine and extreme precipitation.
Secondly, it is proposed that storm drains and inlets that are more efficient at
capturing runoff will be viewed more favorably and accepted by the surrounding
community than otherwise identically designed infrastructure that is partially
or wholly obstructed with debris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will a)
characterize the ability of urban drainage infrastructure, including GI, to
manage stormwater under a range of precipitation and catchment conditions, b)
pilot a strategy for meaningful engagement of paid Civic Scientists in the
operation of decentralized infrastructure systems, c) develop an app that fuses
multiple data sets (e.g. climate data available through web services, crowd-
sourced photographs and work orders, payments) coupling environmental and human
subsystems in a unique and potentially important way, d) survey public
perception of urban drainage systems under a variety of contexts, e) potentially
improve smart city planning and implementation, f) strengthen social
infrastructure through community engagement, and g) advance knowledge in the
fields of urban stormwater, sustainable water management, Internet-of-Things
(IoT) technology, urban stewardship, environmental monitoring, and data fusion.
By focusing on how to enhance the performance of existing urban drainage
systems, the research targets building urban adaptive capacity and promoting
sustainability and resilience in the face of climate change. The geographic
focus of the work is the Cramer Hill section of Camden, NJ, an extremely flood
prone neighborhood in which most of the residents are from underrepresented
minority groups and 35% of the residents fall below the poverty line. The NYC
research sites are geographically distributed throughout that city, with the
majority located in neighborhoods with similar ethnic, racial, and economic
characteristics to Camden. Broader impacts include a) helping stormwater
utilities generate inlet and GI designs and maintenance protocols that function
during extreme precipitation, b) evaluating upper bounds on the ability of GI
and existing stormwater infrastructure to help in adapting to extreme
precipitation, c) improving public perception of GI, and d) creating a new model
for helping urban residents generate income through decentralized infrastructure
maintenance. Study of the urban drainage systems under different weather and
physical conditions, maintenance regimes, and social participation formats, will
be of value to researchers in engineering, ecology, and urban planning. The
incorporation of Civic Scientists in data collection will help to evaluate the
potential role of community stewards in distributed infrastructure operation and
maintenance, of great contemporary interest in environmental management and
smart city development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.