* 2141122
* PFI-TT:  Next-generation hybrid solar cells enabling lower cost, safe, and environmentally friendly floating photovoltaic installations
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Robert Opila, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 319,107.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable solar cell use on water
rather than just on land. The growth of solar photovoltaic energy has
highlighted the increasing problem of competing land use, scarcity, and cost.
Floating photovoltaics have emerged as a solution to this problem; deploying
solar modules on existing bodies of water lessens the need for land-based
installations. However, the high cost has inhibited growth of this renewable
energy source. This project advances a new system that is lighter and cheaper.
Furthermore, the modules are fabricated with non-toxic and environmentally
friendly materials, mitigating the risk posed by other novel photovoltaic
technologies of contaminating the bodies of water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project advances lower cost lightweight alternatives for solar
photovoltaic generation. This hybrid photovoltaic technology combines innovative
polymer science with silicon, the most abundant and significant photovoltaic
material in use today, to provide cheaper, lighter, and more efficient flexible
modules. Recent computer model simulations indicate that the proposed polymer
deposition method (oxidative chemical vapor deposition) generates high
conductivity and when coupled with an optimized surface treatment of silicon,
the power efficiencies can exceed 20%. Furthermore, this hybrid approach allows
the polymer to mechanically support the brittle silicon substrate, enabling the
fabrication of flexible modules (to address wind load) encapsulated by plastic
films rather than glass panels. This project validates the high efficiency,
mechanical robustness, and durability under accelerated degradation conditions
of the hybrid photovoltaic technology and creates a prototype for testing in a
relevant environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.