* 2141849
* Enhancing the Augmented Reality Sandbox's Software and Hardware to Support Quantitative Simulation for STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Frank Klassner, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing and evaluating the
Augmented Reality Sandbox to advance technical curricula in civil engineering
and environmental science courses. The Sandbox is a widely deployed STEM
classroom tool that enables students to model landscapes with sand and observe
how virtual water flows over the landscape. Its basic design consists of a box
of sand on a table with a short-throw projector and an altimetry sensor mounted
about 3 feet above the sand. The altimetry sensor passes a 3D scan of the sand
surface to software that generates a color elevation map of the surface and
projects it onto the surface of the sand. The software projects virtual water
flowing across the sand landscape according to the fluid dynamics driven by the
sand surface's shape. This project will advance the geophysical principles that
the Sandbox can model by adding new simulation capabilities to its open-source
software. The project aims to improve educators' understanding of best practices
for this tool by measuring the Sandbox's effect on students' performance in
courses. By bringing together a team of investigators from both civil
engineering and environmental science, the project will produce laboratory
projects and evaluations that will impact the pedagogy of geophysics and
hydrology topics common to both fields. It will also meet a critical need for
updating the Sandbox's software to work with newer altimetry sensors, thereby
extending the Sandbox's life as a classroom instrument. Project outcomes will
include publication of findings on best practices for using the classroom
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add new capabilities in the
Augmented Reality Sandbox's software. The scope of the new abilities covers
modeling drainage basin delineation, as well as defining and representing
infiltration rates for regions in the landscape, rainfall rates over regions of
the landscape, and scale factoring for the sandbox's modeled area. These
software extensions will provide students in environmental science and civil
engineering courses with engaged learning experiences that depict the dynamics
of the water cycle and support both quantitative and qualitative modeling. This
project will also develop hardware extensions to the sandbox frame's design to
support rapid turnaround on laboratory project setup between lab periods and
consistent sand landform models across lab periods and projects. The project's
evaluation goal is to study the Sandbox's effectiveness in student learning. The
project will evaluate both the original and the extended versions of the Sandbox
through student surveys and analysis of aggregated scores on pertinent exam
questions. With this information, the project will advance understanding of the
Sandbox's effect on students' qualitative understanding of geophysical
processes. The project will also investigate conditions under which the
Sandbox's new modeling capabilities help students understand geophysical
processes through simulations. The project aims to improve educators'
understanding of best practices for this tool by measuring the Sandbox's effect
on students' performance in courses under varying numbers of laboratory projects
in which students use the Sandbox. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.