* 2141952
* Investigating Learning Progression Modules in Integrated Science Content Courses for Preservice Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Amanda Harwood, Alma College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 211,203.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by supporting highly effective
pre-kindergarten through sixth grade (PK-6) STEM teaching through improved
preservice elementary teacher STEM education. Many elementary teachers—while
certainly capable of high-quality science teaching—often do not have a strong
background or sense of self-efficacy in science and have limited opportunities
to work with PK-6 students’ developing science ideas in their teacher
preparation programs. Additionally, 2- and 4-year college and university-based
faculty who teach science content courses as part of preservice elementary
teacher certification programs have limited opportunities to collaborate and
consider how to best support preservice elementary teachers in their respective
contexts. This IUSE Engaged Student Learning Track 1 project intends to adapt
three research-based learning progressions (LPs) into six learning progression-
based modules—LPMs. The LPs are representations of how students’ science ideas
may increase in sophistication with instruction. The LPMs are to be implemented
in two required and sequential integrated science courses to (a) support
preservice teachers in developing their own science ideas and (b) scaffold their
attention to PK-6 students’ thinking about science. Additionally, the project
team intends to host two mini-conferences for 2- and 4-year Michigan STEM and
science teacher educators to provide an environment in which to co-learn about
supporting preservice elementary teachers in the context of recent changes to
state certification standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
specific objectives. One is to develop, implement, and evaluate six LPMs in two
integrated science courses for preservice elementary teachers. A second intent
is to develop, host, and identify impacts of two mini-conferences as a context
in which to share findings and materials of this project. The mini-conferences
are also intended to engage post-secondary STEM and science teacher education
faculty from 2- and 4-year institutions to seek solutions to common issues
related to supporting preservice elementary teachers’ STEM learning. Finally,
the project aims to use quantitative and qualitative methods to investigate if
and how LPMs impact preservice elementary teachers’ science understandings. The
research is designed to also investigate if and how preservice elementary
teachers take up ideas from the LPMs during episodes of microteaching in their
subsequent elementary science teaching methods class. While LPs have been
previously researched in the context of preservice methods courses, they have
not been implemented nor researched in the context of undergraduate science
(content) courses. The research and evaluation included in this project has
strong potential to advance knowledge about preservice elementary teachers’
science education and support highly effective PK-6 STEM teaching through
improved preservice elementary teacher STEM education. Dissemination of project
research findings and materials to local, state, and national contexts is
expected to occur through publication of research articles in peer-reviewed
journals, conference presentations, and a special page devoted to this NSF-
funded project on the Education Department webpage of Alma College and through
social media. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.