* 2141384
* EAGER: ADAPT: AI Guided Design and Synthesis of Semiconducting Molecules
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Kolaczyk, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,995.00

Understanding how atoms and molecules combine to form more complex molecules and
materials is fundamental to chemistry. Yet, there are more ways that atoms can
be arranged into molecules than there are actual atoms in the universe. Chemists
typically rely on experience, literature accounts, and ad hoc criteria for
designing and prioritizing molecules for specific applications, often resulting
in a monumental effort. Furthermore, when considering the synthesis of new
molecules using tried or untried reactions, chemists must often speculate,
relying on instinct rather than ground truths. The PIs will apply and extend
several aspects of artificial intelligence (AI) to develop a general platform
that will facilitate data-driven property prediction and synthesis of
semiconducting materials, focusing on blue light-emitting materials. As a
result, this project will expedite the discovery of novel organic semiconductors
that can be synthesized efficiently, with optimized properties for target
applications. The inclusion of a diverse team of graduate students in this work
from the PIs’ research groups will broaden participation and help create an AI-
aware workforce in the context of chemistry and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focus will be on optimizing the
design of blue light-emitting materials using AI. To carry out this objective,
the project will proceed with two parallel experimental tracks connected by an
AI platform. In the first track, data and computational models will be used to
train AI machine learning and experimental design modules for molecular-pair
inputs. This will provide a workflow that is fully containerized, enabling the
design of robust blue light-emitting molecules. In the second track, the focus
will be on extending the potential chemical space that can be integrated into
the first track design concept. This will dramatically increase the diversity of
semiconducting materials that can be explored and provide a roadmap for how to
make new, unexplored molecular frameworks with desired properties. The project
will incorporate concepts and techniques from high-dimensional sparse
regression, machine learning with graph inputs, and discrete optimization. The
resulting dual mode platform (property design/synthesis design) will provide an
unprecedented level of prediction, making the design and manufacturing of
materials a more efficient and automated process. At the same time, novel
statistical machine learning and experimental design algorithms are expected to
emerge in addressing chemistry problems involving molecular pairs as inputs.
This project also provides new opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
student training in materials and computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.