* 2142290
* CAREER: Bridging the Gap between Deterministic and Stochastic Structures for Mixed Stochasticity System Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Hongyi Xu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2026
* USD 536,740.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems or products composed of
parts that have random (or stochastic) characteristics pose a significant
challenge to the design of complex engineering systems. There is a lack of
systematic methods for designing artifacts utilizing this type of mixed
stochasticity structure. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
project will establish a novel computational framework that bridges the gap
between random and regular structural patterns to enable: 1) generative design
of structures with tailorable stochasticity and desired properties and 2) design
of mixed stochasticity structural systems that consist of mixed stochastic
structural units to achieve optimal performance. Two sets of engineering
applications will be used to evaluate the methodology and demonstrate its
benefit to society: design of microstructural materials in energy storage
systems and design of a mixed stochasticity structural system for vehicle impact
safety. The broader application of the research developments will benefit a wide
range of industries, such as high-capacity energy storage materials, structural
safety and reliability, and automotive lightweighting, which rely on materials
and structures with mixed stochasticity. Furthermore, the results of this
research will contribute theories and methodologies that benefit the reliability
design of mixed stochasticity systems, such as power grid systems, water
distribution systems, and transportation systems. The education and outreach
objective of this project is to create a prototype of education-research-
industry integration and apply it to K-12 education outreach, outreach to local
businesses, and university education. The K-12 education outreach will motivate
students to pursue education and careers in science and engineering fields. The
outreach to local businesses will assist small businesses and small
manufacturers to compete in the post–COVID-19 world. The integration among
research, industry practice, and education will strengthen the undergraduate and
graduate students’ learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
research goal of this project is to create a novel computational framework that
bridges the gap between deterministic and stochastic structures by establishing
a unified design space that covers structural patterns whose stochasticity
ranges from random to regular. This framework enables generative design of
microstructures/structures with tailorable properties and stochasticity, as well
as design of a mixed stochasticity structural system that consists of
deterministic and stochastic structural units to achieve optimal performance.
This research will transform the discovery and design of
structural/microstructural systems in three ways. First, a first-of-its-kind
design representation method will be developed for mixed stochasticity
structures that will enable the design of structures with tailorable
stochasticity. Second, the research will provide a theoretical foundation for
transferring knowledge between deterministic and stochastic systems to inspire
new designs that achieve target properties. Third, a new design framework will
be established for the robustness and reliability-based design of mixed
stochasticity structural system. The education and outreach plan includes a
Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math (STEAM) project for K-12
teachers and students in underrepresented minority schools, research
dissemination to local small businesses and small manufacturers, and integration
among university education, research, and industrial
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.