* 2142924
* CAREER: The Efficacy of Sexual Assault Mandatory Reporting Policies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Kathryn Holland, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 05/31/2027
* USD 237,049.00

Sexual assault is a serious threat to safety and educational access within
institutions of higher education, especially for women and underrepresented
groups. The U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights has attempted
to remedy this issue via Title IX guidance, instructing institutions to
establish policies that can address sexual assault and ensure assault survivors’
equal access to education. As colleges and universities interpret and implement
federal legal directives, little attention has been paid to assessing whether
the resulting policies achieve their intended aims. Many institutions have
created policies that require most employees to report sexual assault they learn
about to university officials, even if the person who experienced the sexual
assault does not want to report. It is assumed that these mandatory reporting
policies will increase reports and benefit survivors, but there is a lack of
evidence to support those assumptions. Regaining a sense of autonomy and control
is essential for survivors’ healing after an assault, and some mandatory
reporting policy practices may cause unintended harm. Therefore, understanding
the effects and outcomes of college and university mandatory reporting policies
for sexual assault is essential for creating policies that best support
survivors and ensure equal access to education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project will collect qualitative data from both institutions of higher education
(e.g., mandatory reporting policy text) and institutional members (i.e.,
faculty/staff members and students) at two institutions of higher education. The
analysis of these institutional- and individual-level data will achieve three
research aims. Research Aim 1 will evaluate how institutional mandatory
reporting policies are reflected in and deviate from faculty/staff and students’
understandings and attitudes of those policies. Research Aim 2 will determine
the impact of mandatory reporting policies on faculty/staff and students’
behaviors and outcomes. Research Aim 3 will then elucidate faculty/staff and
students’ perspectives on mandatory reporting policy practices that afford
survivors greater autonomy. These aims will support and be supported by
education aims focused on enhance student training and dissemination in
qualitative research methods and analysis, and through a graduate seminar and
hands-on experience researching MR policies. Education Aim 2 will provide
opportunities for institutional leaders and policymakers to learn about the use
of qualitative research to evaluate and create evidence-based policy. Findings
from this research will advance our understanding of how college and university
mandatory reporting policies for sexual assault are translated from paper into
practice, determine the efficacy of such policies for addressing sexual assault
and supporting sexual assault survivors (e.g., ensuring their access to
education), and facilitate evidence-based
policymaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.