* 2142773
* CAREER: Soft Robotic Fingertips with High-Resolution, Calibrated Shape and Force Sensing for Dexterous Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Monroe Kennedy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Robots capable of manipulating objects like humans will greatly benefit society
from elderly care in assisted living to advanced manufacturing, such as small
component assembly. The current key barrier to robots performing these types of
service tasks is insufficient dexterity. To approach human dexterity, robots
must be able to move their fingers and sense their touched surroundings with a
comparable level of resolution to humans. The key challenge is providing high-
resolution, calibrated tactile sensing, which once modeled can be leveraged for
advanced robotic manipulation. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
grant supports a sensor design that leverages a camera to observe the contact
boundary of a transparent robotic fingertip. When the camera observes
deformation of the soft robotic fingertip from touching an object, these
observed deformations are mapped to the shape of the deformed finger and applied
forces on the fingertip surface through the novel modeling technique. The
calibration and modeling techniques to be developed in this project allow for
manipulation motion planners to determine the best sequences of grasps to
reposition an object in the robot’s hand with an estimate of expected
manipulation success. This will advance the field of robotics by increasing
dexterous manipulation ability in service tasks benefiting the US economy,
prosperity and welfare. The research in robotic perception and manipulation
supported by this grant will promote education in robotics. Through close
involvement with non-profit organization “Black In Robotics” the research team
will also broaden the participation of underrepresented groups as students learn
to design and research robotic systems capable of performing advanced service
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optical tactile robotic fingertip is modeled as
a Cauchy elastic material with a direct correlation between the observed strain
and stress field of the sensor. By illuminating the interior of the sensor with
multi-colored light-emitting diodes (LEDs), the contact surface shape is
reconstructed by correlating light intensity to the interior surface normal, and
strain is observed through the deformation of contact surface markings. The
novel calibration method enables high-resolution measurement of both the robotic
finger contact surface shape and stress field. This is then used to model grasp
stability through the high-resolution limit surface and position within the
limit surface for a multiple soft-finger grasp. This representation is then
leveraged by a high-level grasp planner to strategize a sequence of grasps for
in-hand manipulation between target object poses. The modularization of the
manipulation problem is expected to increase the rate of motion planning
adaption to novel objects while providing a more accurate estimation of grasp
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.