* 2142712
* CAREER: Moduli spaces of surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Alexander Wright, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2027
* USD 194,632.00

Moduli spaces of surfaces are of central importance in mathematics and
theoretical physics and are a meeting ground for researchers working in
different fields. They parametrize different geometries on surfaces, so that a
point in the moduli space encodes a shape which a surface can assume.
Classically, one considers the evenly curved shapes, with richly different
points of views arising from hyperbolic geometry, complex analysis, algebraic
geometry, and matrix groups. More recently, singular flat geometries have gained
prominence because of their relationship to the classical moduli space as well
as their connections to important examples in the theory of dynamical systems
(systems that evolve over time). This project will advance the study of moduli
spaces in five interrelated research programs tied together by shared techniques
and analogies. Progress on these research programs will advance the
understanding of the geometry of surfaces and higher dimensional spaces and will
unlock applications to dynamical systems. The nature of the topics makes their
simultaneous investigation synergistic and allows for their integration into
educational activities, including the training and mentoring of graduate
students, vertically integrated research with undergraduate students, and the
development of a new course for the bridge to PhD program. The research with
undergraduates program will include a proactive recruiting strategy designed to
improve participation of members of groups historically underrepresented in
mathematics. Undergraduate participants will be encouraged to participate in the
MathCorp summer outreach program, and the more senior participants will receive
training on mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five research programs that will
be undertaken are as follows. First, the PI will build quasi-convex co-bounded
planes in Teichm√ºller spaces, and eventually convex cocompact surface subgroups
of mapping class groups, by gluing together components obtained via dynamics.
Second, the PI will determine if there is a non-trivial orbit closure of
translation surfaces of rank at least 3, by classifying special constructions
and investigating low genus moduli spaces. Third, the PI will show typical high
genus surfaces are good spectral expanders, using the trace formula and work of
Mirzakhani. Fourth, the PI will develop Patterson-Sullivan theory for mapping
class groups of non-orientable surfaces. Fifth, the PI will develop a criterion
for unique ergodicity in the context of dilation
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.