* 2142577
* A Study of the Impacts of a Web-based Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning Tool on Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Clifton Kussmaul, The POGIL Project
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 298,498.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing an existing web-
based platform that supports teaching and student learning in team learning
contexts. Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) is an evidence-based
approach to teaching and learning in which students work in teams on
specifically designed activities facilitated by instructors. It has been shown
that POGIL can reduce student attrition and improve student understanding.
However, instructors can be hesitant to adopt POGIL due to a lack of training,
the significant development time for creating POGIL activities, and the lack of
effective support tools for facilitating and monitoring student team activity.
This project will train and support instructors to implement POGIL learning
activities using the web-based platform and the activities in their courses.
This study will examine how instructors use the platform in their classes, how
the platform affects student behavior during the activities, and how the
platform affects student motivation and learning. This project will support a
set of instructors as they migrate their activities and classes into the
platform, which can be used in face-to-face, hybrid, or online
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the
adoption of POGIL activities in STEM courses so that students will have better
learning outcomes. The team learning approach supported by this project is
grounded in the theory of social constructivism. Students learn STEM concepts as
they interact with their peers and the instructor in the context of a well
designed activity that engages students in active learning. The team plans to
recruit, train, and support 14 POGIL practitioners from multiple STEM
disciplines and contexts to adapt, pilot, and assess learning activities. New
capabilities will be implemented for an existing web-based platform that will
provide rich feedback and access to numerous learning activities. The project
will address three research questions: (1) How do instructors use the platform
to support their implementation of POGIL? (2) How does the POGIL implementation
affect student behavior during the POGIL activities? (3) How does using POGIL
with the platform affect student motivation and learning? These questions will
be answered by analyzing interviews, surveys, student performance data, and
platform usage data. An activity migration rubric will be developed and
validated to assess how well the platform supports each POGIL activity and
identify when changes are needed to the platform to address limitations, enhance
accessibility, and add new capabilities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.