* 2142703
* CAREER:  Probing exciton-exciton correlations and phase transitions for spin-polarized excitons in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Xiao-Xiao Zhang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 424,114.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;When light is absorbed by a solid, it can create a transient
excitation quasiparticle, the so-called exciton, which carries information from
both the light and the matter. Understanding excitonic interactions are crucial
for the future design of quantum devices with contact-free, all-optical control
and sensing. This project investigates the quantum correlations between excitons
in an atomically-thin two-dimensional crystal with exceptionally strong light-
matter interactions. The unique optical and electronic properties of the two-
dimensional crystal promise the realization of quantum correlation well above
the liquid helium temperature. The research results will establish new platform
systems to achieve on-chip operation and control of coherence for future quantum
technology developments. Integrated with the research, the project aims to
promote the participation of women in STEM and train the next-generation STEM
workforce through interdisciplinary research projects and tasks. A series of
career support seminars for women in STEM will be organized at the University of
Florida. In addition, optics science demonstration stations will be developed
for display in a local museum to increase STEM awareness in a younger
generation.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Condensed Matter
Physics (CMP) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) programs of the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;An exciton is a bound electron-hole pair that can be considered as a
Boson, often created through optical excitations in semiconductors. Beyond the
dilute exciton gas limit, exciton-exciton correlation forms, and the possibility
of achieving quantum degeneracy of exciton liquid and condensate phases have
attracted great attention for decades. The recent advent of two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors of transition metal dichalcogenides provides a completely new
paradigm for exciton physics, where excitons have anomalously strong binding
energy and enable all-optical control of the spin and valley degrees of freedom.
This project aims to investigate the nonlinear exciton interactions and seek
experimental signatures of exciton complex correlations in tungsten-based
monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides. In particular, this research will
focus on spin-polarized excitonic states, which have long lifetimes and support
a high exciton density. Both the classical regime and the possible quantum
degeneracy of 2D excitons will be investigated through a combination of
ultrafast optical spectroscopies and optoelectronic probes. The outcome will
inform our understanding of excitonic many-body interactions in 2D and lay the
foundation for realizing macroscopic coherence in compact 2D devices.
Investigation of these spin-polarized excitons will also elucidate how the spin
polarization of bosons affects the formation of correlation and further
macroscopic coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.