* 2142727
* Computer Simulations of G-proteins and Molecular Machines
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Arieh Warshel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

Over the past several decades we have witnessed tremendous advances in the
studies of the molecular basis of human health. However, detailed quantitative
understanding is still in a crucial need. For example, understanding is needed
of the control and mediation of life processes by G-proteins where the complexes
of these proteins, with their cofactors, regulate signal transfer and transport
processes in the cell. Equally important is the understanding of the use of the
energy reach compound ATP in specialized proteins to fuel biological machines
and to control key energy conversion processes. A related issue that requires
detailed understanding, is the problem of directional motions of biological
motors that generate directional force in muscular, cardiac, and neural cells
that are often involved in diseases due to faulty functions. Similarly, the
understanding of the action of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) is crucial
for having a clearer view of the way external factors such as different hormones
activate cellular process. The PI serves as “Science Ambassador” and engages
with children and young adults to attract their interest in STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has developed methods for studying
phosphate hydrolysis reactions in solution, in RasGAP, in EF-Tu and in ATPases.
Using these methods, the PI’s group explored the key role of mutations leading
to cancer and identified the underlying allosteric mechanism as well as, the
mechanism by which chemical energy is converted to work. ab initio QM/MM studies
of the reference solution reaction and evaluation of the corresponding surface
in G-proteins and ATPases were conducted in the PI’s laboratory. Similar studies
were also done with the biological motors, F0F1-ATP synthase, and myosin V. The
current projects will move in parallel on the following fronts: (i) continue
studies of the action of molecular machines, examining the action of rotary
motors, with focus on understanding the role of mutations on the efficiency of
the motors; (ii) studies on the detailed action and unidirectionality of
myosins; (iii) studies of GPCRs focusing on the activation pathways of the
μ-opioid receptor; and (iv) systematic studies of G-proteins, exploring the
action of EF-Tu by ab initio QM/MM and work to establish the allosteric control
of the activation process. This project was funded by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.