* 2142208
* Using Science Communication Instruction to Improve Undergraduate Science Literacy Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Rebecca Sanft, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 11/30/2024
* USD 299,931.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing teaching
practices that increase the science literacy of undergraduate students,
especially for non-STEM majors. Greater scientific literacy in the general
population is critical to the United States successfully navigating global
crises such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and worsening climate change. With
the increasingly significant role played by science and technology in everyday
life, building students’ science literacy skillset is of urgent importance to
the nation's continued health, wellbeing, and economic prosperity. This Level 1
Institutional and Community Transformation project will provide 15 STEM faculty
at the University of North Carolina Asheville with the knowledge, skills, and
support to implement a broadly-oriented science communication assignment
designed to promote students’ science literacy skills. Faculty will participate
in a multi-part professional development experience and receive ongoing
mentoring support to transform their classroom practices. The project will use a
novel integration of research-based education practices in order to implement a
science communication assignment aimed at a general audience. The project's
research and evaluation have potential to contribute new knowledge about
effective teaching practices that promote student motivation, engagement,
science literacy skills, and science communication skills. An additional outcome
is the potential to examine how aspects of the proposed faculty development
experience and ongoing mentoring contribute to faculty motivation, engagement,
and rate of adoption of high-impact teaching practices in the classroom. If
successful, this project may serve as a model to increase students’ science
literacy skills in STEM and non-STEM courses alike. It has the potential to
generalize to other institutions to enhance science literacy and STEM education
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is grounded in Self-
Determination Theory (SDT) which posits that meeting learners’ psychological
needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness can positively impact their
intrinsic motivation and psychological wellness, leading to increased
engagement, academic achievement, and long-term retention of skills and
knowledge. This theory will be applied to both faculty (through the proposed
professional development) and their students (in revised target courses). As
such, the first goal of this project is to create, implement, and assess a
novel, integrative professional development program designed to (a) increase
faculty feelings of competence, autonomy, and relatedness to facilitate adoption
of teaching practices that promote student engagement and learning; and (b)
provide faculty with necessary skills, knowledge, and support to implement a
broadly-oriented science communication assignment and promote student feelings
of competence, autonomy, and relatedness in order to enhance students’ science
literacy skills. The effectiveness of the professional development program will
be measured through surveys, teaching observations, and submitted teaching
artifacts. The second goal of this project is to assess the impact of the
revised course instruction and the science communication assignment on: (a)
students’ feelings of competence, autonomy, and relatedness; and (b) students’
science literacy and communication skills. Multiple measures (including faculty
self-reports, student surveys, student projects and artifacts, and classroom
observations) will be used to assess the degree to which suggested teaching
strategies lead to changes in students’ motivation, engagement, and science
literacy. Materials and research findings will be disseminated via publications
in pedagogical and scientific journals, and presentations at STEM education and
faculty development conferences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.