* 2142344
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Connections Between Instructional Practice and Student Learning in Inorganic Chemistry Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sam Pazicni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,033.00

Understanding the complex relationships among teaching, course environments, and
student learning is important to inform improvements in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. This project aims to serve the
national interest by studying the connections between several aspects of
inorganic chemistry instruction and college students’ learning about molecular-
level symmetry, a concept that is essential for understanding how three-
dimensional structures influence the properties of substances. Currently, little
is known about how instructors teach about symmetry or how students use their
understanding of it to solve problems. This project plans to collect and analyze
data from inorganic chemistry courses around the country to characterize
teaching practices, course environments, and their connections to student
learning. The results of this work will be used to develop evidence-based
professional development materials for inorganic chemistry instructors to
enhance student learning about molecular-level
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted by a collaborative
research team from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro and the
University of Wisconsin–Madison. The project team will employ the Consensus
Model of Teacher Professional Knowledge, which positions the relationship
between instruction and learning within a framework of multiple factors, such as
instructor and student beliefs, behaviors, and knowledge. Faculty and student
research participants will be recruited from twenty-six inorganic chemistry
courses from a variety of institution types across the nation. The research
questions to be addressed include: (1) How do the teaching beliefs of inorganic
chemistry instructors impact their classroom practices when teaching symmetry?
(2) How do classroom practices for teaching symmetry emerge from the mutual
bootstrapping of personal pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), PCK &amp; skill,
and classroom context? (3) How can student outcomes for symmetry be traced to
classroom practices? (4) How can student amplifiers and filters explain
different student outcomes across different sets of classroom practices? and (5)
What constitutes topic-specific professional knowledge for teaching symmetry? To
address these research questions, the project team plans to conduct multiple
embedded case studies using convergent mixed methods. A variety of quantitative
and qualitative data streams will inform each case. Data sources will include
interviews with faculty members and students, video observations of symmetry
instruction, course artifacts, and student learning and skills assessments. In
constructing each case, the project team will use a combination of inductive and
deductive coding methods to analyze qualitative data prior to integrating with
quantitative data. An expert advisory panel will monitor the success of the
project and provide important feedback at specific decision-making points. The
results of this project will be disseminated to researchers and educators via
workshops, conference presentations, and journal publications. The project is
expected to advance our understanding of the learning and teaching of symmetry,
as well as various instruction-learning relationships. Thus, the findings will
have potential to improve undergraduate chemistry education and will be of
interest to education researchers from a variety of STEM disciplines. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.