* 2142320
* Collaborative Research: StudyCrafter: An AI-Supported Platform for Engaging Learners to Conduct Research with Human Subjects
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Camillia Matuk, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 434,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming and broadly
disseminating technology to support research methods education through
StudyCrafter, an innovative platform that uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) to
help students prepare for research involving human subjects. Its intent is to
improve current undergraduate research methods education by providing an active
learning environment where students can easily create scenario-based research
studies and then deploy them online to collect data from participants.
StudyCrafter will support students in acquiring and applying research methods
skills as they build their own original research studies. Authentic human
subjects research opportunities in the classroom are elusive, despite their
importance for future practitioners. The project team will augment the
StudyCrafter platform with AI to improve studentsâ€™ computational thinking and
data science skills from the initial framework of a study to the analysis of
results. The project will use an iterative design approach to improve the
platform while expanding its use from two to eleven universities through a
coordinated network of pilot testers and early adopters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to iteratively develop a
flexible and scalable educational model for undergraduate research methods
education by extending StudyCrafter to include: (1) tools that can assist
students in analyzing their data, (2) student-centered curricula giving
instructors interactive content to teach relevant knowledge and skills, (3) AI-
assisted coaching to support students with their research; and (4) automatic
prompts and scaffolding methods to encourage students to critically reflect on
their research. Grounded in active learning, this project will address the lack
of authentic research experiences in current research methods education through
an AI augmented platform, and study the affective, cognitive, and logistic
outcomes for students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.