* 2142315
* Integrating Methods for Universal Design for Learning in Introductory Undergraduate Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Elliott Bertrand, Sacred Heart University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,941.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
outcomes in introductory level college mathematics courses by providing
professional development for faculty in the use of Universal Design for Learning
(UDL). Through UDL-focused professional development, college faculty will learn
how to implement multiple effective teaching strategies that are aligned with
students’ diverse learning needs. College students often find introductory level
mathematics courses to be very challenging, and these courses can create
barriers that slow down the progress of STEM majors in their degree programs.
Mathematics education researchers have argued for significant revisions to
undergraduate course structure and faculty development to improve student
learning outcomes in these foundational courses. This project will create and
assess the effectiveness of a new faculty professional development program that
will help mathematics faculty implement UDL in introductory mathematics courses.
UDL provides guidelines for using teaching strategies that account for the
diversity of learners and seek to improve student accessibility to course
content. The research team aims to develop and test a new instrument to assess
the degree to which UDL is being used in courses. The project will create two
faculty workshops to prepare mathematics faculty to implement UDL in their
courses. Improving student learning outcomes in foundational mathematics courses
should help students improve their progress towards graduation in STEM majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to train mathematics
faculty so that they can implement teaching strategies that lead to improvements
in student learning outcomes. The specific goals of the project are: (1) to
develop and validate an assessment instrument that can be used to assess the
extent to which UDL is being used in a course; (2) to train mathematics faculty
to use UDL guidelines to re-design their courses; and (3) to use UDL to improve
student learning in introductory mathematics courses. The research plan
addresses research gaps in understanding the effectiveness of faculty
professional development in increasing the use of UDL in undergraduate courses,
how UDL implementations are assessed, and how variability in faculty
implementation of the UDL framework impacts instruction. The new assessment
instrument, faculty development programs, and research results will be
disseminated to the mathematics education community through national conferences
and mathematics education publications so that other mathematics educators will
have the opportunity to adapt this approach to their institutions. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.