* 2142377
* Inclusive Excellence in STEM: Addressing Inequities in Undergraduate Student Access and Achievement through Integration of STEM-Focused, Equity-Minded Pedagogy
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Roxanne Hulet, Skagit Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,938.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
addressing inequities in undergraduate STEM students’ access, learning, and
degree completion. These inequities will be addressed in this project via three
primary areas. First, the project seeks to increase use of inclusive, student-
centered teaching practices. Second, the project seeks to implement high impact
practices supporting STEM student engagement. Third, the project seeks to
improve student access to STEM degrees by restructuring mathematics course
pathways. The project will create and support equity-focused collaborative
professional development groups for STEM faculty to increase faculty awareness
of equity-mindedness. STEM faculty will implement and support inclusive teaching
and high impact practices designed to improve student success and specifically
address the needs of students from underrepresented STEM student populations.
The project will increase student access to STEM degrees by developing
innovative accelerated models for pre-college mathematics to improve student
completion of mathematics prerequisites required for STEM degrees. This project
aims to advance understanding of mechanisms and institutional reforms
contributing to student success in STEM degree pathways at community colleges.
It will also provide greater insight about factors contributing to meaningful
and sustainable changes in STEM faculty teaching practices. Additionally, this
project has potential to increase the impact of equity-focused teaching for
improving underrepresented student success in STEM
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project specifically addresses the needs of
students from underrepresented STEM student populations, including racially
minoritized, first-generation, low-income, and female students. The project
will: 1) increase awareness and use of inclusive pedagogical practices by STEM
faculty, 2) utilize high impact practices to address equity gaps in access and
achievement in STEM degrees and improve student persistence and success in STEM
courses and programs, and 3) increase student transition and success rates in
calculus-based mathematics prerequisites. This project provides an opportunity
to generate much needed knowledge for STEM educators at two-year institutions,
including a greater understanding of the successful interventions for community
college students, where aspiring STEM students are more likely to be
academically unprepared, first-generation, older, working, and/or from
underrepresented student groups. The broader impact of this project allows for a
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to student
success in STEM degree pathways. Focusing on the impact of culturally
responsive, inclusive teaching approaches for student success within STEM, the
project seeks to determine if implementation of culturally responsive and
inclusive teaching approaches within introductory STEM courses, combined with
high impact practices, peer mentoring, and undergraduate research experiences,
result in improved outcomes for students, and especially students from
underrepresented groups. The evaluation of the project’s overall success and
progress towards outcomes will be based on the achievement of objectives,
resulting in improved STEM student access, retention, and degree completion,
curricular redesign and implementation, and a shift in faculty culture. The
project asks the following research questions: 1) What activities result in
changed beliefs and teaching practices within 2-year institutions and produce
STEM departments more focused to address the needs of underrepresented STEM
student populations? 2) What are the impacts of restructuring and accelerating
pre-calculus math pathways to reduce structural barriers to STEM participation
and promoting overall student access and success in STEM, including the
participation and achievement of underrepresented STEM students? The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.