* 2142491
* CAREER: Experimentally Testing the Role of Sympagic Algae in Sea-ice Environments using a Laboratory Scale Ice-tank.
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Jodi Young, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2027
* USD 398,931.00

Sea ice in Antarctic coastal waters shape ecosystems, both in the surface waters
and at the bottom of the ocean, environments that depend on algae living in sea
ice for their productivity. With high variability in sea ice formation and melt
between years and as a response to climate change, it is of importance to obtain
better understanding of the interaction of sea ice with algae, as well as
provide better data for global climate models. This project will accomplish
those goals by measuring phytoplankton growth and cellular properties in sea ice
with experiments performed using an ice tank. Laboratory experiments will be
based on previous observations in the Antarctic Peninsula coastal waters,
providing realistic conditions to emulate. The scientific importance of the
proposed work aligns with the National Science Foundation goals to understand
the biological and chemical properties of sea ice bio-geo-chemistry and its
feedbacks with seasonal sea ice dynamics and climate. The finding from this
project will be of interest to a broad scientific community, including
oceanographers, biologists, chemists, and ecosystem and ocean modelers. To
address the scarcity of data on sea ice microbes that limits our ability to
predict future Antarctic climate with accuracy, the principal investigator will
develop an Antarctic Science Minor in order to train future scientists with an
environmental perspective and prepare the future US workforce with a strong
scientific background on Earth and Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a paucity of data to understand the
processes underlying observed patters in sea ice quality and their interaction
with the sea-ice microbial community. This project will provide a mechanistic
understanding of primary production and physiology of sympagic algae over the
seasonal cycle of formation and melt of Antarctic sea ice. Although sea ice is
central to the Antarctic coastal ecosystems, little is known of how they affect,
and are in turn affected, by sea-ice algae. This project concentrates on first-
year sea ice, forming and melting each year, creating unique and very dynamic
habitats. The study will be structured by 4 main objectives: 1) how different
algal species adapt to the seasonal changes in sea ice conditions, 2) how
different methods to measure primary production (carbon dioxide drawdown, oxygen
production and variable fluorescence) relate in sea ice and differ from sea
water measurements, 3) how sympagic algae influence the physical structure of
sea ice, 4) how sympagic algae contribute to organic matter cycling during ice
melt. Due to expected changes in sea ice due to climate change, this study is
uniquely positioned to provide needed data on short-term and seasonal processes.
Results from this study will be useful to refine models of algal production in
Antarctic and Arctic ecosystems, data not available to date as sea ice and its
biogeochemistry are often poorly represented in earth system models. This
project will also provide education for graduate and undergraduate students as
well as material to develop class curriculum for middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.