* 2142904
* CAREER: Leveraging benthic foraminiferal biogeography to recognize ecosystem responses to climate change and engage first-generation students in scientific inquiry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Christina Belanger, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2027
* USD 213,727.00

This project aims to understand how ancient ocean ecosystems were altered by
past warming events that serve as analogs for future global environmental
change. By analyzing both modern and ancient marine sedimentary records, PI
Belanger will determine the range of ecosystem changes possible with future
warming and identify ocean regions that are most vulnerable to its negative
impacts, including the loss of oceanic oxygen. This assessment is important for
the maintenance of economically valuable marine resources. Further, this work
will identify ocean regions important for CO2 storage during past warming and
improve our ability to forecast how the global carbon cycle will respond to
ongoing climate change, which is critical for formulating national climate-
related polices. PI Belanger will mentor first-generation college students in
research related to this project via a structured program developed through this
grant, which will enhance their retention in STEM fields and, thus, broaden our
future STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The delivery of organic matter
produced in the surface water to the deep ocean fluctuates with climate change,
which affects the amount of CO2 stored in the ocean as well as the distribution
of oxygen and organisms. Single-celled organisms, such as benthic foraminifera,
living on the ocean floor vary depending on the organic matter and oxygen
available, thus their fossilized remains preserved in ocean sediment cores can
be used to reconstruct these environmental factors over time. This project will
create a global database of modern and fossil benthic foraminifera, quantify the
relationships between benthic foraminifera and modern oceanic conditions, and
apply those relationships to marine sedimentary core records to reconstruct
spatial patterns in oceanic changes during past warming events. This data-driven
project will provide accessible research experiences to first-generation college
students and create a supportive community through a newly-developed program
which will broaden participantsâ€™ mentor networks and provide skills-training
needed to pursue advanced STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This statement is
non-editable and added to every proposal Abstract once it has been saved in
eJacket. This statement is viewable after the Abstract has been saved, and is
read-only.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.