* 2142074
* Investigating How Life Science Students Develop Lasting Skill in Making Connections Between Physics and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Catherine Crouch, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,993.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving instruction in the
introductory college physics courses that are taken by many students in the life
sciences and health professions. Introductory Physics for Life Sciences (IPLS)
courses are designed to make physics accessible and exciting for the thousands
of students who take introductory physics as a requirement for entering the
health professions or studying the life sciences. Those courses emphasize
physical concepts and competencies that life science professionals have
identified as most useful for life science students, and the courses present the
concepts and competencies in appropriate biomedical contexts. Since physics is
an increasingly important foundation for the health professions and the life
sciences, helping future practitioners become more skilled and motivated to use
physics in their work has great potential to improve their work. Past studies
have shown that IPLS courses can be effective and can have a long-lasting
positive impact on students' attitudes toward physics and on their skill in
using physics to solve biological problems in their later work. This project
aims to understand how IPLS courses achieve those outcomes at multiple
institutions. In particular, the investigators will explore how the topics
covered, the pedagogical strategies employed, and the messages conveyed shape
students' experiences in the course. The conclusions of this research will guide
other colleges to achieve similar outcomes as they launch or revise their own
IPLS courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address two central
research questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) How does an IPLS course support the
development of students' interest in physics, a sense of self-efficacy, and an
interdisciplinary identity (taken together, "physics affinity")?&lt;br/&gt;(2)
How does an IPLS course support students in successfully applying physics to
model and analyze biological situations? Specifically, how do the course's
curricular, pedagogical, and interpersonal elements connect to the process of
becoming a skilled problem-solver?&lt;br/&gt;To answer those questions, the
investigators will use existing survey instruments, students' written
reflections, students' written work on synthetic tasks applying physics to
biology, interviews with students, and other tasks. Some products of the project
will include a "physics affinity" survey (which will include elements related to
self-efficacy, achievement goals, interdisciplinary attitudes, and motivation),
reflection prompts and synthesis tasks, a set of guidelines for IPLS developers
and instructors, and a set of student developmental profiles that illustrate how
different students develop skills and physics affinity in different ways. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.