* 2142149
* Building Legacy in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Shawhin Roudbari, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,300,000.00

This project will serve the national interest by creating a model for effective
educational transformation that develops practical and replicable processes
across institutional boundaries leading to inclusive institutional
transformation. These processes will teach the importance of cultural empathy
and effectively prepare undergraduate engineering students to build knowledge
and 21st -century skills (teamwork, problem-solving, critical thinking, and
communication). Undergraduate students from the University of Colorado at
Boulder and Tuskegee University will form a collaborative cohort to tackle each
year's educational objective dealing with aspects of food insecurity and food
scarcity. The project will focus on co-facilitation and co-learning across
institutions through an outside of the classroom undergraduate project set on
land co-located near one of the collaborating universities. The central
hypothesis is that an inter-institution approach to educational transformation,
one centered on democratizing the practice of innovation across institutional
boundaries, will effectively prepare next-generation innovators and engineers to
address systemic and institutional biases within STEM by challenging educational
norms in higher education. A total of one hundred students will be focused on a
common goal of a learning living lab that will be sustained for future
generations (legacy building). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This inter-institutional
project is built on a theoretical framework, "Participatory Action Learning and
Action Research (PALAR) for Community Engagement," which has four recurring
stages: plan-act-observe-reflect. The PALAR-based model will involve an
undergraduate focused community engagement project geared towards effective,
collaborative, innovative, and self-developed engagement by faculty and students
from different academic units and institutions. The research team will complete
the objectives and activities leading to deliverables for building an
educational model focused on innovation across institutions to achieve this
goal. These deliverables will fill a gap for addressing barriers to educational
transformation, including integrating learning around real situations across
institutions. Key dissemination elements will include: a replicable educational
model, an inter-institution informal curriculum, scholarly publications, and
workshops. Two key objectives frame the work. The first is to understand what
kind of research, knowledge, and action is needed to achieve practical community
engagement and improvement for social justice and positive, transformative, and
sustainable change by tackling historical and institutional forms of racial
inequity. The second is to produce evidence and further understand
organizational context factors that improve or constrain knowledge sharing
across institutions. Data sources will include observations, stakeholder
interviews, focus group discussions, surveys, and documents (reflective
diary/journals). The research team will use this qualitative data to understand
the collaborating institutions' enablers and obstacles to develop the joint
undergraduate educational model for community benefit. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.