* 2142948
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Preparing Gulf Coast Cyber Scholars
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Angela Clark, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,056,582.00

This award supports the continuation of the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service
(SFS) project at the University of South Alabama (USA) that promotes
cybersecurity education and research excellence to prepare graduates to work in
critical cybersecurity positions within the federal government's executive
workforce. This project will support 20 students, with a mix of 3-year
undergraduate-to-masters, 2-year masters, and 3-year doctoral students, and it
builds on the institution's strong commitment to cybersecurity education and
research. For example, cybersecurity components are included in USA’s
undergraduate Computer Science and Information Technology programs, master’s
level Computer Science and Information Systems programs, and a doctoral program
in Computing. These academic paths produce graduates who can fill a wide range
of cybersecurity positions, from network security analysts to advanced
cybersecurity researchers. USA has a record of meeting the needs of a diverse
student body, and a high percentage of the students come from rural or
financially depressed areas. Moreover, in the current cohort of scholars, 34% of
CyberCorps® students are female, and 16% are members of ethnic groups that are
underrepresented in their pursuit of careers in the field. The project team
expects to maintain and exceed this diversity during this renewal award by
increasing targeted recruiting, community awareness, and long-term K-12 STEM
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USA program builds upon four
foundations: 1) the resources of the University of South Alabama and its School
of Computing (SoC), 2) the academic programs within the SoC, 3) a mature and
dynamic cybersecurity curriculum across SoC programs along with experienced
faculty who support both cybersecurity research and education, and 4) the
strength of a vibrant research center focused on forensics, information
technology, and cybersecurity. USA's scholars benefit from core fundamental
cybersecurity coursework and cutting-edge cybersecurity research. The project
aims to recruit and graduate 20 students over four cohorts. USA's project team
provides tailored academic and research mentorship with a goal to achieve 100%
program completion and placement into cybersecurity positions with a targeted
focus on employment within the federal executive workforce. The success of
program objectives will be assessed using both internal and external
reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.