* 2142120
* The Culturally Sustaining Mathematics Education Project to Enhance Mathematics Pre-Service Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Nicola Edwards, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,989.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the preparation of
K-12 teachers to teach mathematics. K-8 pre-service teachers often struggle to
deeply understand the mathematics that they will teach as future teachers.
Additionally, Secondary Mathematics Education majors and Mathematics majors
sometimes lack the deep understanding of foundational mathematics that is
necessary for success in upper level mathematics courses. For students
historically underrepresented in mathematics, mathematics learning may seem
disconnected from real life experiences. This project seeks to help students at
a minority serving institution deepen their mathematics understanding and
performance so that they can be successful in their math courses and in their
future careers. The project plans to transform mathematics learning by
connecting students’ personal identities and cultural understandings of the
world to their mathematics understanding. The lessons will be student-centered
so that students can use their prerequisite knowledge and discuss their ideas
freely as they solve authentic problems individually or through group
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to transform the Mathematics for
Teachers course instruction and curriculum with culturally sustaining pedagogy
and inquiry-based teaching and learning methods. Mathematics Education faculty
will collaborate to revise the Mathematics for Teachers courses, which serve
elementary education and middle grades education majors. The revised courses
will implement culturally sustaining pedagogies (CSP) and inquiry-based
instruction. Secondary Math Education and Mathematics majors will serve as peer
tutors for the revised courses. Both tutors and learners will develop their
mathematical proficiencies and identities in a culturally sustaining mathematics
learning environment. The purpose is to improve K-8 preservice teachers'
learning outcomes, to increase the mathematics proficiency of K-12 pre-service
teachers and mathematic majors, to increase the passing rate of K-8 pre-service
teachers enrolled in Math for Teachers courses, to increase the number of
students retained in Elementary Education majors and Middle-level mathematics
majors from freshmen to sophomore year, and to improve the mathematics
identities of K-12 pre-service teachers and mathematic majors. This project
hopes to produce a model that supports the mathematics learning of students who
have been historically underserved in mathematics by connecting students’
personal identities and their mathematics learning experiences. The project will
examine undergraduate preservice teachers’ and mathematics majors’ mathematics
learning and achievement in the context of a historically black university,
where 81% of the undergraduate students are from racial and ethnic groups
traditionally underrepresented in mathematics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. Partial funding for the project is from the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.