* 2142101
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Characterization and Functional Validation of the Genetic Architecture of Skin Pigmentation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Brenna Henn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 30,164.00

Research on the evolution of human skin pigmentation includes the
characterization of this characteristic's underlying genetic variation. Recent
studies have shown that the number of genes associated with skin pigmentation
differs across populations and that much of this genetic variation is still
unidentified due to underrepresentation of some populations in human genetic
research. This doctoral dissertation project lays the groundwork necessary to
model human skin pigmentation evolution by characterizing and functionally
validating the genetic architecture of skin pigmentation in a population that
has been underrepresented in such research. Data generated from this project can
inform several pigmentation research objectives, including understanding the
role of natural selection in shaping this human trait. The project can also be
used as a model for research on other complex genetic traits and may inform
other fields including bioarchaeology and forensic anthropology. Additionally,
this project contributes to the skill development of undergraduate and graduate
students through wet lab, computational, and fieldwork
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team conducts fieldwork to collect
paired genetic and pigmentation data from individuals in a population with high
levels of ancestral alleles and higher levels of genetic diversity than other
extant human populations. The research presents an opportunity to research
pigmentation variation that may have been present in ancestral human
populations, and therefore potentially broadens our understanding of
pigmentation genetics globally. Newly collected samples will be genotyped and
then evaluated using a genome-wide association (GWA) approach. Data from four
different descent populations will be meta-analyzed to increase power to detect
low-effect size loci. Regions identified in the GWA study are not necessarily
causal pigmentation loci, rendering functional validation necessary. Top
candidate genes are therefore identified and functionally evaluated for
causality with CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats) gene editing in zebrafish, an effective model organism to study human
skin pigmentation. Using a rapid automated phenotyping platform to image larvae,
pigmentation is analyzed comparing CRISPR- mosaic “knockout” fish with “mock”
injected sibling controls. This strategy can functionally verify whether novel
associated genes from the GWAS are causal pigmentation
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.