* 2142521
* Assessing Peer Mentorship as a Scalable Intervention to Promote the Academic Success and Retention of Diverse Undergraduate Biology Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Mike Wilton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 292,236.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
biology student academic success and retention in the major. At most
universities in the United States, roughly 50% of undergraduate biology students
leave the major within the first two years of their studies. To address this
concern, most institutions put in place a number of first-year student support
programs. There are, however, considerable challenges and significantly fewer
supports for biology students in their second year of study when the student
retention rate is at its lowest. This project seeks to improve the success of
second year biology majors by implementing and characterizing near-peer
mentorship programs at two research-intensive, minority serving institutions.
Upper division biology peer mentors who have themselves overcome common barriers
to student success will provide academic insights and supports tailored to their
second-year biology major mentees. Importantly, this project is intended to shed
light on the theoretical mechanisms by which peer mentorship promotes mentee
academic success. Advancing understanding of how peer mentorship works may
enable wide adoption and successful implementation of this strategy at a
national level across various post-secondary academic settings. In turn, this
should increase the number, quality, and diversity of students graduating with
STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess the impact of peer mentorship,
this project will employ a rigorous randomized control research design that will
enable the assessment of how peer mentorship influences mentee (1) short-term
and longer-term academic performance and retention and (2) sense of belonging,
academic self-efficacy, and academic habit complexity. Additionally, the project
will include a focus on identifying and investigating effective near-peer
mentorship practices to assess how these behaviors impact mentee outcomes. To
assess whether peer mentorship is a scalable intervention at diverse
universities, this project will implement peer mentorship programs at two large,
public Hispanic-serving institutions where both biology programs share similar
academic challenges at the second year level. The mentorship structure will
include mentee:mentor cohorts in 6:1 ratios, a seminar course where mentees
participate in guided discussions on topics relevant to student success, and
weekly mentor check-ins. To characterize these mentorship structures and achieve
the previously mentioned goals, data will be collected from a variety of
sources. Institutional Research groups at each project site will provide
academic grades, major declaration, and demographic data for mentees, while
project-generated survey instruments will capture mentee noncognitive impacts
and mentor behaviors linked with these outcomes. Combined, these data will
advance understanding of how peer mentoring promotes student academic success in
challenging STEM majors. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.