* 2142131
* Developing Students’ Systems Thinking and Data Analytics Skills in Civil and Environmental Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Swaminathan Krishnan, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2024
* USD 298,894.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating active learning
experiences that will help students develop systems thinking and data analytics
skills in civil and environmental engineering. Students will learn how to
analyze civil engineering systems to support data-driven decision making. These
skills will enable students to design, build, operate, monitor, and maintain
large complex civil infrastructure systems. A project-based learning approach
can help students learn system design and analysis skills by applying
engineering methods taught in class to real world problems. This project will
develop seven educational modules that include a mini project, a dataset for a
civil engineering system, assessment questions, and multimedia content in which
example problems are solved. The effectiveness of the modules in improving
students’ systems thinking and data analytics skills will be assessed in the
context of multiple existing civil engineering courses. The results will be used
to inform the development and implementation of the modules. Interactive
workshops will be offered for civil engineering faculty to disseminate project
results, train faculty in the use of the modules, and obtain feedback that will
help guide the development and usage of the modules. Faculty who are interested
in adopting the modules will be able to download them from online repositories.
This project will help prepare students for the complex systems problems that
they will encounter in the engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to improve student learning in civil engineering by
introducing cross-cutting themes of systems thinking and data analytics in
existing courses. This project will develop seven educational modules for the
cross-cutting themes: (1) systems thinking; (2) modeling; (3) cost, economics,
and long-range planning; (4) optimization and decision making; (5) machine
learning; (6) network analysis; and (7) data collection. Each module will
include instructional materials describing how to adapt the module to courses, a
presentation to help instructors teach the techniques used in the module,
examples showing how to solve related problems, questions for assessing student
learning outcomes, a dataset, and a mini project so that students can apply the
techniques they have learned. This project will assess the impact on students by
addressing a set of research questions including: (1) To what extent does
student learning of systems/analytics increase after use of the modules? (2) To
what extent can students apply analytics techniques in different civil
infrastructure planning, operations, and management contexts? (3) Have students’
mindset/attitude about the importance of systems thinking and analytics changed
as a result of the modules? This study will collect assessment data for a
control group that does not use the modules and a treatment group that uses the
modules to determine differences due to the modules. To disseminate the results
and obtain feedback from multiple stakeholders, including industry and the
engineering education community, two workshops will be convened. The workshops
will be run as charrettes, an interactive form of participant engagement that
solicits feedback and reflection for the co-creation of knowledge. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.