* 2142136
* Developing and Implementing Case-Based Scenarios to Support Elementary Pre-service Teachers’ Enactment of Equitable Mathematics and Science Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Lauren Barth-Cohen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,971.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving future elementary
teachers’ equitable mathematics and science instruction through the development
of cased-based scenarios. This project aligns with the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) program goals of developing a new teaching practice and
curricular innovation that has the potential to improve undergraduate teacher
preparation in STEM education. This project intends to investigate how cased-
based scenarios (also referred to as cases) that present authentic teaching
dilemmas can be used in university methods courses to enhance future elementary
teachers’ ability to enact equitable mathematics and science instruction. In
collaboration with in-service teachers, the project is developing cases that
represent actual classroom situations that attend to elementary students’
cultural resources and lived experiences, as well as issues of power and status
in classrooms. These project-developed cases are to be implemented in
university-based elementary mathematics and science methods courses where pre-
service teachers engage with ways to mitigate deepening educational inequities
through cases as a learning tool. The research team intends to develop
principles that others can use to design cases focused on equitable mathematics
and science teaching. Cases resulting from this project will be made available
for public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenge of supporting
elementary pre-service teachers in enactment of culturally grounded mathematics
and science, this project involves designing a series of cases capturing
authentic voices of in-service elementary teachers from a variety of backgrounds
and settings. These cases will then be implemented in university-based
elementary mathematics and science methods courses, providing new learning
opportunities for pre-service teachers. A design-based research approach
utilizing qualitative analyses and computational data analytics techniques will
investigate the following research questions: How does in-service teachers’
expertise about culturally grounded pedagogy influence the development of cases
focused on mathematics and science teaching? How can an expansive framing
approach to implementing cases in methods courses support pre-service teachers’
learning? How does this approach support pre-service teachers’ learning of
culturally grounded pedagogy in mathematics and science? What design principles
can be used to develop cases that enhance pre-service teacher learning of
mathematics and science content and culturally grounded pedagogy? By examining
pre-service teachers’ written responses and dialogue when interacting with
cases, along with surveys, journal entries, and performance on a consequential
learning task, results are expected to contribute to knowledge regarding pre-
service teachers’ learning of culturally grounded mathematics and science
pedagogy in methods courses. Project results are to be disseminated via
scholarly presentations and manuscripts, a project website, podcast episodes,
and professional development sessions/workshop series for P-12 practitioners.
This project has the potential to benefit the STEM education community and
society at large by working to prepare future elementary teachers to mitigate
deepening educational inequities in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools. Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.