* 2142789
* Micromechanics of Interactions Between Hard Magnetic Particles and Soft Matrix on Magneto-Mechanical Actuation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ruike Renee Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 395,170.00

This award studies the micromechanics of the magneto-mechanical actuation of
hard-magnetic soft active materials. These materials utilize the interactions
between embedded hard-magnetic particles and applied magnetic fields to achieve
actuation of the soft matrix materials. Hard-magnetic soft active materials are
a new group of soft active materials that can be activated rapidly, reversibly,
and remotely. These materials are composites with hard-magnetic particles
embedded in soft matrices. The actuation is achieved through transferring the
magnetic micro-torques in the magnetic particles to the soft matrix. They have
demonstrated many advantages, such as untethered complex deformation, rapid
response speed, and reversible actuation, showing promising potential for
applications in soft robots and biomedical devices. However, due to the
relatively new development of these materials, the understanding of how the
microscopic behavior drives the macroscopic material actuation remains unknown.
The work will provide the fundamental knowledge of the magneto-mechanical
actuation mechanism of hard-magnetic soft active materials at the micromechanics
level, the theory that can connect macroscopic effective properties with
microscopic structures, and the understanding of how the stretch-induced
softening effect can affect the macroscopic actuation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new knowledge on how particle-
particle and particle-matrix interactions can contribute individually and
collectively to the actuation by using a micromechanics approach. The new
knowledge will be used in a theoretical model to obtain the effective residual
magnetic flux density. The work will also investigate how the Mullins effect
affects actuation. The synergetic development on theoretical models, simulations
and experimental testing will provide an effective platform to correlate the
micromechanics and macroscale mechanical response of stimuli-responsive soft
composites with micro-fillers. The project will use the exciting demonstrations
of hard-magnetic soft active materials in soft robots as vehicles to promote
STEM education with a focus on students from underrepresented groups as well as
K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.