* 2142238
* Developing Computational Efficacy and Skill Within an Inclusive Community of Practice in the Natural Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Raychelle Burks, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building students’
computational thinking (CT) skills and computing self-efficacy in biology and
chemistry majors in a community of practice (CoP). The computational training
for students in biology and chemistry disciplines is typically insufficient in
preparing students to develop computing tools for various projects and
applications in their own disciplines. In order to improve students’ computing
knowledge and skills, this project plans to incorporate four computational
interventions in the curricula of biology and chemistry majors. The
interventions include two seminars, a coding workshop, and pair programming
projects. The project intends to investigate the effect of these four
computational interventions on students’ CT skills, computing self-efficacy,
career interests, and outcomes. The target participants in this project are
first- and second-year undergraduate students who are typically unprepared for
biology, chemistry and other STEM majors. The proposed project will also produce
a novel, streamlined CT assessment instrument that can be widely deployed for
larger-scale research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an alliance
consisting of two host and four satellite institutions across three states. The
CoP spanning the alliance will include novice to experienced practitioners
engaging in reciprocal communication, mentorship, teaching, and learning.
Project personnel aim to determine the core interventions and key components
contributing to the greatest gains in students’ CT skills and computing self-
efficacy and to identify factors that motivate participation within each
setting. The project team hopes to identify ways to effectively scale and adapt
the projects across multiple types of institutions within the alliance. The
project intends to advance the current knowledge base about best practices in
education and development of computational skills for biology and chemistry
majors. The project results will be disseminated to various peer-reviewed
education journals, regional and national conferences. The workshop materials
and instructor resources will be available on the project website, which will
facilitate onboarding for additional Alliance partners. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.