* 2142779
* I-Corps: Development of pneumatic memory elements for controlling soft robots with air
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Michael Tolley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a robotic control that uses air. Rather than controlling robotic
systems with microcontrollers and motors, the proposed technology controls
commercial robotic platforms with air using minimal electronics. The control
approach has not been used in a commercial robotic product to date but may
decrease the manufacturing and assembly costs of commercial robotic systems
while maintaining or expanding the capabilities of robots. Initially, the
pneumatic components will be used to control a robotic toy as a commercially-
viable stepping-stone for powering and controlling commercial robotic systems
with pneumatic circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of pneumatic memory elements to control the movement of robots
with air. The robots move by pumping air through channels and embedded air-
powered valves. Traditional robots require a motor to control every actuated
joint while the proposed technology only requires one pressure source, such as a
pump, to control multiple movements. Recently published results demonstrate the
use of air-powered circuits inspired by neural circuits found in animals, called
central pattern generators, to control the rhythmic motions of a walking robot
without using electronics. The robot was equipped with valves acting as
inverters that cause a high-pressure state to spread throughout an air-powered
circuit. The robot also was equipped with simple pressure-activated mechanical
sensors to change the movement of the robotic appendages. The goal is to
transfer this soft robotic technology into a commercially viable
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.