* 2142720
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Bridge or Barrier? The Impact of Horizontal Transfer on Genetic Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Brandon Ogbunugafor, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 01/31/2025
* USD 321,668.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria are an essential part of life on
earth, but we do not really understand how they rapidly adapt to new
environments. Genes in bacteria are not only inherited from parent to offspring
but can also transfer between different species. This “horizontal gene transfer”
is often caused by small genetic elements called conjugative plasmids. These
plasmids carry the machinery to move copies of themselves into new bacterial
cells. A gene on one of these plasmids can inhabit very different host cells
over time. A mutation in this gene may then have different effects in each host.
This means genes could evolve differently during parent offspring transmission
than when they are transferred horizontally between species. This project
combines mathematical models and experiments with different bacterial species to
measure the effect of horizontal transfer on the evolution of an antibiotic
resistance gene and determine how that influences adaptation to changing
conditions. Because antibiotic resistance genes are often located on these
plasmids, this will aid in combating the evolution of drug resistance.
Additional broader impacts include the development of learning tools and a new
undergraduate course that will provide authentic research experiences for
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three research aims. First, the
researchers will propagate communities with combinations of three bacterial
species (Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, and Klebsiella pneumoniae) and
monitor the evolution of a plasmid-borne gene coding for resistance to beta-
lactam antibiotics. Horizontal gene transfer will be manipulated during this
process to determine the role of transfer between species in evolution of drug
resistance. Second, genetically engineered bacteria will be used to determine
why certain mutational sets are favored during horizontal transfer.
Mathematically modeling of the results will produce predictions about whether
horizontal transfer speeds or hinders the evolution of drug resistance. Third,
the researchers will build a computational model to incorporate more realistic
features of microbial communities, including more complex environments,
migration, and competition between different bacterial species. This model will
be tested in live bacterial communities with horizontal transfer turned on or
off through plasmid engineering. Overall, this project will elucidate the role
that horizontal genetic inheritance plays in the evolution of bacterial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.