* 2142608
* Cultivating Learners' Autonomy to Improve Math Skills for STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* MD Sarder, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2025
* USD 298,005.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing students'
motivation to achieve early mastery of essential math skills (i.e., basic
procedural math skills) necessary for success in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Based on self-determination theory, this
IUSE Engaged Student Learning Level 1 project will develop motivational features
for the STEM Fluency system, an online training system that aims to improve
students' mastery of essential math skills via explicit practice. The
motivational features will support students' autonomy during the online training
by providing students meaningful choice and rationale to increase their
motivation to engage with the training. The project will improve students'
mastery of essential math skills and positively impact students' persistence and
progress in STEM undergraduate programs. The project will also generate design
principles that will inform researchers' future endeavors to improve students'
engagement in online training on a variety of STEM topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM undergraduate students often do not possess essential
math skills that are foundational to solve STEM problems, or they are far from
fluent in their use. The goal of the project is to develop an enhanced STEM
Fluency system that addresses students' motivational needs to complete essential
math skill training, particularly for those who are underprepared and
underrepresented in STEM. The development of the enhanced STEM Fluency system
will follow the stages of design-based research to iteratively improve the
enhanced system through analysis, design, development, implementation, and
evaluation. The central question of the project is to what extent the essential
math skill training in the enhanced STEM Fluency system affects students' sense
of autonomy, mastery of essential math skills, and self-efficacy. To address
this question, the project team will conduct quasi-experiments by comparing the
effectiveness of the original system to an enhanced system with integrated
autonomy-supportive features. The project team will also use validated learning
assessment instruments, surveys, and interviews both to iteratively improve the
design and to test the efficacy of the enhanced system. The research findings
will be disseminated via conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal
publications, and workshops. This project will advance understanding of how to
increase student engagement in online STEM training and benefit society by
developing a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.