* 2142248
* Collaborative Research: Innovating Quantum-Inspired Learning for Undergraduates in Research and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a quantum
information science and technology curriculum with experiential learning for
undergraduate STEM students. Emerging quantum technologies promise to
revolutionize computing, communication, networking, and sensing in
unconventional ways and with information security. This has created a need for a
new generation of engineers, scientists, and programmers who can apply quantum
science and technology principles in the STEM workforce. The multidisciplinary
nature of quantum technologies poses challenges to providing a comprehensive
education for students from different degree programs who may lack the technical
background in some areas. This project aims to lower entry barriers for
students, to develop transferable skillsets for quantum computing and
engineering, to generate knowledge about conditions for creative teaching and
effective student learning in this multidisciplinary field, and to prepare
students for entering this rapidly emerging field. The success of this project
should lead to large numbers of undergraduate engineering and science students
equipped with essential quantum knowledge and skills and a new quantum education
program adaptable for undergraduate STEM students at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
advance knowledge of the learning process for undergraduate students from
multiple STEM disciplines in studying quantum information science and
technology, and then to develop new online modules and a scalable learning
paradigm for effectively teaching quantum fundamentals. The scope includes both
software and hardware aspects and encompasses related engineering and science
disciplines. The project team plans to study the technical and cognitive entry
barriers to quantum science and engineering, create modules for teaching quantum
fundamentals, develop experiential learning tools, and seamlessly integrate new
tools and modules into existing undergraduate engineering curricula. The
research team will investigate the conditions under which improved student
learning of quantum science and engineering occurs and further study the
effectiveness of the created tools and approaches. The new quantum engineering
learning platform and curriculum developed in this project should advance
engineering and science education and workforce development in this emerging
technology frontier. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.