* 2142827
* CAREER: Synergistic Approaches for Specialized Intelligent Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Meng Jiang, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2027
* USD 211,164.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent assistance systems
currently lack the in-depth knowledge needed to automatically provide effective
responses in specialized domains, such as emotional support on social media.
Manually creating specialized knowledge bases or a one-fits-all model is
expensive and infeasible. Existing research on intelligent assistance systems
tackles three important sub-problems, user modeling, information extraction, and
text generation, but considers these problems to be separate and so addresses
them with separate methods. The underlying assumption is that there is no need
for cross-utilization of the information needed to address or the knowledge
learned by addressing each sub-problem. For instance, knowledge bases or
knowledge graphs need no or little expansion by information extraction methods
to obtain all the facts. Similarly, language models would have been well trained
for generating an answer to the factual question and need no information from
the other methods. This underlying assumption is too simplistic and does not
hold for specialized intelligent assistance. This project addresses this
limitation by discovering and utilizing synergies in user modeling, information
extraction, and text generation. The PI designs, develops, and evaluates novel
algorithms to assist individuals who are suffering from anxiety, depression, and
other types of mental issues and who are seeking help on social media.
Furthermore, this research supports the cross-disciplinary development of a
diverse cohort of PhD and undergraduate students at Notre
Dame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed algorithms mutually enhance one another
by sharing knowledge. The technical aims of the project are divided into three
thrusts. The first thrust develops novel information extraction methods to
enhance the construction of mental health ontologies from social media data.
These methods convert unstructured social media data into structured data for
efficient retrieval and learning. The second thrust develops novel natural
language generation techniques to create textual responses with user models and
ontologies, enabling personalization and knowledge awareness. The third thrust
enhances user models with novel contextualized representation learning
algorithms that learn from user behavior data and structured knowledge. The
proposed algorithms preserve the spatio-temporal behavioral patterns of users
and their generated content to more precisely reflect their situations and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.