* 2142610
* CAREER: Liquid Metal Processing of Magnesium Composites for Microstructure Refinement
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Mehdi Razavi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 02/28/2027
* USD 606,413.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
advance the current state of magnesium implants for skeletal repair in humans by
developing a new liquid-metal processing strategy, discovering process-
structure-property relationships, and aiming to achieve the performance
necessary for larger implants than are currently possible. Bioabsorbable
magnesium implants are used in skeletal repairs and tissue reinforcement, but
large implants corrode too rapidly and, as a result, also generate harmful
hydrogen gas pockets. This problem limits the magnesium implants to small
structures such as bone screws and coronary stents. Because corrosion can not be
controlled adequately by existing manufacturing processes, magnesium and its
alloys can not presently be used for full-size weight-bearing implant
applications. To overcome these challenges, this research will help to
understand and control the microstructural evolution during the implant
manufacturing process and improve corrosion resistance by creating finer
microstructures. The new process, called Severe Ultrasonic Melt Shearing (SUMS),
will enable manufacturing of magnesium composite implants with refined
microstructure and ultra-low uniform corrosion. The research will aid the
adoption of magnesium in large-scale and small-scale applications for
orthopedic, craniomaxillofacial, cardiovascular, ureteral, and esophageal
implants. It also will have a direct impact on the field of metallurgy, which
can use the SUMS process for production of high-quality, ultrafine-grained
composites. Research activities will be integrated into new educational
initiatives that promote advanced education about biometals manufacturing among
students at all levels, with special attention to Hispanic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SUMS process creates potential nucleating
particles by dispersing oxide films into the melt that can initiate the
nucleation events, resulting in the grain refinement. Simultaneous induction of
intensive shearing and acoustic streaming in the melt is meant to disintegrate
and thoroughly disperse the clusters of reinforcing nanoparticles, resulting in
microstructure homogeneity and reduced melt segregation. The rectified diffusion
of the dissolved gas in melt into the cavitation bubbles can de-gas the melt,
resulting in the elimination of casting-induced defects related to gas porosity.
The research team will develop integrated computational and experimental
approaches to understand the dynamics of the SUMS process and provide insight
into how to achieve high shearing and acoustic cavitation in the magnesium
composite melt. The award supports fundamental research to understand the
mechanisms of microstructural refinement, elucidate how microstructure can alter
corrosion, and unravel the guiding principles of magnesium composite production
with ultra-low uniform corrosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.