* 2142709
* CAREER: Stability Phenomena in Topology and Arithmetic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jennifer Wilson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2027
* USD 122,513.00

This project is focused on the study of stability phenomena in sequences of
objects that arise in algebraic topology, geometric group theory, and arithmetic
groups. These objects, like configuration spaces, mapping class groups, and
matrix groups, are extensively studied and have deep connections to different
areas of mathematics and physics. Although the objects in each sequence tend to
get progressively bigger in many senses, the goal of the project is to show that
some aspects of their structure stabilize. To engage the public on her research,
the PI will partner with her university’s Museum of Natural History to showcase
her work through the Science Communication Fellows (activity booths), Scientist
in the Forum (public talks) and Research Station (display case) programs. These
Museum programs have an established record of reaching hundreds of members of
the public and inspiring interest in STEM topics. The PI will also organize a
public lecture series on mathematics topics of popular interest. To support
graduate education, the PI will continue to support the department’s Marjorie
Lee Browne program (a 2-year "bridge to the PhD" math Masters program for under-
served groups) by supervising students, and designing a new Masters-level
differential topology course (implementing inclusive teaching practices) as a
stepping stone to the department’s PhD-level differential topology course. The
PI will organize a 4-day graduate summer school/workshop in Representation
Stability, and will continue co-organizing her department’s research and
learning seminars in the area. The PI will continue to assist with a new
qualifying exam study support program for Michigan PhD students. The PI will run
a semester-long professional development workshop for her department’s grad
students on “the art of mathematics research talks". To support undergraduate
education, the PI will continue teaching in inquiry-based learning format, an
evidence-based active learning model related to the flipped classroom. The PI
will run an REU with two students and will continue to co-organize and speak in
her department’s undergraduate Math Club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on four broad programs. The first program concerns representation-
theoretic stability behavior in the homology of the Torelli subgroup of the
mapping class groups of genus-g surfaces, and the analogous subgroups of the
automorphism groups of the free groups on n letters, as g and n grow. Both
families are central objects in geometric group theory and their homology is not
well understood, but its long-term behavior may be studied using tools from the
field of representation stability. The second program concerns the algebraic
structure of the homology groups of configuration spaces of connected manifolds.
Configuration spaces have a long history of study in fields ranging broadly from
topology to algebraic combinatorics to physics. The PI aims to expand the scope
of the existing stability literature by establishing higher-order stability
patterns among the “unstable” homology classes, extending her existing work with
Miller on configuration spaces of surfaces. The third program concerns the
principal congruence subgroups of the general linear groups—objects fundamental
to number theory—and aims to adapt machinery developed by
Galatius–Kupers–Randal-Williams to prove higher-order stability patterns in
their homology. The fourth program will study the high-degree rational
cohomology of the special linear groups of a number ring. Conjecturally, these
homology groups do or do not vanish in a range below their virtual cohomological
dimension, depending on ring-theoretic properties of the number ring. These
cohomology groups are governed by their Bieri–Eckmann dualizing module, the
Steinberg module. The PI will approach these conjectures by constructing
resolutions of the Steinberg module, by studying the topology of certain
simplicial complexes related to the associated Tits buildings. These conjectures
have implications for the K-theory of the integers. The project also includes a
broad educational component and broader impact activities which include a
partnership with the university's Museum of Natural History, a public lecture
series (Scientist in the Forum), a bridge-to-PhD program for Masters students,
organization of summer schools and seminars and a semester long professional
development workshop for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.