* 2142917
* CAREER: Elucidating structure-function relationships of inflammasome-activating nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Ashish Kulkarni, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2027
* USD 243,884.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award proposes to develop polymeric
nanomaterials and investigate their effects on immune cell functions,
specifically, activation of the inflammasome, a multiprotein complex that
controls immune cell functions during normal and pathological (leading to
disease) processes. By varying the self-assembly of their polymeric building
blocks, the proposed set of nanomaterials will activate different inflammasome
functions, and will be used as tools to evaluate how their surface and core
chemical patterns influence uptake, intracellular fate, and inflammasome
activation in immune cells. The results from the proposed studies will generate
a set of new guidelines that will provide clear criteria for the design of novel
nanomaterials that elicit predictable degrees of inflammasome activation and can
be used for biological applications, including immunotherapy and vaccines. The
project’s educational goals are to integrate the proposed research modules into
several educational programs developed for students at various educational
levels spanning the K-12, college, and graduate levels and increase the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in bioengineering
research. These efforts include the integration of mentorship and research
experiences into immuno-engineering and bioengineering courses to provide a
unique learning experience to a diverse workforce at the emerging interface of
chemical engineering, biomaterials, and immunology, a summer workshop for local
K-12 students from underrepresented groups, new research experiences for women
and underrepresented students to encourage and promote the involvement of these
students in the field of bioengineering, recruiting graduate students from
underrepresented groups and an online open course network of teachers and
students interested in immunoengineering to disseminate, discuss, and
collaborate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this CAREER proposal are to establish strong and integrated research and
educational program that: (1) provides a foundational understanding of how
different nanomaterials interact with immune cells resulting in inflammasome
activation, (2) advances the field of inflammasome-activating nanomaterials for
biological applications including targeting inflammatory diseases and (3)
encourages and inspires a diverse set of K-12 students, undergraduate and
graduate students to participate in learning and contributing to the
bioengineering field. This proposal will develop a library of polymeric
supramolecular nanoparticles with different surface and core properties to
elucidate the effects of nanomaterial properties on inflammasome activation and
identify the underlying molecular mechanisms. Specifically, supramolecular
polymeric nanomaterials with tunable surface and core properties will be
developed to determine how they influence uptake, intracellular fate, and
inflammasome activation in various immune cells. The mechanisms underlying
inflammasome activation in response to various nanomaterials will be dissected
by assessing key components of lysosomal disruption–cathepsin B maturation and
calcium influx-mitochondrial dysfunction pathways. The PI’s long-term
educational goal is to mentor and train the diverse cadre of students from pre-
college (K-12), undergraduate and graduate levels as the next generation of
bioengineers to become critical thinkers capable of contributing to society and
the growing body of scientific knowledge either through academic, industrial or
entrepreneurial route. Towards that goal, the educational aims for this project
include: (1) integration of mentorship and research experiences into the
educational curriculum, including project-based biology for engineers course and
a lab-based immunoengineering course; (2) to encourage and promote the
involvement of K-12 students from underrepresented groups in the bioengineering
field by leveraging current efforts in organizing summer workshops that provide
hands-on training and graduate students run ‘Science Day’ that will include
various activities such as students presentations, science trivia and team-based
competition; (3) designing and developing an online resource for sharing
immunoengineering course materials to instructors and graduate students. (4) to
increase awareness about how engineers can contribute to the biology and
immunology field to advance human health by disseminating outcomes of our
research to broader communities, including the research community and the
general population. The proposed research will generate a set of new guidelines
that will provide clear criteria for structural and functional requirements to
design the next generation of novel nanomaterials that elicit predictable
degrees of inflammasome activation and can be used for various biological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.