* 2142651
* CAREER: Taking Process-based Models to the Field to Understand the Possibility and Implication of an Internal Shear Band Forming in Ice Flowing over Rough Topography
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Jenny Suckale, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 03/31/2027
* USD 684,964.00

Ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland lose the vast majority of their ice mass
through narrow drainage routes that are embedded into comparatively stagnant
ice. The sharp difference in ice speed inside and outside of these drainage
routes is comparable in magnitude to the speed difference between a race car and
a pedestrian, begging the question how ice with relatively similar properties
across the entirety of the ice sheet behaves so differently. The most convincing
explanation to date is that rapidly moving ice has lost direct contact with the
bedrock below and is slipping towards the ocean while slowly moving ice remains
connected to the bed and is moving through internal deformation. Compelling as
this explanation might be, it does not address where in the ice column the slip
occurs that enables fast motion, but this location is essential for assessing
how sliding, and the associated ice motion, responds to climate change. If slip
occurs where ice and rock meet at the base of the ice sheet, water infiltration
from a warming ocean could directly affect ice speed. If slip occurs close to
the base of the ice sheet but within the ice itself, this feedback would likely
be less immediate. The research plan is integrated with a collaborative
educational program that aims to increase participation in polar science for
high-school students from historically disadvantaged communities that are prone
to be impacted by sea-level rise in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this CAREER proposal is to understand the possibility and implications
of an internal shear band forming in ice flowing over rough topography by
developing a suite of customized numerical models that will be available as
open-source tools to the glaciological community for usage and further
development. The team hypothesizes that ice flowing over a hard bed with rough
topography in the non-cavitating limit may experience sufficient strain
localization in the ice just above topographic highs to form an internal shear
band through creep instability despite advective cooling as the ice thins and
accelerates. The deformation in this internal shear band is highly localized and
reminiscent of sliding, highlighting that flow and sliding may be end members
that are connected by a spectrum of increasingly localized englacial
deformation. The team will test its hypothesis through a three-step process by
(1) identifying the nondimensional conditions that are required for internal-
shear band formation for a bed with an idealized topography, (2) generalizing
insights to beds with more realistic, fractal bed topography and comparing
results to existing field observations, and (3) producing continental-scale
assessments of where an internal shear band could form for both Greenland and
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.