* 2142103
* Supporting Student Learning of Introductory Thermodynamics using a Virtual Laboratory with Stealth Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Pfotenhauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,691.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a new virtual
laboratory software application to help students learn thermodynamics concepts.
Introductory undergraduate thermodynamics is a foundational course in many
engineering majors. However, students often have difficulty understanding and
visualizing the complex concepts taught in this course, creating a barrier to
students’ academic success. Active learning experiences for students have been
shown to be effective in improving student learning outcomes. Virtual
laboratories are digital learning environments that can provide active learning
lab exercises for students using a simulation of a system. This project will
recruit thermodynamics instructors from diverse institutions to provide input on
the design of the virtual laboratory application and to implement the
application in their courses. The study will examine how real time analysis of
student actions while using the application can be used to assess student
learning. The software application will be available to the public along with a
collection of curated instructional support materials such as laboratory
assignment handouts, quizzes, and presentations. Project results will be
disseminated to engineering educators at professional conferences and in
publications focused on engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to improve student learning outcomes in introductory
thermodynamics courses. The project plans to conduct a workshop of
thermodynamics instructors that represent a diversity of educational contexts,
practices, and needs. Participants will use an existing prototype application,
determine design constraints, define use cases, identify best practices for
teaching, and brainstorm potential virtual laboratory challenges. The workshop
results will guide the design and development of the virtual reality application
so that it will be aligned with the different educational contexts. Participants
will be asked to integrate the application in their thermodynamics courses and
to provide feedback to the project team. The project includes three research
questions: (1) How do different engineering instructors integrate VR-based
virtual laboratories into their introductory thermodynamics coursework? (2) How
does a VR-based virtual laboratory support student learning of introductory
thermodynamics concepts? (3) How can student learning be assessed using stealth
assessments embedded within the virtual laboratory itself? A cross-case analysis
method will be used to synthesize findings across all of the instructors’
implementations and contexts. Qualitative methods will be used to derive key
themes of player interaction and self-perception of learning as well as
traditional statistical methods to analyze differences in student assessments.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.