* 2142579
* CAREER: Elucidating the Synergistic Nanoscale and Carbohydrate Interactions of Glyconanomaterials with Bacterial Proteins, Toxins, and Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Geyou Ao, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2027
* USD 609,147.00

Carbohydrate-mediated interactions are involved in many cellular events,
including immune responses and infections. Controlled fabrication of
nanomaterials with carbohydrate functionalities across multiple length scales
will enable many applications, such as versatile sensing of proteins and toxins
as well as multifunctional, antimicrobial coatings against a broad spectrum of
bacteria, viruses, and fungi. This CAREER award supports fundamental research to
provide the framework for establishing biopolymer-boron nitride nanomaterial
hybrids for multifunctional antimicrobial applications from sensing microbial
pathogens to mitigating the spread of infections. In addition, exceptional
mechanical, thermal, electrical, and physicochemical properties of boron nitride
nanomaterials will enable multifunctional protective coatings that are
electrically insulating, thermally conductive, and absorb ultraviolet light.
This research will be closely integrated into educational and outreach
activities in the core areas of nanotechnology and glycoscience. This project
will enable the offering of interactive seminars and workshops for local middle
and high school students and teachers. In addition, it will allow the formation
of a highly interdisciplinary nanotechnology course focusing on bionanomaterials
and applications development. Combined, these activities will simultaneously
advance scientific discovery and train a broadly inclusive, diverse, science and
engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synergistic nanoscale and
carbohydrate interaction mechanisms of carbohydrate-decorated nanomaterials
(known as glyconanomaterials) with microbes are largely unknown. This research
will test the broad hypothesis that the synergistic interactions of
glyconanomaterials with carbohydrate-binding bacterial proteins and toxins can
enhance specificity and multivalency for bacterial adhesion, toxin inhibition,
and cell membrane disruption. Specifically, glycopolymers with tunable
carbohydrate structures mimicking the functions of naturally occurring
glycoconjugates will be complexed noncovalently with one-dimensional boron
nitride nanotubes and two-dimensional boron nitride nanosheets. The nanoscale
size and shape of boron nitride scaffolds allow multivalent ligand display and
distinct conformational arrangement of polymers. This will significantly amplify
the binding affinity of carbohydrate-mediated interactions and even enable the
discovery of nanostructure-dependent interactions with microbes that are unique
to glyconanomaterials. Molecular interactions of glycopolymer-boron nitride
complexes with bacterial proteins and toxins will be investigated by optical
spectroscopy, small-angle X-ray scattering, and electron microscopy. The
antibacterial property of robust coatings from glycopolymer-boron nitride
complexes will be investigated by antimicrobial assays. This research will
illuminate the mechanistic behavior of glycopolymer-boron nitride nanosystems
and will offer a transformative approach to fabricate glyconanomaterials for a
broad range of applications, including antimicrobial coatings for improving
indoor air quality and biosensors of microbes. The integration of research and
education through an innovative nanotechnology course and outreach activities
will establish a platform for increasing the pipeline of engineering students of
diverse backgrounds. Combined, this CAREER project will simultaneously advance
scientific discovery and the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.