* 2142473
* Collaborative Research: Gamified Learning of Computing Hardware Fundamentals
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Mary Jo Koroly, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing a novel hands-on
and gamified curriculum focusing on computing hardware fundamentals. Growing use
of electronics in nearly all spheres of life has created a great need for
engineers, scientists, and technicians to contribute to their sophisticated
design and manufacturing process. However, misconceptions of hardware
surrounding manufacturing jobs, along with the rising popularity of jobs in
analytics and artificial intelligence, motivate students to avoid hardware-
related college courses. Studentsâ€™ knowledge of electronic hardware and basic
principles of their operation have not received much attention. This has
contributed to a remarkable skill gap in the current electronics industry.
Hence, there is a critical need for training college students to learn the
fundamentals of hardware from a system perspective through a hands-on approach.
Additionally, there is a need to stimulate these students interests in hardware.
The project aims to design engaging, collaborative, and thought-provoking
gamified learning modules that will be played on an electronic hardware
platform. Each gamified module, to be played individually or collaboratively in
a team, will target training students on one major concept of hardware using an
engaging and experimental learning approach. Games will introduce and exercise
one of the fundamental concepts of computing hardware. Collectively, the
gamified modules will provide a system-level perspective of the modern
electronic system. The project intends to evaluate the curriculum at two
universities and high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
between University of Kansas and University of Florida will investigate a new
paradigm of preparing undergraduate students with foundational concepts of
electronic hardware and key principles of system operation, including underlying
physics (e.g., signal propagation, switching of transistors) and mathematics
(e.g., Boolean algebra, logic gates) of computing. The project seeks to
understand the ability of gamified learning to stimulate situational interest
and learning of hardware content among diverse groups of students, including
women, low socio-economic status students, first-time-in-college students, and
historically underrepresented ethnic minorities. This project has the potential
to create a skilled and diversified workforce in the semiconductor industry. A
mixed research method will be used to evaluate the proposed activities in this
project. Project activities will also include development of similar gamified
modules for high school students, which in turn leads to creating a recruiting
pathway for more electrical and computer engineering undergraduate majors. The
project will share the gamified modules, hardware platform design, course
materials, and other outcomes with the educational and semiconductor community
through web portals, workshops, tutorials, and special sessions. The project has
potential to help students adopt emerging technologies with more complex
functionality, such as augmented and virtual reality. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.