* 2142782
* CAREER: Advancing Accessible Making for People with Visual Impairments via Tactile Shape Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Sean Follmer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Affordable 3D printing technologies have enabled the maker movement by giving
individuals the ability to create finished physical products. However, existing
computer-aided design (CAD) tools that allow authoring and editing of 3D models
are not accessible to people who are blind or visually impaired due to the lack
of widely available low-cost high resolution tactile displays for presenting 3D
information to members of this community, and the scarcity of research and
guidelines on multi-modal interaction with such displays. This work will address
these issues through the development of fundamental technology supporting the
creation of 2.5D refreshable and scalable tactile displays, and rigorous
investigation of their use by the intended audience in the context of
perception, interaction, and learning, thereby providing access to essential
tools for STEM education and employment. Project outcomes will contribute to the
fields of accessible user interfaces and haptic technology. Additional broad
impact will derive from the resulting understanding of how better to design 3D
user interfaces in general to enable wide scale use of such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the stated goals, this project will
investigate four key research questions: (1) How can low-cost, high resolution
2.5D tactile displays be developed? (2) What interaction techniques are
necessary to understand and interact with 3D information using such displays?
(3) How can 3D authoring and making best be supported for members of the target
community? (4) How does access to 3D printing in the wild change this
community's self-efficacy of making and their opinions of STEM? To these ends,
the project will focus on the following synergistic research aims: using
electrostatic adhesive inchworm motor arrays to enable low-cost, high resolution
2.5D tactile displays; supporting direct manipulation and multi-modal
interaction for shape understanding and authoring for makers who are blind or
visually impaired; and long-term deployment of a mixed-initiative system for
supporting 3D understanding and authoring, to validate the tool and its effect
on self-efficacy and learning. The research agenda will be tightly integrated
with a meaningful education plan, including development of informal STEM
learning materials for the target audience and deployment of those materials at
community workshops, as well as course development in the area of accessible
user interfaces and technology, with specific attention to touch and audio
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.