* 2142666
* Collaborative Research: Implementing a Humanities-driven Curriculum to Address Critical Thinking and Empathy Skills Among Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* John Carrell, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by understanding how critical
thinking and empathetic science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
professionals can be developed through a humanities-driven curricular and
problem-solving approach. The need for empathetic and critical thinking skills
for STEM professionals is becoming readily evident due to the increased
complexities of our society. Continued globalization through technologies means
that the work of scientists and engineers has a greater impact on how we
interact and communicate than ever before and presents a new set of grand
challenges for our society. Traditionally, the humanities have played little to
no role in STEM education even though critical thinking and empathy skills are
hallmarks of a humanities education. There are, however, natural links that may
enrich STEM students' educational experience and better prepare them to meet
these grand challenges. This project will present science and engineering
problem-solving within a humanities setting, an approach called humanities-
driven STEM (HDSTEM). This approach will engage an interdisciplinary
collaboration between humanities and engineering situated at two universities,
Texas Tech University (TTU) and Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). With
this collaboration, students will develop problem-solving skills that require
them to empathize and think critically. Through the NSF IUSE:EHR Engaged Student
Learning track, this work will meet the program's goal to seek transformative
approaches to generating and using new knowledge about STEM teaching and
learning to improve STEM education for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the effectiveness of
two problem-solving assignments: typical problem-solving and empathy-embedded
problem-solving within two-course designs: a HDSTEM design with team-taught
Humanities and STEM faculty, and instruction by STEM faculty in an introductory
engineering curriculum. Curriculum treatments will be compared across two
universities, TTU and RIT. While considering different faculty and instructors
for this curriculum at the two institutions, the curriculum will be tied
together through shared typical and empathy-embedded problem-solving
assignments. The purpose of these treatments is to deepen STEM students' ability
to empathize and think critically. At the same time, the project will examine
which of the two implementation processes (i.e., HDSTEM curriculum and
introductory engineering curriculum) performs better. This study will use a
mixed-methods approach to analyze data and results. Multiple sources of data
will be collected, analyzed, and compared for triangulation. Comparisons will be
made between the data collected at the beginning and end of the courses; the two
course interventions will also be made. Discourse and content analysis in
conjunction with commonly used rubrics for critical thinking and empathy will
measure and assess differences from the curriculum treatments. Results will show
benefits in critical thinking and empathy from the HDSTEM environment. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.