* 2142421
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Making Decarbonization of the Electric Power Sector Robust to Climate Change
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Michael Craig, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2027
* USD 455,004.00

2142421 (Craig). Decarbonizing, or reducing carbon dioxide emissions from, the
electric power sector underpins climate change mitigation. In the near-term,
regardless of decarbonization progress, climate change will intensify. As
climate change intensifies, it will increasingly affect our weather, including
through more extreme events. Extreme events will pose new challenges to avoiding
power system outages, or to maintaining system reliability. Maintaining
reliability is essential to promote human and economic health and wellbeing.
This project seeks to better understand three questions: (1) How can power
systems decarbonize while delivering reliable and affordable electricity under a
changing climate? (2) How will climate change impact system reliability of
alternative future power systems? (3) What strategies exist that further
decarbonization, affordability, and reliability of power systems under a
changing climate? The project’s scope spans the conterminous United States. To
promote national health, prosperity, and wellbeing, this project will translate
its scientific advances for power system stakeholders through a series of
workshops and other training venues. This project will also provide graduate
students new educational opportunities through stakeholder-driven problems. The
PI will recruit underrepresented minorities and female undergraduate and
graduate students to contribute to research on this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the scale of real-world power systems coupled with
deep climate uncertainty, existing power system planning methods are ill-suited
to answer our research questions. Robust decision-making (RDM) offers a new
approach that has promising capabilities to bridge the above domains and their
uncertainties, enabling discovery of decarbonized, cost-effective, and reliable
systems that are robust to climate change. This project’s overarching goal is to
develop a transformative framework that applies RDM to next-generation planning,
operational, and reliability models to achieve decarbonized, cost-effective, and
reliable systems under climate change. This goal will be achieved for each of
the three main US regional Interconnects (i.e., conterminous US). The above
research agenda will be tightly integrated with an educational plan for STEM
students and power system stakeholders. Education will be guided by an advisory
board of diverse power system stakeholders. Innovative educational programming
for STEM undergraduate and graduate students will combine theory from mini-
courses with practice from stakeholder-driven experimental projects focused on
real-world problems. Stakeholder programming will leverage workshops, the
Institute for Public Utilities, and other venues to educate stakeholders on
risks of and adaptation strategies to climate change. The project will seek to
support qualified under-represented minority and female STEM scholars, at both
the graduate and formulative undergraduate stages, increasing diverse
representation in an important STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.