* 2142656
* CAREER: Combinatorial Algebraic Geometry: Flag Varieties, Toric Geometry, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Laura Escobar Vega, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 249,841.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). There is a strong record of the study of discrete
structures leading to advances not only within mathematics, but also in science
and industry. This project studies and develops discrete structures arising from
the interplay between combinatorics and algebraic geometry. Additionally, the
interdisciplinary potential of combinatorics is utilized in two ways. First, to
study the complexity of a model from machine learning using a recent geometric
rephrasing. Second, to develop an algorithm used to help identify novel complex
genetic structures driving health and longevity outcomes in humans. At the same
time, the project’s educational program will increase the participation in
mathematics of those traditionally underrepresented, recruit talented students
from underserved communities to Ph.D. programs in mathematics, and disseminate
modern research in combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
explicitly, the objectives of the research component are to advance the theory
of combinatorial subvarieties of the flag variety (namely Hessenberg varieties
and Kazhdan-Lusztig varieties), propose a notion of duality for Newton-Okounkov
bodies, and study applications of generalized permutahedra to machine learning.
The broader impacts of the proposal include interdisciplinary projects that have
the potential to benefit society and activities that broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in mathematics. The educational component of this
proposal consists of a research experiences program for Washington University’s
Joint Post-Baccalaureate Program in Mathematics and the combinatorics summer
school ECCO in Colombia. The project will also support research by undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.