* 2142340
* CAREER: Documenting temporal contrasts in an endangered language via community linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sylvia Schreiner, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2027
* USD 218,743.00

This project documents an endangered language with fewer than 1000 speakers. The
language is in a period of rapid shift, with fewer and fewer people in younger
generations speaking it. This project involves two interconnected parts:
documenting key structures having to do with time in the language, and training
native speakers, graduate students, and undergraduate students in the
fundamentals of linguistics and community-centered language documentation. The
sentence structure and meaning of tense and related notions in this language,
which lacks required tense marking on verbs, are under-documented and poorly
understood by linguists. This is a significant gap in our knowledge since tense
plays a critical role in theories of language. The training provided by this
project will enable two community members to engage in and later lead the
documentation of their language and future reclamation activities. The
instruction and explanations will be shaped by the community linguists’ own
insights, and the training will serve as the basis for a curriculum that can
then be used for training other members of the community. Graduate and
undergraduate students will also be trained in these methods; this prepares the
next generation of academic linguists to be a part of a discipline that acts in
a more responsible and collaborative fashion with respect to communities of
speakers. The documentation created during the project will be made available
and accessible to learners, speakers, and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first objective of the project is to thoroughly document the morphosyntax and
semantics of tense- and aspect-like contrasts in the language via fieldwork with
native speakers and to analyze these contrasts within a generative framework.
Documentation will take the form of elicitation with culturally-specific
storyboards, recording of narratives and conversations, and targeted
elicitation. Topics for conversation prompts will be determined in collaboration
with the community revitalization group, so that documentation of traditional
knowledge can be accomplished simultaneously. The second objective of the
project is the reciprocal training of two community linguists along with
research team members. The research team will provide training in linguistics
and language documentation, and community linguists will provide input on their
ways of knowing. This training will enable the community linguists to begin to
lead language documentation efforts in the community, including training other
community members. The training of community linguists through hands-on
documentation experience, in a reciprocal knowledge-building approach, advances
knowledge about this kind of capacity-building program. The culturally-specific
storyboards for documentation will constitute a new resource for those working
with related languages and will be easily transformed into pedagogical
materials. The documentation will also add to the corpus of data from the
language, which will be of great interest to linguists and computational
linguists working on languages with similar
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.