* 2142140
* CAREER: Optical Super-Resolution Nanothermometry via Stimulated Emission Depletion Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Andrea Pickel, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 453,212.00

We live in an era of nanotechnology, where omnipresent devices like the laptops
and smart phones that power our communications, the hard drives that store our
data, and the light-emitting diodes that illuminate our buildings contain a
multitude of nanoscale components. Increasingly, these electronic, data storage,
and energy conversion devices must also operate under challenging conditions,
including extreme temperatures, high pressures, large electromagnetic fields,
and harsh chemical environments. Simultaneously, thermal properties play an
outsize role in determining the overall performance of these technologies. For
example, poor heat dissipation can limit the reliability of electronics and hard
drives, while high-performance thermal insulation materials instead must greatly
reduce heat transfer. Non-invasive temperature mapping with nanoscale spatial
resolution is thus critical for optimizing the performance and reliability of a
wide array of modern technologies. However, most existing thermometry techniques
either require physically contacting samples with a temperature probe, which can
perturb the sample and preclude measurements in challenging environments, or
else lack the spatial resolution needed to resolve nanoscale temperature
heterogeneities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this proposal is to
address these challenges by developing a novel super-resolution nanothermometry
technique, enabling far-field optical temperature mapping with sub-diffraction
limited spatial resolution. The proposed technique relies on luminescent
nanomaterials called upconverting nanoparticles that can operate under wide-
ranging conditions and independent of sample form factor or material type. Using
a custom-built imaging and spectroscopy system, the principal investigator and
her research team will adapt a Nobel Prize-winning super-resolution imaging
technique called stimulated emission depletion for thermometry. The team will
demonstrate temperature-dependent stimulated emission depletion spectroscopy,
use spatially resolved stimulated emission depletion measurements to map surface
temperature profiles of microfabricated heater structures with spatial
resolution down to ~60 nm, and apply stimulated emission depletion
nanothermometry to uncover failure mechanisms in operating optoelectronic
devices, a major challenge that cannot be fully addressed by existing
techniques. In concert, the integrated education plan will democratize thermal
microscopy via the creation of an open source hardware repository and help
ensure full participation of the next generation of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering fields through an elementary school outreach
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.