* 2142882
* CAREER: Using Entanglement to Enhance Communication and Sensing in the Presence of Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Quntao Zhuang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 107,310.00

The proposed CAREER project will utilize quantum effects to advance the sensing
and communication technology, and at the same time deepen the understanding of
quantum physics. While modern technology has provided people precise sensing
tools and convenient communication devices, for many demanding tasks, the
performance is fundamentally limited by classical physics and is far from
satisfying. Quantum effects are required to further boost performance. However,
quantum effects are usually fragile to the environmental noise ambient in
practical scenarios, which makes enhancing performance by quantum technology
challenging. The proposed project will solve the noise issue and develop robust
quantum protocols for practical sensing and communication applications,
including quantum radar, quantum communication networks and quantum sensor
networks. The protocols will feature devices and systems that are currently off-
the-shelf or realizable in the near-term. These research activities will
integrate with an education plan to prepare the next generation of diverse
Quantum Information Science (QIS) engineers who will be adaptive and creative
innovators in a globally connected, innovation-driven world with great
consideration of the societal impacts of their work. For the education plan, the
PI will: (1) organize a workshop each summer oriented to industry that fosters a
collaborative environment between academia and industry on QIS; (2) develop a
new QIS course to augment the standard curriculum with education materials
derived from this quantum sensing and communication CAREER project; and (3)
develop an undergraduate summer research program to engage students from diverse
backgrounds into the CAREER research. The proposed quantum sensing and
communication system designs will impact the NSF’s Big 10 Ideas and cut across
multiple research disciplines essential to the Nation’s competitiveness and
prosperity, including quantum information, machine learning, and photonics. The
expected project outcomes will apply to sensing and communication tasks that
include deep-space communication, radar detection, inertia force sensing, and
radio-frequency signal sensing. Such outcomes will lead to innovations in the
aerospace, chemical, environmental protection, finance, healthcare, and
information technology industries that impact society and the US economy. By
working with industrial partners like General Dynamics, Arm Ltd., and Fidelity
Investments, the PI and his group will help to translate fundamental quantum
research into industry technologies. For the education plan, the proposed: (1)
workforce development workshops will help to prepare US industry employees and
university students for the future quantum edge; and (2) hands-on research
experience with the PI’s group will enable undergraduates to gain problem-
solving skills and a more in-depth knowledge of QIS to inspire them to follow
QIS career pathways. Graduate students will obtain direct experience of
mentoring under the PI’s supervision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CAREER
project will determine the ultimate quantum limits of sensing and communication
tasks and develop entanglement-assisted (EA) protocols to advance real-world
sensing and communication scenarios with near-term technology. The PI will
propose, analyze, and verify protocol designs that can benefit from entanglement
in the presence of noise for an EA quantum pulse compression radar, an EA
communication network, and an EA sensor-network. The project team will combine
numerical and analytical calculations in the theory and modeling of quantum
systems and adopt advanced machine-learning tools for variational circuit
optimization. The theory framework for analyzing different sensing and
communication systems will be a solid foundation to explore EA quantum
information processing in the presence of noise, and will include sensing and
communication modeling, source and measurement optimization, and techniques to
bound the capacity region. The proposed project will advance knowledge from both
fundamental and practical angles. On a fundamental level, the research will
deepen the understanding of the operational meaning of bipartite and
multipartite entanglement and provide paradigms for multiple parameter
estimation and distributed parameter estimation: estimating a global property of
various local parameters. On the application and engineering levels, the
designed protocols will guide the near-term development of quantum devices for
acquiring, storing, and processing information to meet the goal of realizing
entanglement benefits in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.