* 2142670
* CAREER: Exploring the Functional Diversity of Cytoplasmic Dynein
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Morgan DeSantis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2027
* USD 544,160.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells are the building blocks of
all organisms. All living cells must be able to reorganize their contents
rapidly to function properly. To promote intracellular movements, motor proteins
transport cellular material throughout the eukaryotic cell. Some motors move
along tracks called microtubules that function as cellular highways. Nearly
everything that must move around the cell is transported by motor proteins, from
smaller proteins to organelles like mitochondria. If motor proteins’ functions
are impaired, cells can die or malfunction. Remarkably, only one type of motor,
called dynein, transports cargo towards the interior of the cell for long
distances. As the only such motor, dynein must be able to bind and transport
many different types of cellular cargo, even though each kind of cargo may need
to move at different speeds, be vastly different in size, or move only at
specific times. A second set of proteins, called adaptors, bind to dynein and
enable it to transport different types of cargos. The goal of this proposal is
to understand how different adaptor proteins enable dynein motors to move cargos
of different sizes at different speeds at different times. The expected results
will reveal how adaptor proteins alter the characteristics of dynein to display
different motile properties. This research project will also train both
undergraduate and graduate students in microscopy and biophysical techniques,
and to communicating experimental findings to a broad and diverse public
audience using non-traditional approaches like dance and theater. A
collaboration in conjunction with the University of Michigan’s Museum of Natural
History will also develop hands-on, research-driven programs for middle and
high-school-aged students to learn about fluorescence microscopy and motor
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project will address how a
class of cellular proteins, called adaptors, enable dynein to traffic diverse
cargoes. Preliminary work has revealed that individual adaptor proteins confer
distinct motile properties to the mammalian dynein-1 motor. To build on this
finding, the investigators will: 1) Determine why different adaptors have
distinct effects on dynein motility; 2) Determine how each adaptor tunes the
activity of teams of dynein motors; 3) Determine how each adaptor specifically
modulates activation of the dynein motor. To accomplish these goals, the
investigators will use single-molecule fluorescence imaging, protein
biochemistry, complex in vitro reconstitutions to generate teams of motors on a
native-like cargo, and real-time fluorescence microscopic visualization of
dynein activation on microtubules and in solution. Together, the results of this
proposal will provide an in-depth understanding of how adaptor proteins increase
the functional plasticity of the dynein motor, and increase progress towards a
holistic understanding of how trafficking is coordinated across the entire
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.