* 2142646
* Fostering STEM Thinking in Mathematics Courses for Elementary Education Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Marta Magiera, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula and
generating resources that broaden K-8 prospective teachers’ access to authentic
problem-solving experiences and support their understanding of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) thinking and STEM integration in
K-8 mathematics. STEM integration is an approach to teaching STEM content not
with a focus on individual disciplines per se but with a focus on solving real-
world problems bound by STEM practices within an authentic problem-solving
context. The project intends to develop, refine, and test the effectiveness of
four curricular modules to provide a cohesive framework for supporting
prospective K-8 teachers’ learning about STEM thinking and STEM integration. The
modular sequence will be used with Marquette University elementary education
majors in their first course of a 3-course mathematics sequence. Attention to
STEM education in preparing K-8 teachers is important as it serves at these
grade levels as the foundation for students’ interest and even future passion
for STEM, which has implications for meeting the demands of the STEM workforce
in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses the Model Eliciting
Activities (MEA) to create meaningful opportunities for prospective teachers to
experience STEM integration in problem-solving contexts. MEAs are activities
that support students in inventing and testing models in response to open-ended
real-world problems. The project employs a boundary-crossing framework to guide
the design of instructional activities to build prospective teachers’
understanding of STEM thinking as shared STEM disciplinary practices in the
context of problem-solving. In the development of the course activities, Pólya’s
general problem-solving process will be interpreted as a boundary object, and
STEM boundary-crossing will be conceptualized as STEM disciplinary practices
related to problem-solving within each domain. These disciplinary practices and
habits of mind are discerned from respective STEM standards documents: the Next
Generation Science Standards, Standards for Technological Literacy, Standards
for K-12 Engineering Education, and Common Core State Standards for Mathematics.
The modules will address data-driven decision-making with an emphasis on
curricular topics related to representing quantitative relationships using
ratios and proportions, scaling, measurement, and estimation (e.g., solving
problems involving rates, defining attributes such as density, and using
representative sampling). Using authentic problem-solving contexts, the modules
are intended to foster prospective teachers’ engagement in STEM
interdisciplinary problem-solving practices (e.g., asking questions, selecting
and using available resources, selecting, applying, adapting, or creating
models, analyzing structures, generating arguments, and making decisions based
on evidence). These behaviors will be targeted in data analysis through the lens
of the boundary-crossing framework. Materials developed and disseminated through
this project directly respond to calls by the National Research Council (NRC,
2013) for establishing courses where teacher candidates engage in and experience
integrated STEM content supported by STEM-specific pedagogical methods and
practices. Project materials are expected to be useful resources to mathematics
teacher educators nationwide interested in STEM content integration in
mathematics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. Partial
funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.