* 2142873
* CAREER: Uncovering Faculty Beliefs and Values to Define a Model of Doctoral Education in Chemistry
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jordan Harshman, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 05/31/2027
* USD 315,078.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program is a National Science Foundation-wide activity that
offers awards in support of early-career faculty who can serve as academic role
models in research and education and lead advances in the mission of their
department or organization. Chemists have played a significant role in solving
some of the world's greatest issues and improving the quality of life for all
people. Often, this requires that chemists be trained with advanced skills and
knowledge only achievable through the completion of a doctoral degree program
(Ph.D.). Significant concerns have been raised both inside and out of the
chemistry community related to the ability of American chemistry doctoral
programs to prepare their students effectively for future careers and scientific
endeavors. These shortcomings in doctoral training indicate that the current
system is training chemists whose preparation to tackle the world's next grand
challenges could be improved. As such, this project will investigate the
training of doctoral chemistry students from the faculty perspective to
complement existing research that describes student perspectives. The elements
used to progress a student from beginning to end of the Ph.D. program are well-
known and homogeneous. This project will unearth the specific rationale for how
these elements are supposed to develop an independent scientist and identify the
specific roles faculty advisors play. Additionally, funding for this project
will be used to prompt significant reforms in the graduate programs in five
chemistry departments. It is expected that all chemistry graduate programs will
gain access to resources that guide potential reforms through this project.
These reforms are expected to improve the quality of scientists produced by
chemistry doctoral programs for the betterment of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three objectives guide this project. The first
will build a model that describes how the Ph.D. student develops into an
independent scientist based on faculty advisors' stated goals and learning
outcomes. Chemistry faculty will be interviewed to discover each core element's
role(s) in a typical chemistry doctoral program. From thematic analyses, a model
of doctoral education will be constructed and modified/validated by chemistry
faculty. Activities in Objective 2 will discover the chemistry faculty's
specific values and beliefs pertaining to the training of doctoral chemistry
students. This important research will reveal the faculty advisors' goals,
roles, and identities and how they affect the training chemistry doctoral
students receive. These beliefs are expected to be heavily influential in the
practices that are observed in doctoral education. Finally, Objective 3 will
develop resources that outline the primary issues with current Ph.D. training
and what reforms have been suggested to mitigate them. These resources will be
distributed to all chemistry graduate programs across the country. Additionally,
the PI will work closely with five specific chemistry departments with the
explicit aim of achieving tangible reform in how each trains chemistry doctoral
students. This attempt to engage in specific reform aims to produce a generation
of chemists that are more prepared for the challenges they will face in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.