* 2142977
* CAREER: Context-Aware Visual Analytics Systems: Evolving the One-Size-Fits-All Approach to Design and Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Alvitta Ottley, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2027
* USD 203,249.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale data analysis is
increasingly vital in domains from national security to e-commerce.
Consequently, we have seen an increasing number of analysis and visualization
tools to provide automated support for human analysts. However, the current
tools tend to offer support with a “one size fits all” approach that fails to
consider differences in analysts’ cognitive skills and styles, affecting both
how they do their jobs and how well they do them. This project envisions visual
analytics systems that sense the user and her goals to actively support her
analysis by providing the right information at the right time. The work will
produce: (1) a theoretical understanding of how individual differences impact
analytic workflows and which traits are most predictive; (2) algorithms for
analyzing a user’s interactions with visualizations to infer their cognitive
profile and analysis goals; and (3) techniques and theory for using those
inferences to give more personalized suggestions. These three aims help
facilitate a human-technology partnership where a better understanding of the
analyst enables a more practical machine partner, leading to greater exploration
of the data space and more efficient hypothesis generation and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project systematically investigates the
impact of individual differences on a broad range of tasks and visualization
designs. The general approach involves leveraging low-level behavioral data such
as mouse interactions to model the user’s cognitive profile, attention, and
workflow. These data and models will allow the researchers to assess and predict
cognitive traits that affect analysts’ visualization strategies and
effectiveness. Based on these models, the research team will develop context-
aware visual analytics tools that offer personalized guidance and suggestions
based on the learned user characteristics and goals, calibrating the type and
timing of assistance provided based on a given user profile and workflow.
Altogether, this research agenda incorporates situational context into the
design and evaluation pipelines to create broadly usable visualization tools. It
develops new theoretical foundations, algorithms, and techniques that would
result in a more symbiotic relationship between the human and the visual
analytic tool during data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.