* 2142648
* Using a Tutoring System to Teach High-Quality Coding Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Amruth Kumar, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, evaluating, and
disseminating a tutoring system that will teach students to write high-quality
programming code. Code quality has a direct impact on the cost of modern
software and the productivity of professional programmers. High-quality code
should be correct, understandable, maintainable, and extendable. In a typical
academic setting, students write code that is correct, but is hard to
understand, maintain, or extend. Current approaches to teaching students how to
write high-quality code, such as tutor/peer code review, live coding, and
refactoring instruction, are resource-intensive and not scalable. This tutoring
system will teach students to write high-quality code by solving problems on
their own time and by automatically providing guidance on how the students can
improve the quality of the code. This project addresses a significant unmet need
of programming education. It will contribute to research on how to effectively
teach programming. Additionally, the project has potential to better prepare
Computer Science graduates to enter the professional computing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tutoring system will generate refactoring problems as
randomized instances of templates, with each problem illustrating one semantic
anti-pattern. The system will provide a limited set of editing operations with
which to solve problems and will generate feedback that will help students to
incrementally solve problems and understand the anti-pattern. The system will
automatically adapt to the learning needs of each student and will generate
progress reports for instructors. The tutor will cover up to 100 semantic anti-
patterns and include 5 – 10 problem templates per anti-pattern. The system will
be available for C++, Java, and Python. The problems and feedback designed for
each anti-pattern will be evaluated by observing the efficacy of the tutor in
helping students learn to refactor code, and the system’s effectiveness in
helping students to write high-quality code. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.