* 2142978
* CAREER: Towards Scalable, Low-Power, Wide Area Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Bhuvana Krishnaswamy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 05/31/2027
* USD 189,109.00

Wireless data delivery is crucial for real-time data collection and analysis in
the fast-growing areas of smart agriculture, livestock monitoring, and precision
farming among others. Such large-scale monitoring networks currently use
cellular and satellite networks to collect data. Due to the high infrastructure
costs for solar panels and batteries, such networks are deployed only at limited
locations and have delays ranging from a day up to a month. Real-time data
collection will provide an understanding of the spatio-temporal dynamics of an
environment. Such monitoring systems typically deploy sensors in large fields
and require long battery life, long communication range to reduce infrastructure
costs, share the medium with many more devices, and low cost. However, they have
less stringent demands on communication speed and delay. Existing strategies for
addressing long battery life and long-range communication do not co-exist
efficiently in a large-scale network. Technologies that allow long-range
communication typically drain the battery energy faster, while battery-efficient
communication technologies are limited to short distances. In this work, novel
communication algorithms, protocols, and architectures are proposed to
simultaneously achieve long-range communication and long battery life in large-
scale deployments. The outcomes of this work will have a direct impact on the
Wisconsin farming community through real-time soil health monitoring. It will
impact high-school, undergraduate, and graduate education through community-
driven wireless courses incorporating prototypes developed in this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research takes the following three directions
to overcome the barriers for scalability and meet the connectivity needs of
long-range, low-power, wide-area networks (LPWAN): 1) A novel modulation
technique that minimizes energy consumption by encoding information in the time
interval between transmissions is proposed. Error correction and source codes to
address the challenges of a timing channel will be studied in this thrust. 2) In
the second thrust, interference cancellation and distributed interference
avoidance to decode concurrent transmissions from collisions are proposed.
Interference cancellation in existing LPWANs such as LoRa, as well as cross-
layer protocols to avoid collisions, will be studied in this thrust. Novel time-
frequency analysis to decode packet collisions across multiple gateways will
also be explored. 3) In the third thrust, a unified cloud-based LPWAN receiver
that can receive and demodulate a variety of LPWAN technologies is proposed.
Compression algorithms to transmit radio samples to a cloud server will be
designed. A cloud-based LPWAN receiver enables us to coherently combine signals
from multiple gateways, in turn facilitating cooperative
decoding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.