* 2142509
* Rethinking the Genesis of Banded Iron Formations: Simulating Partial Fe(II) Oxidation and Secondary Reactions of Iron-Silica Precipitates
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jena Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 331,331.00

The original minerals from Earth’s primordial ocean preserve signals of the
evolution of early life and ocean chemistry. To fully understand the
implications of these minerals, it is necessary to recreate these phases in
controlled laboratory conditions. This study focuses on the formation of iron
silicates, recently identified as early minerals from marine sediments deposited
during the first two billion years of Earth’s history. We will simulate the
ancient ocean surface water in which a portion of iron is oxidized, the descent
of the particulate products through the deep ocean, and the hypothesized
respiration of the oxidized iron by microbial life in the sediments,
characterizing the solid products of each step. This project will support two
graduate students to lead this research and receive training in experimental
geobiology. Researchers will additionally demonstrate how it is possible to
recreate ancient iron precipitates in the lab and perform electron microscopy of
ancient sediments with students in U-Michigan’s Earth Camp program, a summer
program to expose underserved high school students to Earth and Environmental
Sciences. An alum of this program who attends U-Michigan will receive a paid
opportunity to assist with the proposed research, giving them valuable lab
experience and a supportive laboratory community to assist in the retention of
underrepresented students in the department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will identify likely (bio)chemical reactions that occurred in the ancient ocean
and sediments, enabling to update the investigator’s model of the early iron
(bio)chemical cycle. Iron-rich silicates appear to be early minerals in marine
Archean (4.0 – 2.5 Ga) chemical sediments known as ‘Banded Iron Formations
(BIFs)’. However, it is unknown whether reduction-oxidation (redox) processes,
hypothesized to be present in the Archean ocean and often mediated by life,
promoted the formation of such silicates. The proposed work will investigate
what solid products are formed from plausible processes in the Archean ocean,
thereby generating predictions as to which of these pathways contributed to the
Archean iron cycle and how BIF minerals, particularly iron silicates, may
reflect ancient (bio)chemical reactions. Specifically, researcher will answer
the questions: 1) What are the initial solid products of partial Fe(II)
oxidation under hypothesized Archean ocean conditions? 2) How are the initial
solid products of partial iron oxidation chemically modified under Archean
oceanic water column conditions? 3) How does microbial respiration of
Fe(II,III)-silica products transform their chemistry and mineralogy? The
experiments will address these questions by replicating Archean water column
environments with trace levels of O2, then exposing these solids to anoxic water
column conditions to simulate exposure during particle descent, followed by
simulating early diagenesis by feeding these precipitates to an iron-reducing
bacterial strain. This process-based, mechanistic approach will determine which
plausible redox reactions in the Archean ocean produce iron silicates or other
minerals found in BIFs, yielding insights into the interplay between life and
geochemistry in the Archean Eon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.