* 2142330
* Building Capacity to Develop Community-Engaged STEM Learning as an Institutional Transformative Mechanism
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* William Montgomery, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by integrating STEM learning
with community-oriented problem solving, evidence-based decision making,
critical thinking, and the development of civic duties. The project plans to
build institutional capacity to create an immersive environment of community-
engaged learning (CEL) and to transform STEM education. Working collaboratively
with community partners, students will use their knowledge and skills in STEM
fields to address issues facing many minority communities, particularly inequity
issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic and post-pandemic rejuvenation of
affected communities. This project will directly tackle the challenges faced by
minority and other underserved students, including food insecurity and mental
health issues, to enhance their resilience, confidence, and persistence to
succeed in STEM fields. The project will have a positive impact on minority and
immigrant communities in areas of health and healthcare disparity, environmental
and nutritional inequity, social justice, and equal rights.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage an interdisciplinary team of STEM
faculty, social scientists, and student affairs staff to provide students with
an immersive environment through CEL courses in both STEM and humanities, arts,
and social science (HASS) fields, which will lead to sustained change and a
powerful advancement in STEM education. Interdisciplinarity will be a key
component in this project, as the HASS courses will allow students to understand
complex societal and community issues as they apply STEM knowledge to address
those issues. The STEM solutions will be placed in the social and cultural
contexts of the communities. The objectives of this project include 1) to create
an immersive CEL environment at NJCU that offers broad CEL-focused courses and
curricula in STEM and HASS to transform the student experience in undergraduate
STEM education; 2) to build a holistic support system to empower faculty,
students, and communities to embrace CEL and bolster students’ success in STEM;
3) to promote NJCU as a prominent “steward of place” that benefits and
contributes to the minority communities with scientific and evidence-based
approaches to meet the community needs; and 4) to conduct research on
interdisciplinarity and community-institution partnership, establishing
evidence-based best practices for CEL and catalyzing sustainable transformation
across the university and surrounding communities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.
This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE: HSI program, which seeks to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.