* 2142310
* CAREER: Scalable Lamination Printing of Near Atomically Thin Electronic Materials with Mechanical Stretchability
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Yeonwoong Jung, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2026
* USD 562,713.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will support research to create new fundamental
knowledge that enables the scalable manufacturing of atomically thin and
mechanically stretchable electronic materials, promoting the progress of science
as well as advancing national prosperity. Conventional electronic devices are
unable to operate in mechanically stretchable forms, limited by the physical
rigidness and bulkiness of their constituting materials. Two-dimensional (2D)
layered electronic materials hold promise in this respect owing to their
extremely small thickness and large stretch limits. Manufacturing strategies to
reliably integrate them into desired device platforms maintaining their
structural quality are developed under this grant. This research will
investigate manufacturing methods to precisely delaminate, print, and assemble
2D materials of various kinds in any physical forms toward their scaled-up
heterogeneous integrations. The manufacturing methods should be extendable to
many materials of the growing family of two-dimensional materials allowing for
their device incorporation. Technological opportunities in the field of
stretchable electronics can impact a wide range of applications such as
healthcare, medical, and opto-electrical sensors. This research can have a broad
impact on semiconductor manufacturing and electronics industries, strengthening
the nationâ€™s competitiveness in these important domains. The interdisciplinary
nature of the integrated research and educational programs envisioned in this
project will promote the participation of undergrad and underrepresented
students of diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional manufacturing
methods to prepare for thin electronic materials such as silicon in mechanically
deformable forms have demanded equipment-intensive and costly lithographic
patterning and etching processes. The thickness of the currently employed
materials does not allow for the defect-free mechanical stretchability.
Intrinsically extensible 2D layered materials suffer from adhesion instability
which makes their system integration difficult. This research is to fill this
knowledge gap by investigating the fundamental mechanism for the capillary-force
driven delamination and lamination of 2D materials. The underlying thermodynamic
energy principles will be studied that govern the van der Waals adhesion of
various 2D materials with respect to their growth wafers and will establish
their structure-process-property relationships through experimental and
computational approaches. Finite element mechanics modeling, in-situ electrical
and structural characterizations, as well chemical vapor deposition growth will
be studied to develop the understanding and capabilities of the manufacturing
process. The lamination technique will be used to print and assemble wafer-scale
2D materials onto substrates in a deterministic manner and study their strain-
invariant electrical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.