* 2142144
* Interacting Impacts of Changes in Mean and Variance of Water Availability on Vegetation Phenology and Productivity in Dryland Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Yiqi Luo, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 03/31/2025
* USD 699,883.00

This award investigates how changes in the timing and amount of rainfall impact
dryland ecosystems of the southwestern United States. This award will improve
predictions of how these ecosystems will respond to future climate change.
Worldwide, ecosystems like these play an important role in the global carbon
cycle and support 40% of the human population. Improving predictive
understanding of dryland responses to climate change is a critical challenge
that will have benefits to society and also relevance to policy decision-making.
Results from this award directly address an important knowledge gap, and will
provide insights that have significance for management and conservation of
dryland ecosystems worldwide. The award will leverage experimental
infrastructure, already constructed, that alters the amount and the intensity of
rainfall events throughout the year at the Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site in New Mexico. Research will be conducted in four
distinctly different ecosystem types, including two grasslands and two
shrublands. Digital cameras will be installed overlooking experimental plots in
each ecosystem type and will record thousands of photographs year-round. These
photographs will be made publicly available, immediately and without
restriction, for research and education. Responses to the experimental
treatments will be quantified through automated, quantitative analysis the color
of each picture. Broader impacts from this award will include both formal and
informal science education. Graduate and undergraduate students recruited from
traditionally under-represented groups, will receive training through this
project. Public participation in scientific research will be achieved through
ongoing collaboration with the Sevilleta LTER site’s “Schoolyard” program, and
will bring the science of this project to K-12 teachers and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How future climate change will impact dryland
ecosystems depends on how these systems respond not only to increases in
temperature and changes in mean precipitation, but also to increases in
precipitation variance. Researchers will test the overarching hypothesis that
changes in the mean and variance of water availability will have independent as
well as interacting effects on vegetation phenology, which then will then drive
productivity via changes in growing season length. Based on environmental
response function theory, unique responses of four distinct dryland ecosystem
types are expected. Data products derived from digital camera imagery will be
used to quantify the start and end of the active (growing) season, total active
season length, as well as to estimate rates of primary production and total
annual primary productivity by scaling gross primary productivity quantified
from existing CO2 flux measurements at Sevilleta LTER. Project data will be
assimilated into an already-developed ecosystem model, which will be used for
forecasting and model-based tests of hypotheses. Outcomes from this project will
include peer-reviewed publications as well as imagery and datasets that will be
relevant to dryland researchers worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.