* 2142554
* CAREER: Band-Topology of Multipolar Magnetic Excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Judit Romhanyi, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2027
* USD 266,803.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research aimed at the discovery and understanding of
exotic properties of magnetic quantum materials. Instead of examining the
individual attributes of electrons, considering their collective behavior
reveals many remarkable properties of matter, including the generation of
magnetism. The interplay of the electrons' spin and orbital degrees of freedom
can produce novel states that behave very differently from the original
constituents and bear great relevance for technological applications. This
project focuses on understanding the conditions for such emergent states of
matter and aims to uncover new features that facilitate their experimental
detection and control. Specifically, this research integrates theoretical tools
rooted in the modern concepts of topology and symmetries to characterize novel
magnetic states. Furthermore, it establishes a connection between the
theoretical description and the materials' responses to different experimental
probes. Considering real materials in collaboration with experimental groups is
an integral part of the research design. The results of this study can open new
routes to low-energy consuming reconfigurable devices that build on magnetism
and optical control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach
efforts to decrease the STEM opportunity gap of students from underserved and
marginalized communities. This will be addressed on multiple levels of
education, from elementary to graduate school, aiming to spark interest in
sciences, build scientist identity, reduce the preparation gap, and improve the
retention of underrepresented minorities. In particular, the PI will initiate
summer programs, a physics Bootcamp, and a biennial graduate summer school and
join an existing outreach activity at her institution targeting middle school
students to promote awareness of existing opportunities and to help them
visualize a future in higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research aimed at
the discovery and understanding of the exotic properties of quantum magnets.
Magnetic materials endowed with a multi-component local Hilbert space have an
extraordinary potential for realizing novel topological states. They admit
unconventional multipole degrees of freedom, calling for a generalized approach
to characterize their topology and experimental signatures. In particular, this
research will explore how the enlarged local Hilbert spaces originating from the
combination of spin, orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom can provide an
internal structure to protect the nontrivial topologies. Furthermore, it will
reveal how they can realize novel experimental probes for topological boundary
modes based on the magneto-electric effect, surface-selective optical responses,
and distinctive Hall signals. The results of this study will advance our
understanding of the band-topology of multipole magnetic excitations and uncover
unique experimental fingerprints for their detection and manipulation. Moreover,
they will be directly relevant for a wide range of bosonic systems, including
but not limited to photonic, acoustic, and mechanical lattices and artificial
magnonic metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach
efforts to decrease the STEM opportunity gap of students from underserved and
marginalized communities. This will be addressed on multiple levels of
education, from elementary to graduate school, aiming to spark interest in
sciences, build scientist identity, reduce the preparation gap, and improve the
retention of underrepresented minorities. In particular, the PI will initiate
summer programs, a physics Bootcamp, and a biennial graduate summer school and
join an existing outreach activity at her institution targeting middle school
students to promote awareness of existing opportunities and to help them
visualize a future in higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.