* 2142160
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ancient Genomics and the Molecular Mechanisms of Human Tolerance to Arsenic
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Anne Stone, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 31,362.00

Arsenic causes severe toxicological effects in humans, yet some human
populations have evolved to tolerate this element. Today, people in some regions
may carry protective mutations in a key enzyme that metabolizes arsenic in the
liver. However, several aspects remain unclear about the evolutionary history
and genetic basis of arsenic tolerance. This doctoral dissertation research
project therefore examines the genetic history, modes of subsistence, and gene
regulatory mechanisms in ancient and modern DNA samples from populations exposed
to arsenic. The findings can expand our understanding of biocultural processes
through which humans are able to adapt to their environment. The project also
supports student mentorship and training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, opportunities for international research collaborations, and
science dissemination through conferences and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on the understanding of the
cultural and biological diversity of ancient and modern populations living in an
arsenic rich region. Specifically, three main questions are addressed: (1) what
are the genetic history and relationships among ancient and modern populations?
(2) how did the transition to agriculture impact diet and oral health? and (3)
what role/function do the mutations associated with arsenic tolerance play in
the expression of the AS3MT gene? The researcher reconstructs the genetic
prehistory of the region using ancient DNA and modern genomic data. In addition,
oral microbiome data from ancient dental calculus are used to characterize the
prehistoric diet, oral health and environmental exposures among pre-agricultural
and agricultural populations. Third, genetic sequences carrying protective
mutations are used to assess experimentally whether they alter/regulate the
expression of the AS3MT gene in vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.