* 2142295
* Research-based Professional Development for Science Faculty and Its Impact on Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Louise Nicholson, PENNSYLVANIA WESTERN UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,228,857.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by understanding how the
implementation of a professional development framework designed to improve
instructional practice impacts student learning. This study, conducted at a
public, broad-access, university has been designed to apply lessons learned from
professional development research at both the K-12 level and at the college
level. This project is specifically designed to better understand how extensive
professional development for STEM faculty across several majors can transform
teaching practices and impact student learning in STEM. The framework will be
used at California University of Pennsylvania to (a) implement a type of
professional development known as learning communities, (b) determine how the
characteristics and features of professional development relate to student
learning and practices of science faculty, and (c) contribute to evidence on
best practices for extending the framework to other STEM departments and higher
education institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s scope includes two
goals. The first goal is to implement and evaluate professional development at a
primarily undergraduate institution which is minimally selective (95% acceptance
rate), has a low four-year graduation rate (33.6%), and a high percentage of low
socioeconomic (42%) and students from minoritized groups (21%). The second goal
is to increase students’ content knowledge and scientific literacy in
undergraduate science courses with a professional development framework that has
been empirically linked to student learning in K-12 settings. The research
questions which will help determine whether this goal and its objectives were
met are: (a) What is the impact of framework-informed learning communities on
instructors’ knowledge, skills, attitudes, and beliefs? (b) What is the impact
of participating in framework-informed learning communities on instructors’ use
of active learning instructional practices? and (c) What is the impact of
participating in framework-informed learning communities for instructors on
their students’ scientific literacy and content knowledge? Results from the
study will be disseminated through professional STEM societies’ education
divisions and through publication of manuscripts documenting both implementation
and outcomes of the approach. Participating instructors will be encouraged to
write a narrative describing their use of new instructional practices and
collected student learning data, and to submit their work to their professional
organizations’ annual meetings, and discipline-specific science education
journals. Materials created will be made available publicly through the
institution’s website. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.