* 2142997
* RAPID: Modeling and Analytics for COVID-19 Outbreak Response in India: A multi-institutional, US-India joint collaborative effort
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Simon Levin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project includes study of three broad problems pertaining to pandemic
science with a specific focus on the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak in India. Team
members from U. Virginia, Princeton University, Center for Disease Dynamics,
Economics &amp; Policy, the Indian Institute of Science and the Indian
Statistical Institute, Bengaluru will study three central problems: (i)
biosurveillance, (ii) forecasting and (iii) vaccine allocation. The choice of
tasks is based on current needs, the importance of the problem, and the
likelihood that they can be solved in a timely fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first topic is integrated active biosurveillance.
During this pandemic the interplay between viral mutations, human behavior,
vaccines, and public policies has been unprecedented. An integral element of
managing such a pandemic is biosurveillance; this involves collecting samples,
testing and sequencing viruses across space and time, and combining this
information to assess the distribution and impact of the viral strains. This
project will use an abductive framework for smart biosurveillance â€“ budget
constrained methods for testing, genomic sequencing and identifying new variants
and their transmissibility and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second topic
is forecasting COVID-19 dynamics at the district/state level. Forecasting
COVID-19 dynamics has been challenging everywhere; in India it has been even
more challenging for a number of reasons including noisy data, undercounting of
the deceased, lack of information on compliance of NPIs implemented, etc. This
project will leverage ongoing work by team members on this topic to develop
innovative COVID-19 forecasting methods for the Indian context. It will explore
the use of multiple data sources to combat the inconsistencies and incorporate
publicly available forecasts from other modeling teams to obtain robust
ensembled forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third topic is vaccine
prioritization, allocation, and distribution. This project will develop models
and analytical tools to study a range of questions related to vaccine
prioritization, allocation and distribution. The significant second surge has
highlighted widespread susceptibility in early 2021, due either to waning
immunity and/or limited spread of the first wave. With the possibility of novel
variants due to uncontrolled spread, and emerging possibilities in vaccine
development, an expedited, effective, and equitable vaccine campaign remains the
most important pathway to controlling COVID-19 in India and elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to new methods that combine multi-
scale simulations with recent techniques in AI and machine learning to obtain
implementable solutions to the problems above. The methods will also be
generalizable -- the goal is to develop the needed technical capability to
respond to future pandemics. This innovative partnership between academic
institutions in the US and India will form the basis of future joint
collaborations on this important topical area of global
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.