* 2142888
* CAREER: Understanding the Principles of Working Memory in Phishing Decision Making
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Prashanth Rajivan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 228,668.00

Phishing is the practice of deceiving people into disclosing sensitive
information or inappropriately granting access to a secure system. Although
phishing attacks are rampant on the Internet, due to automation, the likelihood
of an individual encountering an attack daily or weekly is small. Yet people are
expected to detect the rare attacks that automation misses. These attacks tend
to be novel and targeted and, therefore, difficult to detect. Past research has
blamed inattention to important cues for human susceptibility to phishing, but
the underlying cognitive functions that prevent people from paying attention to
indicators in a phishing message are not well understood. This project is
developing foundational theories of cognitive processes to explain and predict
human decisions to trust or suspect phishing attacks. The project will inform
the development of new email security and training solutions to improve the
general publicâ€™s ability to detect phishing attacks, and in this way, the
project has broad potential societal impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
is conducted using laboratory experiments and the development of computational
models to reveal cognitive functions critical to phishing detection. The
research applies natural language processing methods to determine the features
in phishing messages that people encode to their memory during decision-making,
and the impact of these features on successful detection. This research also
studies and characterizes functions critical to memory processes that impact
individual susceptibility to phishing attacks. The challenges of applying
cognitive models and reinforcement learning models to provide personalized
phishing training experiences are also investigated. Knowledge and methods
produced from the activities of this project have implications beyond phishing.
They inform related challenges in misinformation detection and threat detection.
The long-term goal of this project is to establish a multi-disciplinary research
program in security and educate a diverse engineering workforce through
inclusive research, educational, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.