* 2142218
* CAREER: Recycling the Radio Spectrum for Science: A New Paradigm for UAS-based Precision Agriculture
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Mehmet Kurum, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Demand for radio spectrum space is growing quickly, spurred by the explosion of
emerging technologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT), Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (UASs), and 5G networks. Unfortunately, the growth of active wireless
systems often increases radio frequency (RF) interference (RFI) in science
observations. As it stands, very little of the RF spectrum is dedicated to
science, and the small amount of spectrum available can fall victim to
neighboring RFI or re-allocation for commercial use in the wake of the growing
demand for bandwidth in commercial applications. This project focuses on
changing the paradigm of remote sensing methods and developing next generation
technologies and ideas that are more spectrum efficient, more effective, and
meet the challenges of present and future spectrum congestion. In particular,
the project will recycle existing RF communication and navigation signals to
enable new remote sensing methodologies at these commercially protected bands
for scientific use in a myriad of practical solutions for precision agriculture,
forestry, water conservation. This project will demonstrate new, low-cost
sensing technologies in practical settings and contribute to the agriculture
economy. The developed technology aims to usher in a host of precision
irrigation for agricultural applications in the nation and worldwide with
emphasis in economically distressed areas and developing countries. The
complementary educational goals of the Principal Investigator (PI) are to
generate a greater awareness and understanding among students, the public, and
farmers about the amazing world of microwave remote sensing and its utility for
non-intrusive tracking of the world’s most precious resource: water in plants
and soil. The project will support the PI’s efforts to broaden the participation
of today’s diverse students, including underrepresented minority groups, in STEM
education though activities such as new mobile apps, drones, games, and fun
facts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will construct fundamental microwave
remote sensing science, a disruptive sensing framework, and integrated
ubiquitous platforms that are non-intrusive, widely accessible, and automated to
improve water utilization. This goal will be realized by offering at least three
specific new contributions: (1) generating fundamental knowledge needed for a
paradigm shift towards microwave bands in UAS-based precision agriculture, (2)
designing an integrated/connected RF testbed for evaluating the new paradigm,
and (3) integrating smartphones into low-cost drones for broader adaptation.
These objectives will be achieved by conducting advanced electromagnetic
modeling and simulations, physics-aware machine-learning-based soil moisture
retrievals, and field validation. Specifically, this work will generate the
scientific basis for accurate water monitoring of root-zone soil moisture
observations by recycling low-frequency emissions in microwave spectrum from
small drones. Exploring the low-frequency microwave spectrum for remote sensing
from drones is unprecedented because no existing small drone instrument is
capable of remote sensing at such low frequencies in microwave spectrum. This
project will fill in the necessary scientific basis to evaluate the approach’s
feasibility and develop the foundation for the algorithms to support such a
paradigm. This work will be important for developing the requirements for water
utilization in irrigated and rainfed farming and creating algorithms for the new
paradigm of RF-assisted UAS-based precision
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.