* 2142742
* Evolving the culture of biology: Promoting graduate teaching assistant professional development to foster inclusion, efficacy, and evidence-based practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Erin Shortlidge, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,817,686.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
teaching practices in biology. Based on the ongoing need to improve the state of
undergraduate biology education, the research team plans to develop training for
administrators, STEM faculty, and staff. The Evolving the Culture in Biology
(ECB) Scholars will, in turn, train graduate and undergraduate teaching
assistants at their institutions. The effort will be designed to foster the
adaptation and implementation of intentional, inclusive, evidence-based teaching
practices by graduate teaching assistants and undergraduate learning assistants
through participation in teacher professional development (Teaching Assistant –
Teaching Professional Development, TA-TPD). A set of six regional ECB Workshops
are planned, which will extend the team’s prior work that was supported through
the NSF Research Coordination Networks for Undergraduate Education initiative.
The Teacher-Centered Systemic Reform (TCSR) model guides the effort. The
research and evaluation activities will investigate the effectiveness of the
workshops and the association of project activities and factors with the
expected outcomes of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
interconnected objectives: (1) Develop regional workshops that will host
workshop ECB Scholars from at least ten unique institutions, reaching a vast
number of institutions over the four years, while reducing expenses for travel;
(2) Engage each ECB Scholar to participate in a contextually rooted reflective
process to develop or enhance existing the Teaching Assistants Teaching
Professional Development (TA-TPD) activities at their institutions. (3) Evaluate
the efficacy of workshops and TA-TPD using a mixed methods research design for
formative and summative purposes and the generation of knowledge. Based on the
Teacher-Centered Systemic Reform model and in parallel with the evaluation, the
research team plans to conduct a mixed methods research effort that is guided by
the following research question: What are the impacts of the ECB program on ECB
Scholars and their institutions? What are the outcomes for Teaching Assistants
who participation in Teaching Professional Development activities? A rich set of
data will be collected through pre-post surveys, focus groups, and document
analysis using quantitative descriptive approaches and qualitatively-derived
frameworks that are grounded in the empirical data and the Teacher-Centered
Systemic Reform model (contextual factors, personal factors, teacher thinking
and beliefs, and instructional practices). The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.