* 2142627
* CAREER: Studying Tendon Cell Mechanobiology in the Native Tissue Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Spencer Szczesny, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2027
* USD 654,682.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research to
identify how the behavior of cells within tendons is affected by tissue damage
and how this leads to tendon degeneration. Previous work studied the response of
tendon cells to different strains under artificial conditions. However, it is
important to understand how cells response to damage inside the native tendon
tissue. This is because many important interactions are lost when cells are
isolated from their native environment. Also, these interactions between cells
and their environment have a strong effect on cell behavior. Therefore, this
project will develop novel techniques to study cell behavior in their native
tissue environment. These techniques will be used to understand how tendon
fatigue damage causes tendon degeneration. This information will provide the
scientific foundation for developing new treatments for tendon disorders. Also,
engineering students will help incorporate our results into high school biology
classes. We will identify whether this improves the recruitment and retention of
more women in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this
CAREER project are to determine how tendon cells sense physical stimuli in the
native tissue environment and to identify the role of dysfunctional cell
mechanobiology in tendon degeneration. The central hypothesis is that fatigue
damage alters the physical stimuli presented in situ to cells within tendon and
that mechanotransduction of these altered stimuli initiates the negative
cellular response leading to tendon degeneration. To test this hypothesis, the
researchers will develop a live tissue explant model enabling simultaneous in
situ measurement of local physical stimuli and gene expression and will identify
the mechanotransduction mechanisms that drive the response of tendon cells to
mechanical loading within the native tissue environment. The innovative
technique of colocalizing fatigue damage (i.e., altered strains and collagen
organization) with cellular gene expression will identify the specific physical
stimuli that initiate tissue degeneration in the native tendon environment.
Importantly, the explant model also enables the researchers to perturb
mechanotransduction signaling pathways during fatigue loading and investigate
their mechanistic role in inducing tendon degeneration. Beyond tendon, by
investigating whether canonical mechanotransduction mechanisms observed in 2D
also operate within tissue explants, this work will advance the broad
understanding of how cells within fibrous soft tissues (e.g., tendon, meniscus,
skin) respond to physical stimuli in the native tissue
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.