* 2142795
* CAREER: Designing Human-Centered Privacy, Security, and Data Ethics for Non-Primary Smart Device Users
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* James Pierce, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2027
* USD 82,361.00

The introduction of smartphones and tablet computers began a trend of people
owning and using multiple “smart" computing devices connected to sensors and the
Internet. Popular smart devices include watches, doorbells, cameras, locks,
televisions, and speakers. Smart devices offer better ways of living, working,
playing, creating, and caring for others. But they also introduce privacy
concerns, security vulnerabilities, and potentials for unfair and opaque uses.
For example, people may use smart security cameras to surveil and monitor the
activities of neighbors, domestic workers, passersby, and other household
members. Smart devices with spatial sensing capabilities--such as microphones,
cameras, and location tracking--may identify and track people nearby. Non-
primary users, such as guests, roommates, and delivery drivers, may interact
with smart devices, but with limited awareness, consent, and control. This
project will study how primary and non-primary users interact with smart
devices, and each other, to better understand their concerns and preferences.
Findings will be used to develop prototypes for new products and interfaces to
improve privacy for non-primary users. Insights from these prototypes will be
generalized into design recommendations for practitioners and educators. The
project will also address design tradeoffs and stakeholder conflicts that demand
policy and strategy responses beyond purely technological solutions. The
education plan incorporates digital privacy, cybersecurity, and data ethics into
design and human-computer interaction education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will apply interdisciplinary
design processes to develop design prototypes, patterns, and principles for
improving human-centered data privacy, security, and interrelated ethical
concerns, including trust, transparency, and fairness. Design principles are
practice-based heuristics or guidelines used to understand design problems and
to make and explain design decisions. Design patterns are generalized solutions
to recurring design problems. They are commonly used across many fields of
design and software engineering. Fieldwork will be conducted to understand the
practices and preferences of diverse stakeholders with a focus on non-primary
users of smart devices. Empirical results will inform the design, development,
deployment, and analysis of novel prototypes corresponding to design patterns.
This research will contribute to a long-term research program integrating
design, engineering, and privacy/security expertise to promote positive social
change and ethical research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.