* 2142839
* CAREER: Molecular Recognition of 8-oxoguanine Modified G-Quadruplexes by the FANCJ Helicase and the REV1 Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Colin Wu, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2026
* USD 375,227.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA is the “blueprint of life”
that contains the instructions needed for cells to grow. That information must
be duplicated accurately when a cell divides; otherwise, errors will be embedded
into the DNA template and be passed onto the future generations of cells.
Cellular DNA undergoes harmful modifications daily as a result of chemical and
environmental stressors. The goal of this project is to determine the precise
mechanisms by which repair proteins recognize and remove damaged DNA. The
experiments will be incorporated into the CHM 4257 (Biochemistry Laboratory)
curriculum to increase the access of basic research for Oakland University (OU)
undergraduates. Since 24 students enroll in CHM 4257 each year, this project
will provide research opportunities for up to 120 OU undergraduates. CHM 4257
students will gain a more authentic laboratory experience instead of performing
a set of scripted procedures. To integrate research with outreach, OU students
will demonstrate genetic testing (for lactose tolerance) in high school science
classrooms with an all-in-one DNA analysis kit from Bento Lab. By mobilizing
research, students and teachers who have limited resources will have a
convenient way to use laboratory equipment. The outreach activities will allow
OU undergraduates to work with high school students and teachers to reinforce
textbook principles through hands-on experiences. This project will engage
students in research, classroom education, and community outreach to prepare
them for a future career in science. American Rescue Plan funding is used to
support this early career investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;G-quadruplexes (G4s) are ubiquitous nucleic acid
structures that are formed by guanine-rich sequences. G4s are especially prone
to oxidative damage and 8-oxoguanine modified G4s (8oxoG4s) must be removed
timely in dividing cells. The FANCJ helicase and REV1 polymerase have emerged as
first responders in the repair of 8oxoG4s; however, the precise mechanisms by
which FANCJ and REV1 assemble onto DNA to coordinate the unfolding of 8oxoG4s
with translesion synthesis are not yet clear. The goals of this project are to
define the fundamental role of 8oxoG in not only the thermal and mechanical
stability of 8oxoG4s, but also the binding of FANCJ and REV1. The DNA binding
properties of FANCJ and REV1 are expected to correlate with their repair
functions in human cells. To test this working hypothesis, the impact of 8oxoG
on the structure and thermal stability of 8oxoG4s will be examined by circular
dichroism spectroscopy; the mechanical stability and unfolding mechanism of the
DNA will be determined by single-molecule “fleezers.” Next, the affinities of
FANCJ and REV1 for 8oxoG4s will be measured by biolayer interferometry. Lastly,
the effects of 8oxoG4s on the DNA repair and contractile phenotypes of human
heart muscle cells will be determined by modified comet assays and video-based
imaging. These results will define the relationship between oxidative DNA damage
and cardiomyocyte function for the first time, and they will facilitate future
research to delineate the unknown phenotypes of FANCJ and REV1
variants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.