* 2142483
* CAREER: Scaling Complexities in Soil Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Katherine Todd-Brown, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2027
* USD 216,015.00

This NSF CAREER award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue
Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Too much carbon (C) in
the atmosphere causes the Earth to warm, while C in the soil improves water
retention and nutrient availability. C in the atmosphere is produced through
burning fossil fuels and also as a byproduct of decomposition of plant matter by
microorganisms in soil. As a result, soil C is directly connected to that in the
atmosphere. Earth system models (computer simulations) struggle to predict
whether soil C will increase or decrease over the next 100 years. Some
simulations predict huge increases in soil C, leading researchers to hope that
soils will help to mitigate continued CO2 emissions. By contrast, other
simulations predict that soils will release more C, leading to a feedback loop
that will cause atmospheric C to increase even if CO2 emissions are greatly
reduced. Research in this NSF CAREER project will improve predictive
understanding of the C cycle and global warming by adding details to the
simulations about how C moves through soil, as well as by pulling together more
data to help calibrate and validate simulations. The project will also develop
and promote a useful terminology to more accurately describe the detailed
processes to be modeled in computer simulations, as well as provide research
training for graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will expand predictive understanding of soil C dynamics by connecting
traditional soil C models to a process-rich understanding via a new multi-scale
modeling framework. Traditional soil C models divide soil C into pools; C then
leaves a pool at a rate proportional to the C in that pool. While this captures
the observed dynamics in incubation studies, the parameterization remains
difficult to predict, a priori, for a given soil type, relying on soil organic C
stocks and incubated respiration rates for both parameterization and validation.
By representing processes like microbial dynamics and mineral-organic
interactions more explicitly in non-linear models, and linking these process-
explicit models to the traditional linear soil C models via numerical
experiments and mathematical analysis, this work will be able to incorporate
non-traditional measurements to inform traditional model parameterizations. In
this project, soil measurements will be interconnected from primary open data
archives in repositories and held by U.S. government agencies to support an
expanded predictive understanding of soil carbon dynamics. This project will
also spearhead development of shared language (ontology) with a democratized
governance structure via data-centered communities of practice linking
researchers across soil projects internationally. Training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students will be integrated with the research and
outreach activities. By linking established and new understanding of soil C
dynamics with the rich legacy of soil data, results from this project will help
policy makers to better manage activities related to C stocks and
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.