* 2142207
* Building Capacity for Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Amy Buddie, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 149,994.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing an institutional
change model to enhance course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs)
in STEM disciplines. Undergraduate research is a high-impact educational
practice shown to increase student persistence and success in STEM. Embedding
research into courses has the potential to reach more students, including those
from diverse backgrounds, than the traditional apprentice model of undergraduate
research. This Capacity-Building Institutional and Community Transformation
project will develop a model of institutional change to support the integration
of quality CUREs in STEM disciplines. Once published, other institutions can use
this change model to advance CUREs at their
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the following goals: (1)
conduct a needs assessment to understand the gaps and opportunities for
implementing CUREs; (2) develop a Community of Practice to facilitate the
advancement of CUREs, bringing together diverse stakeholders both internal and
external to the institution; and (3) develop a strategic plan for CUREs in STEM
disciplines at the university. Achievement of these goals will be informed by a
Theory of Change developed after the needs assessment. Data collection will
include surveys, interviews, and focus groups with stakeholders, followed by an
analysis of artifacts related to CUREs, such as tenure and promotion guidelines,
syllabi, and student reflections. The final product will be a strategic plan for
CUREs at Kennesaw State University. Ultimately, this project will expand the
number of CUREs at this institution as well as the quality of those experiences
for students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.