* 2142487
* CAREER: Three-manifolds with finite volume, their geometry, representations, and complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Anastasiia Tsvietkova, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2027
* USD 274,186.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The research project focuses on three dimensional
manifolds. A three-manifold is a space that near each point looks like the
three-dimensional space we live in. Mathematically, such spaces can be
approached from different viewpoints. One of them is topological: considering
properties of the space that are preserved by continuous deformations. Another
viewpoint is geometric: studying certain rigid structures associated to the
space. A three-manifold can also be described by equations and by an algebraic
object called a group, which allows tools from algebraic geometry. Yet another
point of view is computational: many sophisticated algorithms not only help
calculate invariants of three-manifolds, but also raise questions about
algorithmic complexity of various mathematical problems. This project includes a
study of intrinsic geometric and topological properties of 3-manifolds, as well
as the rich interplay between all these approaches. Subprojects stemming from
interesting special cases of harder problems are suitable for early-career
mathematicians, allowing the educational program to be strongly intertwined with
the research goals. The PI will continue research training and mentoring at all
stages, from projects with undergraduates to working with postdoctoral
researchers. Through cross-disciplinary workshops, the PI aims to strengthen
relations between the above mentioned fields of research. Building on her prior
mentoring experience with students from underrepresented groups through the
Association for Women in Mathematics and the Garden State LS Alliance for
Minority Participation programs, the PI will continue to support
underrepresented communities through research involvement. Additionally, to
promote gender diversity in mathematics, the PI will organize quarterly “Women
in Topology” lectures at Rutgers, Newark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the
overarching theme to study intrinsic geometric and topological properties of
three-manifolds with finite (hyperbolic or simplicial) volume, the project's
goals encompass long-standing open questions about submanifolds of three-
manifolds. They include obtaining universal upper bounds on the number of
embedded surfaces, in the spirit of Mirzakani’s work on curves, but one
dimension up; work inspired by open conjectures about embedded surfaces and arcs
by Menasco and Reid from 1992, Sakuma and Weeks from 1995, Finkelstein and
Moriah from 2000. Among other questions of interest are problems on the
interface of algebraic geometry and knot theory, and conjectures about lower
bounds on complexity of well-known topological problems. The outcomes will
significantly contribute to low-dimensional topology and geometry, positively
impact computational topology, and deepen the connections between geometry,
topology, algebraic geometry and theoretical computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.