* 2142801
* CAREER: Correlated Superconductors under Extreme Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Cheng-Chien Chen, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2027
* USD 197,998.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education on modeling superconductors
in which electrons interact with each other strongly or are subjected to extreme
conditions such as intense light illumination and high pressure.
Superconductivity is a quantum phenomenon that allows electricity to flow with
zero resistance below some critical temperature. Superconductors have several
existing applications such as magnetic resonance imaging devices, quantum
computers, and magnetic levitation trains. However, broad-scale utilization of
superconducting technology is currently limited, because most existing materials
become superconducting at very low temperatures under normal conditions. Recent
experiments have shown that critical temperatures of superconductors can be
boosted under extreme conditions of exposure to intense lasers or ultrahigh
pressures. However, the underlying mechanisms for these experimental
observations have largely remained elusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI will employ and develop advanced computational techniques to
tackle the challenges associated with understanding the mechanisms of
superconductivity under extreme conditions. The main research goal is to provide
a fundamental theoretical understanding to guide experiments in characterizing
and discovering new materials that become superconducting when exposed to
intense light or high-pressures. The research will help expedite the modeling
and discovery of new materials that become superconducting at higher
temperatures, thus offering opportunities to revolutionize the industries of
energy, transportation, and information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports various education and outreach activities. The PI will (i)
train both undergraduate and graduate students in computational physics, data
science, and materials science research, (ii) deliver corresponding
interdisciplinary courses by integrating research with teaching, and (iii)
broaden the participation of groups traditionally underrepresented in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines and organize science
summer camps for Birmingham high-school and community college students, in order
to engage them at early stages towards STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports research and education in theoretical and computational studies
of correlated superconductors under extreme conditions. The materials to explore
include unconventional superconductors like the cuprates and iron selenides, and
conventional superconductors yet with substantial correlation physics manifest
in the electronic structures. The PI will investigate phase diagrams and light-
induced superconductivity of correlated Hamiltonians, such as the extended
Hubbard and Hubbard-Holstein models. The objectives are to show that metastable
superconducting phase at equilibrium can dominate at nonequilibrium, and that
exotic pairing symmetry can be selectively enhanced by a tailored laser pump.
The PI will also model the use of strain and pressure as tuning knobs to control
topological superconductors. Furthermore, the PI will investigate whether
correlation effects in rare-earth hydrides can potentially help achieve
superconductors with high critical temperatures at reduced pressures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle the challenges in studying the above systems,
the PI will employ and develop advanced numerical techniques including large-
scale exact diagonalization, first-principles evolutionary structure prediction,
and novel data science approaches, such as dataflow computing, time series
regression, and graph neural networks. The research activities will advance the
understanding and control of correlated superconductors under nonequilibrium and
strained environments, and help expedite the modeling and discovery of new
superconductors with high critical temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports various education and outreach activities. The PI will (i) train
both undergraduate and graduate students in computational physics, data science,
and materials science research, (ii) deliver corresponding interdisciplinary
courses by integrating research with teaching, and (iii) broaden the
participation of underrepresented STEM groups and organize science summer camps
for Birmingham high-school and community college students, in order to engage
them at early stages towards STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.