* 2142073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Physiological tradeoffs arising from early-life disruption of the gut microbiome
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Rachel Carmody, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 33,753.00

The gut microbiome – the term used to refer to the collective community of
microbes that live in the gastrointestinal tract – is a key player in the
creation and use of energy for the host. Studies show that disrupting the course
of development of the gut microbiome with antibiotics can increase body fat and
the linked risk of obesity and disease later in life. These effects can differ
between females and males. This doctoral dissertation research investigates how
antibiotic use causes increased body fat, frames this effect in an evolutionary
context, and examines why sex differences in this effect arise. Combining these
areas of focus allows this investigation of cause-effect relationships important
for understanding how factors experienced in early life impact health outcomes
later in life, and in addition to the potential to inform public health
research, the results speak to larger theoretical frameworks in biological
anthropology. This research provides intensive training for a female graduate
student and opportunities for undergraduate students, particularly members of
groups currently underrepresented in STEM fields to gain robust research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental adversity during early life can
cue developmental changes in young animals that promote metabolic diseases in
adults such as obesity. The gut microbiome plays critical roles in the
regulation of host energy balance, with disruption of the gut microbiome through
antibiotic use causing short-term weight and fat loss. Notably, despite short-
term energy losses, exposure to antibiotics in early life has been linked to
obesity and overweight in adulthood in humans, mice, livestock, and other
animals. However, the physiological mechanisms underlying these long-term
obesogenic effects remain unclear. The investigators hypothesize that gut
microbiota depletion during the critical period of early life constrains energy
budgets, necessitating energy allocation tradeoffs that persist in adulthood at
the cost of fitness. To test this hypothesis, the investigators profile the gut
microbiome and host energy allocation over the course of development in a
conventional mouse model of early-life antibiotic treatment, followed by direct
evaluation of immune and reproductive fitness in adulthood. The proposed study
provides novel evidence linking disciplines concerned with the developmental
origins of health and disease to those concerned with the gut microbiota and
host-microbial interactions. The results of this research contribute to
theoretical discussions regarding trade-offs following early life influence and
illuminates the factors contributing to rising rates of metabolic diseases
across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.