* 2142383
* Coaching to Learn: A Peer-to-Peer Intervention to Help College Students Apply and Transfer Effective Learning Strategies across STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mark McDaniel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 60,164.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing a peer-based
intervention that trains college students to use research-based cognitive study
strategies to support academic success and retention in STEM majors.
Undergraduate students who start college pursuing STEM majors often change plans
after earning lower than expected grades in required introductory STEM courses.
A mismatch between less effective learning strategies students typically use and
more effective strategies that could be adopted contributes to this problem. A
growing body of research demonstrates that college students rely heavily on
ineffective learning strategies such as rote memorization and cramming. Coaching
to Learn is a unique peer-to-peer intervention that empowers college students to
learn, apply, and transfer effective learning strategies across STEM courses.
The importance of this project stems from its novel use of an intervention that
integrates concepts from cognitive psychology and discipline-based education
research and embeds peer-based coaching in effective study strategies into an
introductory course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to expand and
rigorously test the Coaching to Learn model with a mixed-method, four-semester
longitudinal investigation of outcomes, including exam scores and grades earned
in Calculus 1, grades in other key STEM courses, progress toward graduation, and
retention in STEM majors. Students in Calculus 1 will be randomized into
treatment and control groups, and analyses will estimate the treatment effect
using administrative data and pre-, post-, and follow-up surveys. These surveys,
along with semi-structured interviews with participants, will allow additional
analysis of students’ perceptions of the coaching program and peer coaches;
their understanding, application, and transfer of the focal learning strategies;
and the potential moderating effects of self-regulation and sense of belonging.
Separate analysis of outcomes will be performed for populations of low-income,
first-generation, and underrepresented minority students, who may be especially
likely to benefit from coaching to train effective study strategies. The broad
scope of the design and evaluation of Coaching to Learn reflects the project’s
long-term goal: creating a model that can be replicated with adaptation to other
educational settings, including community colleges and minority serving
institutions. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.