* 2142274
* Teaching Science with Computational Thinking: Preparing Preservice Elementary Educators of the Future STEM Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yuanhua Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 294,958.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of improving science teaching
at the elementary level by infusing a critical computational thinking
perspective into the science methods courses and field placement experiences of
elementary level preservice teachers. Computational thinking is a means to
understand and solve complex problems using computer science concepts. Despite
its increasing importance, as reflected in national standards and initiatives,
no single preservice teacher prepared to teach computational thinking has
graduated from the teacher education programs in West Virginia, and the
situation nationally is similarly challenging. Most often, a sole focus on
computer science provides no explicit connection to disciplinary classroom
settings and student context, missing important opportunities for preservice
teachers to recognize what computational thinking may mean in their future
classrooms. Without systemic changes in teacher education, preservice teachers
are likely to develop insufficient levels of understanding of and interest in
the computational nature of science. Consequently, preservice teacheers will be
limited in providing their students with important knowledge and skills
necessary to participate in the workforce of the future. To address the issue,
this project aims to develop and implement a computational thinking-infused
curriculum in science methods courses. The project intends to co-design and
pilot science lessons in schools where elementary preservice teachers are
placed. The research agenda of the project is designed to investigate the impact
of the efforts on the teaching of preservice teachers. By the end of the
project, the participating preservice teachers are expected to know, practice,
and teach critical computation thinking-infused science lessons. Project
activities are anticipated to result in a model and a set of resources that can
be tested and used in teacher education nationwide to cultivate preservice
teachers’ computational thinking-enhanced STEM learning and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to help
preservice teachers develop interest, competence, and a positive perception of
the utility value for incorporating critical computational thinking into their
science instructional practices. Project research questions focus on measuring
these constructs and identifying computational thinking practices and processes
exemplified in preservice teachers’ teaching efforts over time. Approximately
100 preservice teachers, enrolled in science methods courses in the Bachelor of
Arts in Elementary Education Program of West Virginia University are intended to
participate over two years. Preservice teachers are intended to have the
opportunity to practice, design, and teach contextualized science lesson units
that integrate both computational thinking processes and practices with the 5E
Instructional Model, a widely accepted constructivist, inquiry-based
instructional model for teaching science. Project research aims to determine the
impact of computational thinking-infused activities on preservice teachers’
motivations and teaching. Then the project intends to employ a research-
practitioner partnership perspective during full-time preservice teacher
placement experiences. Selected preservice teachers are to be involved in
iteratively co-designing, with multiple stakeholders from the local education
community, piloting, and testing computational thinking-infused science lesson
units in placement classrooms. Through the dissemination of project activities,
research outcomes regarding how to integrate a critical computational thinking
lens with the 5E Model, and developed materials, this project intends not only
to help develop preservice teachers’ understanding of and interest in the
computational nature of science teaching but also likely enable teacher
educators and in-service teachers nationwide to recognize its relevance to
pedagogy, content, and context, contributing to students’ preparation toward
future STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.
Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.