* 2142003
* CAREER: Organic Structure and Interphase Engineering for Fast-Charging, High-Temperature and Sustainable Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Chao Luo, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2027
* USD 454,616.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fast-charging, high-temperature
and sustainable batteries are critical for the applications of energy storage
devices in stationary energy storage, well drilling industry, and high
temperature regions. This project focuses on developing advanced organic
materials, electrodes, and electrolytes for organic rechargeable potassium
batteries under fast-charging and high-temperature conditions. This set of
materials represents a “beyond lithium” chemistry for energy storage
applications for grid-scale storage integrated with intermittent renewable
energy such as solar or wind. The materials, including the organic polymers,
organic electrolytes, and potassium salts, are plentiful domestically and have a
lower environmental footprint. The fundamental research program and
complementary educational activities include interrelated components: 1)
principles of organic material, electrolyte, and interphase structure design for
organic batteries and extreme conditions; 2) integrated educational activities
involving middle school, high school, undergraduate and graduate students with
an emphasis on groups historically underrepresented in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to develop organic
rechargeable potassium batteries (RPBs) as alternatives to Li-ion batteries and
to seek fundamental understanding of 1) the correlation between organic
structure and electrochemical performance in RPBs; 2) the impact of highly
conductive one-dimensional (1D)/two-dimensional (2D) carbon materials such as
carbon nanotube and graphene to the ion/electron transport and structural
integrity of organic electrodes; and 3) the impact of solid electrolyte
interphase structure, composition and stability to the battery cycle life.
Extensive structural characterizations will be performed to investigate reaction
mechanisms of organic electrode materials in RPBs, the interplay between 1D/2D
carbon materials and organic electrode materials by π-π interaction and
heteroatom effect, as well as the interfacial chemistry of organic electrodes in
RPBs. This project will afford structure design principles for organic
materials, electrodes, and interphase to enable rational structure design and
performance optimization of fast-charging, high-temperature, and sustainable
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.