* 2142133
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Humans as reservoirs: Historical microbiomes uncover hidden zoonotic pathways
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Kristen Rayfield, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 31,000.00

Human populations have migrated to nearly every environment in the world, and as
part of this process have modified and integrated with local ecologies. Human
alterations to the environment, such as deforestation, contribute significantly
to zoonotic disease transmission, including transmission of pathogens (bacteria,
viruses, and other microorganisms) from animals to humans, and from humans to
animals. Less well studied are the impacts of the human-altered environment on
marine mammal populations. This doctoral dissertation research project
investigates the transmission of a human pathogen into marine mammal
populations, uses preserved microorganisms on historical marine mammal remains
as a unique resource to measure human-animal pathogen transmission, and explores
the impact of human alterations on the marine environment. This project and the
dissemination of its results serve to build collaborative research among
anthropologists, conservation biologists and environmental ecologists through
publication and through outreach with the National Parks Service, Skype a
Scientist, and STEM mentorship for the Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal runoff increases the
introduction of human pathogens and antibiotics into the environment. This can
lead to the spread of zoonotic disease in wildlife and the environmental
selection for antibiotic resistance. Of importance, Klebsiella pneumoniae, a
common hospital acquired infection of humans, has become endemic among
California sea lions along the California Channel Islands. In addition, a
hypervirulent strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae (hvKp), has been documented along
the Pacific Rim. However, the origin of this transmission event is unknown. This
project studies the introduction of Klebsiella pneumoniae into the California
sea lion population using museum collections. Museum collections can provide a
timeline for studying environmental alterations as well as pathogen emergence.
The investigators use metagenomic sequencing on California sea lion dental
calculus to reconstruct the microbial community and link changes in microbial
diversity to human activity. The investigators also perform in-solution DNA
capture on specimens with Klebsiella pneumoniae to determine which strains are
present. By investigating the oral microbiomes of California sea lions across
time, the investigators assess whether any human-mediated alteration to the
microbiome allowed for easier transmission of Klebsiella pneumoniae into the sea
lion population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.