* 2142998
* CAREER: Carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen biogeochemistry at the scale of a sinking marine particle
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Andrew Babbin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2027
* USD 458,351.00

CAREER: Carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen biogeochemistry at the scale of a sinking
marine particle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sinking particles transport carbon from
surface waters to the deep ocean. As particles sink, microorganisms transfer
nutrients to and from the surrounding water. Microorganisms also use organic
matter associated with particles as a source of energy. Together, the metabolism
of microbes and physical processes control whether carbon is consumed or
preserved in the ocean. Yet, the processes that occur at microscopic scales on
particles remain poorly understood. This research will study the biogeochemical,
physical, and ecological processes that influence sinking particles in the
ocean. The project will train undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher. The project aims to broaden participation in ocean
sciences by developing a new hands-on laboratory course at the college level.
The lead scientist will collaborate with teachers and develop ocean chemistry
learning modules for use in standard high school
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and his team will
utilize a custom laboratory model system and in-situ metagenomics to reveal
which organisms colonize marine particles and how, which successional metabolic
patterns emerge, and the consequences that these microscale properties have for
the water column. Specifically, the competitive advantage that bacteria with
chemotaxis, motility, and denitrification abilities have for colonizing marine
particles will be explored through a combination of precision microfluidic
experiments in the laboratory and bioinformatics analysis of samples collected
from the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. The work will further investigate the
effects that pore networks have for promoting particle colonization by changing
the physical flows and resolving the dynamic chemical landscape within a
particle. Results from these experiments will be used to translate the
mechanisms of life at the microscale to global ocean
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.