* 2142628
* Computing Fellows Program: Increasing Meaningful Computing Engagement Across Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jennifer Rosales, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,953.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing computing
fellowships to increase opportunities for meaningful computing engagement across
all disciplines. The low rate of participation of women and underrepresented
groups in computing negatively impacts the diversity and robustness of the
computing workforce. This issue also lowers the level of technical innovation in
other disciplines. In order to address this issue, the project will develop
computing fellowships and study their effectiveness. The Fellows in this project
will work with students and faculty in courses of science, humanities, and the
arts to incorporate computing activities in classes and support student
learning. The project aims to lower the barrier of entry to computing while
raising student confidence and interest. This project has the potential to raise
the computing abilities, interest, and self-efficacy of students in all fields,
to attract more women to computing, and to increase diversity to the computing
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adopt and adapt an evidence-
based peer and near-peer learning to promote self-efficacy, a sense of
belonging, and engaged student learning. The project will include rigorous
research to establish proof of concept and evaluation for continuous
improvement. Peer and near-peer mentoring and engaging computing experiences in
introductory courses have been shown to have a positive impact on the
recruitment, engagement, and retention of women in computing. The PIs will use a
mixed research method to increase the understanding of the effectiveness of
these evidence-based practices in the proposed computing fellowship project. The
project results will be disseminated through publications in journals and
academic conferences of computing. The project has the potential to be a
national model that can guide other institutions interested in creating similar
computing fellowships. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.