* 2142439
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Inclusive Participation in Artificial Intelligence Undergraduate Education for Social Good Using A Situated Learning Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Frank Gomez, California State University, Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 96,812.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving college-level
education in artificial intelligence (AI). Advances in AI will likely improve
transportation, education, healthcare, and other societal issues. It is
important that college students gain skills in AI to prepare them to be future
leaders and innovators. However, current AI education lacks both broad
multidisciplinary participation and diversity. The project plans to develop and
implement strategies for improving education in AI that are available to all
students, not just those enrolled in computer science programs. To do so, the
project team hopes to develop materials that identify social problems and teach
students to apply AI concepts and methods to address these problems. As a
result, this project may better prepare today’s college students to enter the
STEM workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to
develop AI learning modules to stimulate AI learning in students’ communities.
The students will be trained how to identify social problems. The instructors
will teach students AI concepts and applications through hands-on AI labs. The
students will learn how to propose AI-powered solutions to address social issues
considering both benefits and risks. The interdisciplinary AI For Social Good
(AI4SG) modules will be implemented in the programs of management information
systems, geography, and computer science at three California State University
campuses. The team plans to host an annual workshop to showcase student projects
and disseminate best practices of AI4SG education. The project will use both
quantitative and qualitative research methods and hopes to generate evidence on
how AI4SG education, through culturally responsive computing, can impact
motivation, learning outcomes, innovation, and equity gaps. This project is
supported by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. Additional
support is provided by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which seeks to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.