* 2142043
* Improving Inductive Reasoning Skills in Polymer Science Through Open Virtual Experiment Simulator Education Tools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yu Wang, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,832.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving inductive
reasoning skills of undergraduate polymer science students through developing
novel, dynamic, evidence-based "open virtual experiment simulator education
tools" (OVESET) and research-supported materials. Inductive reasoning is the key
to success in polymer science learning. This project will offer free,
interactive, state-of-the-art learning tools and instructional materials, thus
lifting major barriers many students experience when advancing in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Specifically, OVESET will allow
students to generate experimental results in seconds using only a web browser.
Instructors will benefit from both OVESET and the high-quality, evidence-based
instructional materials. The products developed in this project will be designed
to strengthen students' metacognition, increase students' perceived classroom
equity climate, and improve STEM retention.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project aims to 1) develop the codes and structure of OVESET for each topic
recommended by the American Chemical Society (ACS) for undergraduate polymer
science education, 2) create OVESET ancillary materials based on research-
supported pedagogy, 3) implement OVESET and ancillary materials in undergraduate
polymer science courses and evaluate their effectiveness, and 4) conduct
research to understand in what ways OVESET changes students' inductive reasoning
and meta-cognition using both quasi-experimental and experimental designs.
Systematic evaluation of the project will generate knowledge on whether OVESET
advances students' outcomes, STEM retention, and perceived classroom equity.
Research studies will generate knowledge on the specific conditions in which
OVESET works, such as how interactive virtual simulators like OVESET may impact
students' self-efficacy, growth mindset, sense of belonging in STEM, and
academic motivation. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.