* 2142266
* Expanding Participation for Women and Minorities in the 2022 Neurobiology of Cognition Gordon Research Seminar &amp; Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Sabine Kastner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,250.00

The field of Cognitive Neuroscience has expanded by leaps and bounds over the
past 20 years - the number of yearly publications has increased 20-fold over
these two decades. Bringing the Cognitive Neuroscience community together for
focused and in-depth discussion of cutting edge research every two years is
incredibly valuable (the 2020 Gordon Conference was not held because of the
pandemic). Meanwhile there has also been an explosion of information in
molecular, cellular, circuit and systems neuroscience but little of that
information has made significant inroads into our understanding of cognitive
function. This Gordon Research Conference on the Neurobiology of Cognition
should help bridge the gap, at the very least by identifying the avenues for
connection that have the most potential for near-term traction and by linking
scientist from disparate fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon conference
(GRS and GRC) will take place in July, 2022. The emphasis of the workshop is to
facilitate in-depth discussion between scientists working in divergent fields
whose integration is essential to understanding the neurobiology of cognition.
NSF support will enable graduate students and postdoctoral trainees and early
investigators to participate in this high-profile workshop and will allow early
stage investigators (non-tenured) to attend as speakers and full participants.
Trainee fellowships to cover travel and registration expenses will be
preferentially given to women and under-represented minorities in order to
enhance diversity in the field of cognitive
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.