* 2142898
* CAREER:Unraveling the metabolic networks underlying plant stress adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jeongim Kim, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 02/28/2027
* USD 494,117.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants must constantly deal with
adverse environmental changes, which often negatively impacts their growth. For
instance, plants with continuously enhanced defense frequently have compromised
growth and vice versa. This growth-defense tradeoff is largely due to limited
resources, which are used to produce costly defense metabolites. This issue has
become more pressing in recent years with ongoing climate change, which
accelerates pathogen infection and pest infestation. However, our understanding
of how plants simultaneously coordinate defense and growth remains scarce. This
proposed research will reveal mechanisms underlying growth regulation governed
by a class of stress compounds called aldoximes. Aldoximes are linked to both
plant defense - they are precursors of defense compounds and are induced by
stresses - and growth - they affect the production of the plant growth hormone
auxins as well as phenylpropanoids such as lignin. This project will elucidate
how auxins are made from aldoximes and how aldoximes impede phenylpropanoid
production in plants. Completion of this project will provide fundamental
understanding of plant metabolic networks coordinating hormones, defense
compounds, and lignin under stress conditions. The outcome of this project will
provide opportunities to enhance levels of phenylpropanoids such as anthocyanins
in crops, and will help foster a competitive and successful agriculture
workforce. This project also includes a K-12 educational activity called Phyto-
Detective, which will develop a series of videos aimed to raise awareness of
phytochemicals for a young student audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aldoximes are
stress-inducive compounds and are precursors of defense compounds. In addition,
they affect plant growth through modulating the production of plant growth
hormone auxins and phenylpropanoids. The accumulation of aldoximes represses
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis partially through the transcriptional activation of
the F-box genes that function in the degradation of phenylalanine ammonia lyase
(PAL). Since PAL functions at the entry point of the phenylpropanoid pathway,
aldoxime accumulation shuts down the entire phenylpropanoid pathway. Various
species produce two major natural auxins, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and phenyl
acetic acid (PAA), from their respective aldoximes, indicating the significance
of aldoxime metabolism in a multitude of different plants. Although the
aldoxime-mediated metabolic network plays a crucial role in stress-triggered
growth regulation in plants, molecular mechanisms underlying aldoxime-mediated
phenylpropanoid repression and aldoxime-derived auxin production remain elusive.
This project will elucidate this hidden metabolic network using two model
systems, Arabidopsis and tomato. Using omics and genetics approaches, this
project will identify the metabolic route of aldoxime-derived auxin production,
determine mechanisms of aldoxime-mediated phenylpropanoid repression, and
elucidate the roles of aldoxime metabolism in plant stress adaptation. The
educational goal is to foster the next generation of the agriculture workforce
and increase public awareness of plants and plant-based compounds. The
production and dissemination of educational videos for young students through
summer undergraduate interns and a K-12 teacher conference, respectively, will
provide educational tools to raise awareness of phytochemicals to the public. In
addition, graduate students and postdoctoral associates will receive
comprehensive research training while participating in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.