* 2142461
* An Ethnographic Study of Student Use of Online Resources to Improve Student Learning Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2025
* USD 598,830.00

This project addresses an important and timely topic in undergraduate STEM
education, namely, how students should use online resources appropriately to
support student learning. Helping students to develop good problem solving
skills is an important part of engineering education because it prepares them
for careers in the engineering workforce. Technological advances have provided
undergraduate engineering students with new ways to collaborate and access
online resources. These changes have also created unintended consequences such
as the use of online homework solutions that are accessed directly and shared
person-to-person. Using solutions inappropriately can create barriers to student
learning. The significance of this issue, which has continued unabated with the
emergence of new technologies, points to the need to approach this issue from a
new direction. This project will use new methods to study how and why students
use solutions when studying or solving engineering problems. These research
findings will inform the development of instructional interventions and policies
that help support engineering students’ learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope
of the research and intervention activities includes the study of two high-
enrollment introductory engineering courses, mechanics and thermodynamics, that
reach a large number of students in every subfield of engineering. The project
will use innovative qualitative research methods to advance the field’s
understanding of how and why students use homework solutions and to study the
efficacy of instructional interventions and policy changes aimed at reducing
inappropriate use of solutions. It is expected that these interventions and
policies will improve student learning outcomes. The project team will collect
data through student interviews as well as audio and video journals to develop
rich descriptions of students' experiences getting through coursework.
Ethnographic methods will be used to study how students navigate the cultures of
the courses and the broader engineering programs they encounter, which will help
elucidate patterns in students’ justifications for using solutions and how
students use them to learn. These patterns will inform instructional
interventions co-developed with instructors and potential policy changes at the
institution. The research findings, instructional interventions, and new
policies will be disseminated to engineering faculty at other institutions
through a workshop and publications so that other institutions will be able to
adopt similar interventions and policies. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.