* 2142778
* Social and ecological drivers of life history evolution in wild bees
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Karen Kapheim, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,120,270.00

All organisms must balance energetic investment in essential functions, such as
health and reproduction, and this typically leads to trade-offs over the course
of a lifetime. However, these basic rules of life do not seem to apply to
insects that live in social groups. For example, queens of some ants, bees, and
termites can live for years or even decades, despite laying thousands or
hundreds of thousands of eggs, but their sterile sisters and daughters live for
just days or weeks. The mechanisms underlying this drastic departure from
otherwise universal life history trade-offs are unknown, in part due to
limitations in the types of species that have been studied. This project will
focus on wild bees to determine how variation in sociality influences how bees
balance investment in reproduction, health, and longevity. By expanding the
breadth (number of species) and depth (ecologically relevant experiments within
a key species) of analysis, the project will provide unique insights into how
bees optimize fitness under changing environmental conditions, which is critical
for mitigating issues related to global food security in the face of pollinator
decline. The project will provide training and mentorship for students
(undergraduate and graduate) and a postdoctoral researcher. Training will
specifically target Native American students from a regional campus to broaden
participation in STEM through mentorship in a summer research program and
fellowship. Results generated from the research will be used to develop guided
experiential learning modules in an upper division/graduate course called Genes
and Behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life history theory has been a guidepost for
interpreting variation in behavior and ecology through an evolutionary
framework, but social insects seem to break the rules by escaping classic
tradeoffs between fecundity and longevity. This suggests that social evolution
influences life history evolution, fundamentally altering what seem to be
otherwise basic constraints in how life history strategies can vary. The team
will investigate how wild bees invest in life history traits (immunity,
reproduction) as a function of variation in the ecological and social
environment in three sets of experiments. First, internal and external immunity
will be assayed in multiple bee species to test alternative hypotheses for how
the evolution of eusociality has shaped investment in immune function. Second,
the focus will shift to a facultatively eusocial bee (Megalopta genalis) that
allows direct comparison of life history tradeoffs in solitary and social
individuals under the same ecological conditions. Comparing immune response,
oxidative stress, and gene expression profiles in three tissues between solitary
and social females before and after offspring emergence will take advantage of
natural differences in energy reserves to see how access to resources influences
investment in survival (i.e., immunity, senescence, mortality risk) and
reproduction, as well as the molecular pathways underpinning these traits. A
final set of experiments will test these findings directly by experimentally
removing the workers from social M. genalis nests and measuring the effects on
queen survival, reproduction, and their underlying mechanisms. These activities
will identify the mechanisms by which social evolution influences life history
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.