* 2142460
* CAREER: Performance through Curvature – An Integrated Computational and Experimental Study of the Mechanics of 3D Self-Architected Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Carlos Portela, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2028
* USD 764,893.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will focus on providing a fundamental mechanical
understanding of self-architected materials, i.e., materials whose three-
dimensional (3D) architecture is determined by natural processes as opposed to
being designed a priori by humans. The integrated computational and experimental
approach will concentrate on relating geometric parameters such as curvature to
the resulting mechanical responses, providing mechanics-based design guidelines
and predictive tools for this family of metamaterials. Self-architected
materials with 3D architectures at the nano-to-microscale present a potential
route for scalable nanomaterials that are lightweight and attain extreme
mechanical properties, but their curvature-to-mechanical property relation
remains largely unknown. This research project will contribute to filling those
fundamental knowledge gaps by providing a knowledge base that facilitates the
design of new types of lightweight centimeter-scale materials with aperiodic
self-architected nanoscale features that do not rely on advanced additive
manufacturing, and whose mechanical properties could surpass those of classical
architected materials. Uncovering the mechanics of self-architected materials
can lead to advanced lightweight structural materials for aerospace
applications, protective coatings for defense capabilities, and design
principles for resilient engineered materials—all of which would contribute
towards solving ongoing mechanics-of-materials engineering challenges. An
integrated educational and outreach program will accompany research efforts,
focusing on virtual and in-person engagement of K-12 students and
educators—including an augmented reality framework—introducing design,
fabrication, and experiments on 3D architected materials to a broader audience,
particularly to underrepresented (e.g., Hispanic) groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of this project is to uncover
geometry-to-mechanics relations for self-architected materials, such as those
derived via spinodal decomposition processes, that enable prediction and
understanding of their mechanical properties such as their stiffness, strength,
and fracture toughness as a function of curvature distribution. Expanding on the
concept that negative Gaussian curvature provides stretching-dominated
deformation in shell-based architected materials, this project seeks to
significantly expand on this curvature-induced benefit by determining how the
directionality of negative-curvature enhances the mechanical properties. This
approach will integrate four thrusts that include scalable fabrication of the
phase-separation self-architected materials, computational frameworks to design
and predict the mechanical properties of desirable morphologies, and
nanomechanical experiments on both naturally self-architected samples and on
3D-printed microscale prototypes. Most research efforts will concentrate on
understanding curvature-dependent beyond-linear effective properties and failure
mechanisms of self-architected materials, towards the design of lightweight but
tough scalable architected materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.