* 2142404
* Characterization of STEM Undergraduate Research Experiences and Student Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Bachrach, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating how
participation in undergraduate research, particularly during the academic-year,
can benefit STEM students. Undergraduate research plays an important role in
showing students the scientific research process and inspiring students to
pursue STEM-related careers. The focus of this project is students' academic-
year research at primarily undergraduate institutions. The project seeks to
expand current understanding, through social science research methods, of how
the benefits of undergraduate research are achieved. This effort connects to the
NSFâ€™s mission to broaden access to and encourage participation in STEM-related
activities among diverse student populations. Intended outcomes of the project
are a blueprint and toolkit to help STEM instructors design successful
undergraduate research experiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The novelty of this
project lies in the integration of well-established social science research with
education research, where the former is focused on understanding how different
aspects of work design influence motivation and the latter relates to STEM
Undergraduate Research Experiences (UREs). Adopting a job characteristics theory
lens, the primary goals are to develop and validate a multi-dimensional indirect
URE-modified measure of the work-design structure. These goals will be
accomplished by first adapting an established work-design measure from the
domain of organizational psychology to the STEM URE context. The measure will be
adapted through an iterative process of subject matter expert interviews. From
the earliest stages of the project, bilingual participants will be included in
the interview process to ensure the instrument functions reliably across
linguistically diverse groups. This new measure will be used along with a survey
of self-reported STEM-critical student outcomes (e.g., science identity, design
thinking, data literacy) for relational assessment. The results from this
project will be disseminated broadly via conferences, peer-reviewed academic
journals, and science blogs. Creative Commons will be leveraged to facilitate
wider access and an informational website will also be developed to disseminate
the results from this project. This project will add new knowledge about the
structure of UREs, what aspects of URE structure are most likely to generate
critical student outcomes, and URE design insights to accelerate the
motivational, attitudinal, and behavioral potential of diverse student
populations. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.