* 2142592
* Collaborative Research: Imaging the 3D Viscosity Structure of the Antarctic Mantle with Existing Observations from GPS and Relative Sea Level
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Jacqueline Austermann, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 01/31/2026
* USD 506,129.00

Given the imminent threat posed by rising sea levels across much of the globe,
there is a critical need to better understand past, present, and future
Antarctic ice mass change and the resulting solid Earth deformation. The latter
process is referred to as glacial isostatic adjustment. A key parameter that
determines the rate of this deformation is the viscosity of the deforming
material. To date, the vast majority of global glacial isostatic adjustment
models assume that Earth's viscosity structure varies with depth alone. However,
there exists extensive geological and geophysical evidence for significant
lateral variations in viscosity and for the existence of low viscosity regions
in the Earths mantle below Antarctica that deform rapidly on decadal or faster
time scales. This variability in viscosity causes regions of the solid mantle to
deform differently and thus a model of three-dimensional viscosity structure is
needed to better measure the changing weight of the Antarctic ice sheet, to
accurately model ice sheet dynamics, and to better project future sea level
changes in response to Antarctic ice melt. The research conducted here will
construct a first-generation reference three-dimensional viscosity model for the
solid Earth underlying Antarctica. The analysis will use horizontal and vertical
deformations measured by the Global Navigation Satellite System over the last
few decades at sites across Antarctica, a state-of-the-art seismic model of the
Antarctic mantle, coupled simulations of glacial isostatic adjustment and ice
sheet stability, and a novel, observationally driven and mathematically rigorous
approach to calculating the glacial isostatic adjustment parameters that cannot
be directly observed. This project supports two early-career researchers and two
graduate students. Funding will be used to support the participation of U.S.
graduate students and instructors in a glacial isostatic adjustment training
school, which will be organized by the principal investigator and leadership of
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research initiative Instabilities and
Thresholds in Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the magnitude of
modern ice mass loss from Antarctica is a key element in efforts to constrain
future sea level change. Although satellite gravimetry and changes in ice
surface elevation are used to estimate ice mass change, these observations
cannot provide a direct estimate because they also record changes in the solid
Earth. Similarly, modeling of past and future ice sheet dynamics and sea level
change require an accurate model of solid earth deformation. Thus, the
contribution from the ongoing response of the viscoelastic Earth to ice sheet
evolution across the ice age and into the modern world, termed glacial isostatic
adjustment (GIA), must be accurately quantified. Although the signal from GIA is
widely recognized as being a significant component of modern Antarctic
deformation, our incomplete knowledge of earths three-dimensional viscosity
structure and the appropriate rheological model for the solid Earth deformation
leads to large uncertainties in estimates of present-day ice mass change and
modeling of future ice dynamics and sea level change. Fortunately, direct
observations of solid Earth deformation have been made over the last few decades
by Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) stations installed on bedrock
across Antarctica. These observations have been used in forward modeling to
infer regional one-dimensional viscosity structure, but they have not been
directly used to image the continents three-dimensional viscosity structure.
This will be addressed through four key tasks: (1) Inferring plausible steady-
state diffusion creep viscosity models from the seismic shear wave speeds
determined with the latest ANT-20 seismic tomography model using an inverse
calibration scheme based on experimental results from mineral physics and a
suite of geophysical constraints; (2) Determining ice histories that span from
the Last Glacial Maximum to present from a coupled GIA/ice sheet model, which
explores the range of inferred three-dimensional viscosity models and plausible
parameters governing ice dynamics. These ice histories will be merged with
modern estimates of ice mass change; (3) Exploring and characterizing the
spatiotemporal sensitivities of vertical and horizontal GNSS deformation and
relative sea level observations to the three-dimensional viscosity structure and
ice history produced in tasks 1 and 2 using the adjoint method; and (4)
Inverting observations of GNSS crustal deformation rates and relative sea level
using the adjoint method to derive a new three-dimensional map of mantle
viscosity below Antarctica. These inversions will use the models from task 1 and
2 and intuition gained from task 3 to further refine the three-dimensional
viscosity structure and to explore whether observations include signals of
transient or non-linear deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.