* 2142881
* CAREER: Dynamic Water Transport Timescales: Quantifying Hydrodynamic Responses to Perturbations Across Time and Space in a River Delta
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Matthew Hiatt, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2027
* USD 253,113.00

Surface water movement through coastal environments is controlled by both marine
and terrestrial processes, which yields complicated patterns of water
circulation that vary through time and space. The time it takes for water to
move through an environment is often used as an important estimator of water
quality and ecosystem health. In river deltas, this is complicated by the
presence of deep, fast-moving water in channels that is connected to slow,
shallow moving water in vegetated wetlands. It is important to understand how
water transport times in river deltas evolve over time because of the
considerable interest in using natural deltaic land-building processes for
coastal restoration. This project investigates these issues using field work in
coastal Louisiana and computer simulations of water movement in growing river
deltas. An educational plan builds on these themes by training university
students using innovative field measurements for coastal hydrology, integrating
coastal hydrology research into undergraduate and graduate coursework, and
engaging K-8 students with demonstrations, guided research projects, and field
trips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River deltas are highly dynamic ecosystems with
complicated hydrology that are of significant societal and environmental
importance. This research addresses an urgent need in hydrology to understand
how hydrological processes evolve in non-stationary ecosystems using numerical
modeling, field observations, and graph theory. The project will develop the
concept of Dynamic Water Transport Timescales and establish a framework for
quantifying how changes to delta morphology and hydrodynamics impact water
transport time. Fundamental questions will be addressed concerning the impacts
of multi-decadal morphodynamic change on short-term hydrological transport in
river deltas, the surface water responses to internal and external perturbations
across time and space, and the links between deltaic channel network structure
and water transport times. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Hydrologic Sciences program and the Education &amp; Human Resources program in
the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.