* 2142887
* CAREER: Optically-Controlled Phase Transition of Organic Molecules via Molecular Switching
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Grace Han, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2027
* USD 262,655.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Light-responsive molecules have emerged as a new
tool to optically control various properties of solid-state materials.
Reversible control over the optical, thermal, phase, and mechanical properties
of solid-state materials enables applications that involve optical storage,
energy storage, and mechanical response. The fundamental understanding of the
optically-induced molecular transformation in solids and how such transformation
results in phase change, however, is currently lacking. This CAREER research
project, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B program in the Division of Chemistry, broadens the knowledge on
light-molecule interactions in a condensed environment, which is translated to
understand solar thermal energy storage that has a tremendous impact on the
energy security of the nation. The project contributes to the advancement of
various fields studying molecular switching, phase transition behaviors, and
renewable solar energy storage. Additionally, it addresses critical areas for
improving underrepresented minority engagement in STEM at Brandeis University
and in the local community. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
are actively recruited and trained in organic materials chemistry, and Spanish-
English bilingual science events are established in partnership with a local
high school to promote the interests of students in chemistry and renewable
energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With this
research project organic materials that are optically stimulated to undergo
reversible phase transitions between solid and liquid are developed. The
principal investigator and her research group design and synthesize new organic
functional materials that harness the optically-induced conformational and
polarity change of photoswitches to control the phase of bulk materials. Various
photochromic core structures and functional groups are explored to yield a deep
understanding of the structure-property relationship. New functionalization
strategies that delineate the effect of the polarity, steric hindrance,
molecular symmetry, and fluorous interactions on the condense-phase
photoswitching and consequent phase transitions are investigated. Through this
work, molecular switching dynamics in a crowded environment are unraveled, and
strategies to alter the conformational freedom around the moving parts of
molecular switches are developed. Additionally, measurements of thermal
parameters of phase transition materials are used as a characterization tool to
understand the types and degree of intermolecular interactions in condensed
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.