* 2142830
* CAREER: Hydrodynamic Controls on Fluid and Solute Exchanges Across the Aquifer-Estuary Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* James Heiss, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 394,899.00

Surface water and dissolved chemicals cycle through sediments that underlie
rivers and the ocean due to tides, waves, currents, and other hydrological
processes. Within the sediments, dissolved chemicals, such as organic carbon and
nitrate, undergo chemical transformations before re-entering surface water. This
cycling affects river and ocean water quality, ecosystem health, and coastal
groundwater resources. This project will quantify and map water and chemical
exchanges and saltwater intrusion along the land-sea transition zone in three
types of estuaries using surface water, groundwater flow, and biogeochemical
computer models. The research will be integrated into a multi-step educational
pipeline for high school students from underrepresented communities in the
hydrologic sciences though field-based learning, and professional development
courses on groundwater-surface water interactions that will be offered through
partnership with a regional interstate compact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
limited understanding of the scales of groundwater-surface water and associated
chemical exchanges between river and ocean systems. The project will fill this
knowledge gap by addressing fundamental questions on the connectedness of rivers
and oceans through groundwater-surface water exchanges in estuaries. The
research will develop new coupled surface water, groundwater, and reactive
transport modeling approaches to understand the role of estuary hydrodynamics
and heterogeneity in surface water chemistry on driving fluid and chemical
exchanges across aquifer-estuary interfaces. Knowledge of river to seabed
exchanges will allow for more accurate estimates of nutrient, metal,
contaminant, and carbon fluxes to the ocean, thus bridging understanding of
subsea exchanges to exchanges in terrestrial river corridors. Insights into
hydrodynamic controls on groundwater-surface water exchanges will 1) aid in
predicting the impacts of sea level rise on chemical transformations in
estuarine pore water, 2) improve coastal surface water quality models, 3) guide
coastal groundwater resource management, and 4) strengthen long-standing
restoration efforts in the study estuaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.