* 2142360
* Collaborative Research: A Student-Centered Personalized Learning Framework to Advance Undergraduate Robotics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Frederick Harris, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 336,084.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a student-
centered learning system to support students pursuing degrees in robotics. This
work plans to address two significant issues in robotics education. Central
focus areas of the project include addressing the difficulty of finding
qualified robotics instructors and reducing learning and instructional barriers
related to the expense of robotics training equipment. College students studying
robotics have a variety of backgrounds, learning styles, and goals. Some
students have significant industry experience and return to school to learn a
specific skill, while others have never taken any college courses. The resulting
framework is intended to allow students to tailor their educational experience
to meet their needs and background. The framework will also allow students to
learn robotics using low-cost hardware and will not require instructors with
extensive robotics expertise to deliver course content. The deployment of this
system has the potential to increase the number of degree programs in robotics
at both community colleges and four-year undergraduate institutions.
Additionally, leveraging low-cost devices and simulation has potential to
increase access to high-quality robotics instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will implement a learning system in two one-semester courses covering
robotics topics that make extensive use of low-cost hardware and high-realism
simulators. The student-centered personalized learning framework will prioritize
student autonomy and be used to teach students advanced robotics skills. Course
topics will be selected based on advice from a course content advisory
committee. After the learning system is developed, the course content will be
integrated into the platform. User studies will be conducted to determine the
depth at which students master the desired learning outcomes and their
experiences using the system. The system will be deployed and evaluated at
Lenoir Community College and the University of Nevada Reno. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.