* 2142984
* CAREER: Grasping Understandings of Students Mathematical and Perceptual Strategies Using Real-Time Teacher Orchestration Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Erin Ottmar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2027
* USD 642,343.00

Many middle and high school students in the United States do not reach
proficiency in algebra. When solving algebraic expressions and equations,
students not only need to perform procedures, but also identify mathematical
structure, attend to important perceptual cues, and make decisions about which
steps are most appropriate or productive in a particular problem context. Math
teachers are critical to supporting and improving students’ math achievement by
providing high-quality feedback, instruction, discourse, and opportunities to
their students. However, many teachers struggle to find algebra-based teaching
tools that efficiently provide a means to challenge students to think
conceptually, keep their students engaged, review student work efficiently in
real-time, and better support their instruction. This project focuses on the
design, development, and use of new algebra-focused teacher tools that use
artificial intelligence (AI) to efficiently provide teachers with detailed
information about their students’ math problem solving steps, behaviors, errors,
and learning in real-time. The underlying hypothesis is that if teachers are
given detailed information and feedback about their students’ perceptual and
mathematical processes using real-time analytics, teachers will better notice
and interpret student struggles. In turn, teachers will be able to make better
decisions and differentiate their instruction for a broader range of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research question is to determine
whether teachers are better able to detect, attend to, interpret, and make
actionable decisions when using the AI-supported tool. Researchers will conduct
a sequence of activities during this five-year project. First, to determine what
behaviors best predict learning, a database of log files generated from students
solving problems will be analyzed using statistical and learning analytics
methods. Next, researchers will utilize machine learning approaches to create
automated detectors that capture the use of effective math strategies, errors,
and focus that has led to improved learning. Third, the project will use design-
based research alongside teachers to co-design, develop, and prototype AI-
supported teacher tools. The tools provide critical information about students’
mathematical and perceptual processes and help teachers quickly identify what
gaps students have in their math knowledge. The researchers will conduct
classroom-based observations and interviews to examine how teachers’ instruction
and students’ understanding might be altered with the real-time tools and
feedback. The outcome of the project will advance theories and foundational
research in the fields of learning science, computational data science, human-
computer interaction, and math education, as well as offer new insights into
automatic detection of mathematical strategies and classroom orchestration. The
technical and educational agendas also provide opportunities for
interdisciplinary research and practical training and collaboration between
graduate students, postdocs, teachers, and students. This award is funded in
whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.