* 2142638
* Making the makers: how increased agency and social impact driven makerspaces grow engineering identity and self-efficacy in marginalized students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Maria Yang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,499,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving marginalized
students' experiences in STEM education using makerspaces. Makerspaces have been
growing in popularity as environments in which students can gain hands-on
technical skills in a communal setting, thereby improving their confidence and
sense of achievement. When students have control over their learning, it
contributes to a sense of inclusion. There is evidence that socially impactful
themes may increase enrollment in university STEM programs. A fundamental
unresolved issue is to what extent these types of benefits may specifically and
positively impact marginalized students. The unresolved nature of this issue
stems from contemporary research that suggests makerspaces may sometimes
perpetuate disparities among students from underrepresented backgrounds. This
project intends to develop makerspace student learning experiences that
demonstrate how to maximize positive effects while minimizing the perpetuation
of negative effects. These learning experiences will include a new prototype
makerspace and new social impact course at the University of Michigan (UM), and
a new social impact maker project workshop at MIT. This project will provide
recommendations for best practices that universities may adapt to create
makerspaces that better support the engagement and education of marginalized
students in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to
create a model and a set of metrics that characterize makerspaces' role in
affecting key characteristics that are important for marginalized students, such
as engineering identity, sense of belonging, and views on failure. The scope of
work covers a four-year, longitudinal study that will track three cohorts
(approximately 100 students) at MIT and UM. The project will address three
research questions: (1) How does increasing agency in informal makerspace
experiences affect marginalized studentsâ€™ sense of engineering identity, sense
of belonging, view of failure, and self-efficacy in engineering? (2) How do
informal makerspace experiences compare with formal maker-oriented courses in
influencing these factors? (3) How do socially impactful maker projects
influence the engagement of marginalized students compared with non-socially
impactful projects? Data from quantitative interviews, qualitative interviews,
surveys, and guided projects in instrumented makerspaces will be analyzed to
answer these questions. Project results will be disseminated via publications
and presentations within the American Society for Engineering Education, the
International Symposium on Academic Making, and the International Journal of
Academic Making and Makerspaces. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.