* 2142996
* CAREER: Next-generation Optical I/O with Embedded Equalization for Disaggregated AI Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sajjad Moazeni, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2027
* USD 389,165.00

Ever-increasing size and complexity of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) models and datasets, recently reaching over a trillion parameters,
have created a vital need for vast parallelization over thousands of processing
and memory units. This requires low-latency and ultra-low power multi-Tb/s
inter/intra-rack optical I/O as well as chip-to-chip interconnects. Although
state-of-the-art inter-chip interconnects are realized with copper-based
wirelines, they cannot meet the stringent speed, energy-efficiency, and
bandwidth density requirements of emerging AI supercomputers. Silicon photonic
transceivers have shown a great promise to address this challenge by ultimately
co-packaging optical transceivers with high performance CPU/GPUs. Co-packaged
optics for the next-generation AI computing should provide tens of Tb/s
aggregate data-rates at sub-pJ/b energy-efficiency and low-latency. Despite
recent efforts in developing such transceivers, proposed solutions do not yet
satisfy the energy and latency requirements of future inter-chip links. In this
work, we aim at solving these challenges for ultra-high data-rates by proposing
a new equalization paradigm and a novel system-level architecture to make co-
packaged optics “smarter” than being just an electro-optical bridge as has never
been imagined before. Outcomes of this project can speed up AI/ML computing
hardware by enabling a truly disaggregated computing architecture down to the
package level. We also plan to integrate our research methodology and modern
topics into the educational curriculum by developing a new course. This course
will bridge the gap between the fields of integrated circuits and photonics and
will have publicly available materials for dissemination at other institutes.
Our other educational plans include outreach activities for college and K-12
students and engaging underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most critical challenge in building
energy-efficient optical I/O at high data-rates is the power-hungry equalization
circuitry conventionally implemented in the electrical domain. These equalizers
can consume over 50% of the total link energy and area. We will overcome this
issue by radically transforming the equalization techniques, embedding the
necessary equalization functionalities in reconfigurable photonic devices rather
than the electronic side for the first time. This approach will be deployed for
both the transmitter and receiver sides and can achieve sub-pJ/b overall link
efficiency. Moreover, while co-packaged optical I/O is becoming imminent for
interconnect and switching networks, we will show that these chips can be
“smarter” than being just an electro-optical bridge by adding more system-level
capabilities to them in this project. These new capabilities can be implemented
on a co-processor unit in co-packaged optical I/O chips. In doing so, not only
we can overcome the latency overhead of using optical interconnects for chip-to-
chip communications, but also, we will exploit novel system-level architectures
that can be unlocked by co-packaged optics. The new disaggregated AI
architecture can significantly speed up the compute time for
training/interference of large-scale AI/ML applications by reducing
communication bottlenecks and providing direct memory access for multi-GPU
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.