* 2142922
* CAREER: Design Principles for Controlled Cyclic Polymer Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Matthew Golder, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2027
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Matthew R. Golder of the University of Washington is
developing new synthetic approaches for the preparation of cyclic polymers.
Compared to other polymer classes, cyclic polymers are unique because they lack
chain ends. Cyclic polymers are currently being explored as potential candidates
for next generation of drug-delivery agents, conductive materials, and
thermoplastic resins. The synthesis of cyclic polymers in high purity and large
quantities remains a challenge in polymer chemistry because current
methodologies typically yield mixtures of linear and cyclic macromolecules which
are difficult to separate. In this research, metal initiators based on ruthenium
will be developed and used to control the synthesis of cyclic polymers. Detailed
kinetic and mechanistic studies will be conducted to correlate the initiator
structure with its reactivity in polymerization reactions. Ultimately, the
developed initiators will be able to regulate reaction kinetics and molecular
weight or size of cyclic polymers. If successful, this work will enable the
preparation of cyclic polymeric materials with architectures that are otherwise
very challenging to achieve. The research activities associated with this award
will increase broadening participation and enable training of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in synthetic polymer chemistry. The
outreach program “Husky at Home Science” will reach and engage homeschooled
students across the state of Washington. This activity will develop a virtual
hands-on program and a children’s storybook centered around polymer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the development of ruthenium-
mediated ring expansion metathesis polymerization for the controlled synthesis
of cyclic polymers. In the first goal, tethered ruthenium benzylidene initiators
will be prepared and used to study polymerization reaction kinetics.
Computational modeling will be utilized to complement the experimental synthetic
and mechanistic studies. Emphasis will be placed on determining the role of
initiator structure on the overall reaction profile. In the second goal,
systematic studies will be conducted to gain control over the ring-closing
(i.e., back-biting) of the cyclic ruthenium species relative to insertion.
Decoupling monomer insertion from ring-closure could enable living
polymerization in which the molecular weights of cyclic polymers will be
predetermined by the ratio of monomer to the initiator. Lastly, a methodology
will be developed for more accurate determination of acyclic impurities amongst
cyclic polymers in ring expansion metathesis polymerization. The new technique
will involve incorporation of bulky silyl ether monomers that act as single-
addition degradable junctions, allowing for the union and separation of two
polymer blocks. If successful, this research will advance fundamental
understanding of how to control back-biting reactions in metal-mediated ring
expansion metathesis polymerization, enabling the synthesis of cyclic polymers
that are otherwise difficult to prepare using existing
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.