* 2142555
* CAREER: Understanding the Fundamental Dynamics of Angular Momentum Carrying Acoustic Wave Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Chengzhi Shi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2027
* USD 610,147.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will enable the development
of new knowledge related to the propagation of angular momentum carrying
acoustic waves in anisotropic biomaterials, which is critical for their use in
biomedical imaging, therapies, and treatment. Angular momentum carrying acoustic
waves, such as acoustic vortex beam, are a special type of sound waves that have
a rotating pressure field or energy flux. Previous studies indicated that these
waves could have many potential biomedical applications, including medical
imaging with better resolution than traditional ultrasound imaging and targeted
ultrasonic removal of kidney stones and blood clots with higher efficacy than
classical focused ultrasound therapies. However, these studies focused on waves
propagating underwater and ignored the anisotropy and heterogeneity of
biomaterials such as muscle fibers. Recent theoretical studies have indicated
that acoustic angular momenta will couple when propagating in anisotropic or
heterogeneity materials, altering the propagation path of the wave, and
potentially impeding their reliable use in the suggested biomedical
applications. The research supported by this CAREER award seeks to understand
the fundamental coupling mechanism between different acoustic angular momenta,
especially when propagating in anisotropic biomaterials, through modeling and
experimentation. This understanding will be applied to demonstrate imaging and
blood clot thrombolysis capabilities through anisotropic media. The results from
this research will advance knowledge in acoustics, dynamics, biomechanics, as
well as biomedical engineering, and can potentially lead to novel medical
diagnostics and therapies. This award will positively impact STEM education
through collaboration with existing programs at Georgia Tech aimed to engage
students and high school science teachers from the Atlanta Public Schools and
Atlanta International School, especially from currently underrepresented groups,
and to promote their participation in research. This award will leverage the
Georgia Tech InVenture Challenge to motivate undergraduate students and
encourage them to compete in this interdisciplinary innovation competition using
knowledge learned from this research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to create and experimentally validate new models that
accurately predict the propagation of angular momentum carrying acoustic waves
in anisotropic media. Intrinstic and extrinsic acoustic waves become coupled
when propagating in anisotropic materials, thus shifting the wave propagation
trajectory. The central hypothesis of this research is that this coupling occurs
through Coriolis effects resulting from rotations induced by the wave-medium
interactions. The researchers will test this hypothesis in theoretical models
and in experiments conducted underwater and in soft anisotropic media. They will
probe the ability to translate this understanding to the suggested imaging and
thrombolysis capabilities experimentally using anisotropic tissue mimicking
gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.