* 2142993
* CAREER: Understanding non-photochemical quenching under chilling in the warm-season C4 grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Katarzyna Glowacka, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2027
* USD 618,078.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensitivity to low temperatures
greatly limits the distribution, establishment, and productivity of crops. The
economically important grasses such as maize and sugarcane originated in a warm
climate and did not develop protection against cold. In low temperatures, solar
energy absorbed by leaves exceeds greatly its use for CO2 fixation, which leads
to oxidative stress and subsequent photodamage, arrest of growth and eventually
plant death. As a photoprotective response, the leaf switches into a ‘safety
mode’ where an excess of energy can be harmlessly released. Little is known
about these protective switches in warm climate grasses under cold conditions.
Therefore, this project integrates physiology, biochemistry, genetics,
metabolomics and field phenomics to reveal the regulation of protective
mechanisms against oxidative stress under chilling and cold. Improved chilling
tolerance of warm climate crops would increase their climate resilience, enable
an earlier spring planting/regrowth that would extend the growing season while
facilitating increased use of early season soil-moisture. The education
component will train undergraduate students on the life-long skill of science
communication. The research experiences will provide instrumental training to
female undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow. Increased
participation of women in STEM will lead to a more diverse and stronger
scientific workforce. The public outreach activities will aim for higher
acceptance and appreciation for research innovation in feeding the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is to understand
the non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) mechanism under chilling in C4 warm-season
grasses. The study will be performed on Miscanthus, which is a close relative to
maize and sugarcane while being also extremely tolerant to low temperatures. The
extensive geographical distribution of Miscanthus offers unique opportunities to
elucidate the underlying mechanisms of C4 photosynthesis tolerance to chilling.
By spanning across levels of biological organization this project will 1) Define
chilling-dependent characteristics of NPQ and their effect on plant physiology;
2) Identify how key NPQ related genes contribute to chilling light-dependent and
-independent changes in NPQ characteristics; 3) Determine how NPQ is integrated
at the level of the whole organism. The following education objectives are
integrated with the research: 4) Develop and disseminate an undergraduate-level
course to increase students’ science communication skills; 5) Engage girls in
plant science via hands-on activities; and 6) Educate and engage the public on
photosynthesis and its potential improvement in crop
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.