* 2142122
* Transforming Undergraduate Mathematics Education Through Faculty Development in Active Learning and Equity-Minded Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Roberto Soto, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2025
* USD 297,118.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming undergraduate
mathematics teaching to be more equity-minded and actively engaged. This project
will implement and research a robust and evidence-based professional development
(PD) program to train and support faculty in adopting an active learning in
mathematics (ALM) approach. The ALM approach will have a deliberate focus on
equity-minded instruction. Focusing on transforming mathematics instruction is
important because of the documented reputation of mathematics courses as
gatekeepers, with gaps magnified for students from groups underrepresented in
STEM. These gaps limit broader participation in STEM. With an urgent need to
improve STEM education, this project uses evidence-based best practices in PD to
engage faculty in opportunities to grow as educators through continuous and
sustained community-centered activities. A unique emphasis is on building
communities of practice through a variety of lower- and higher-stakes PD formats
and the specific focus on in-house PD using the department as the unit of
change. This project seeks to increase the number of faculty implementing
evidence-based, effective, and equitable teaching practices. Investigation of
changes in department culture as teaching is transformed will be invaluable to
other departments who aspire to change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal
of the Mathematics Equity through Teaching Actively (META) project is to improve
student outcomes in undergraduate mathematics education. META will advance this
goal by implementing a novel PD program to transform faculty skills and
practices in the near-term and improve student outcomes in the long-term. META
will also provide an evidence base for scaling the PD program for adoption at
other institutions. To advance understanding of the factors that influence
faculty interest in ALM and the success of equity-minded ALM-focused PD, META
will conduct research to assess faculty challenges, faculty supports, and
institutional characteristics that may affect program outcomes. META research
will identify and evaluate the impact of faculty challenges, supports, and
faculty adoption of equity-minded ALM at the department level. The project’s
research questions are: (1) What are the reported supports and challenges for
mathematics faculty who strive to transform their instruction towards equity-
minded ALM? and (2) What department-level characteristics support instructional
transformation towards equity-minded ALM? To address the research questions,
META will collect six data sources: faculty focus groups, individual faculty
interviews, assessment surveys from PD activities, recorded pre-observation
meetings, completed self-assessment classroom protocols, and recorded post-
observation meetings. Data will be analyzed using typological analysis
techniques that were employed in META’s pilot project. Results will be
disseminated published manuscripts, conference presentations, and distribution
among a multitude of existing networks. Findings from META will be of particular
interest to departments that are seeking a robust model of PD to support their
faculty in becoming more equity-minded while embracing ALM. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.
This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which seeks to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.