* 2142713
* CAREER: Reeb graph learning: Classification, Clustering, and Embedding of Graphical Signatures
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Elizabeth Munch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2027
* USD 203,362.00

The constant increase in available data is a ubiquitous feature of modern life.
This data comes in many forms such as points, images, and networks. Networks
(equivalently called graphs in mathematical terminology) can themselves be data
points in a large data set. For instance, one may wish to compare gene
regulatory networks across many different species, or compare embedded graphs
from different molecules to predict therapeutic properties. This research
focuses on graphs with additional structure, which arise in the field of
Topological Data Analysis (TDA), a modern take on data analysis that encodes
shape and structure in data. The research objective of this project is to build
the machine-learning theory necessary to utilize the rich structure of this kind
of graph data which comes with both theoretical guarantees and practical
algorithms. This research plan is combined with a fully integrated education
plan including a series of workshops to stimulate interdisciplinary
collaborations between starting researchers in TDA with domain scientists, as
well as creation of open source code and educational materials to make the newly
developed methods available to more interdisciplinary researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project focuses on graphical
signatures, which are topological graphs equipped with a real-valued function
further encoding some aspect of the topology or geometry of the structure
represented. These include highly utilized constructions such as Reeb graphs,
mapper graphs, merge trees, and contour trees. Recent work has developed metrics
for comparing these objects, allowing for treating the space of, e.g., Reeb
grahs as a metric space. The machine-learning interfaces developed for this
project will utilize and respect the metrics available. While there is work
aimed interfacing general graphs with machine learning, and separately for other
topological signatures such as persistent homology, no tools yet exist for
graphical signatures which take the additional function structure into account.
The project team will further develop a theory of random Reeb graphs to generate
data sets on which we can test the methods, as well as test the results in
applications arising from the field of plant
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.