* 2142300
* CAREER: Mass Measurements in the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Adam Ginsburg, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 04/30/2027
* USD 668,693.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). Massive stars, i.e., those more than ten times the
Sun’s mass, are comparatively rare in local galaxies due to their short
lifetimes. They nevertheless play an outsized role in galaxy evolution. Their
energy output, for example, largely determines the thermodynamics of the
interstellar medium and helps set the timescale for star formation in molecular
clouds. Massive stars are also responsible for the creation and dispersal of a
significant fraction of heavy elements (necessary for rocky planets and life) in
galaxies through core-collapse supernovae and mergers of exotic binary systems
comprised of neutron stars and black holes - themselves end-points of massive
star evolution. The first generation of massive stars may also have ionized the
intergalactic medium soon after the Big Bang. The proposed research will use new
and archival data from the Atacama Large Sub/Millimeter Array (ALMA) to help
determine the dominant mechanism(s) involved in the formation of massive stars
and the role played by their environments, both incompletely understood. This
project will also support research activities by a postdoctoral researcher and a
graduate student, as well as efforts by the principal investigator to develop
and distribute python based optical/radio data analysis tools and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will derive accurate masses
for a sample of High Mass Young Stellar Objects (HMYSOs) - the predecessors of
massive stars - as well as lower mass protostars within the same cluster using
ALMA observations in the Milky Way’s disk and center. While many HMYSOs appear
to grow by accreting gas from their associated disks, there exists evidence that
massive stars can also grow through mergers or inflow-driven instabilities. To
distinguish between these possibilities, they will first measure dynamical
masses of HMYSOs through the analysis of disk kinematics as traced by salt (NaCl
and KCl) emission lines. This represents a novel approach to measure masses at
the start of massive stars’ lives as these lines appear to be commonly detected
for HMYSOs in the ALMA archive. The relative importance of stellar interactions,
turbulent inflow, and disk-mediated accretion requires determining properties of
lower-mass proto-stellar populations in the vicinity of the HMYSOs. The same
ALMA observations will enable such censuses. Combining dust emission maps with
temperature measurements using NH3 or CH3CN lines, the team will measure the
luminosity function and the spatial distribution of protostars surrounding
HMYSOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.