* 2142726
* CAREER: Identifying and Controlling Interfacial and Structural Instabilities in Transition Metal Oxide Cathodes for Na-ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Omer Capraz, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2027
* USD 406,697.00

This project is jointly funded by the CBET Electrochemical Systems program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program.
Increasing energy demand associated with the growing population, environmental
concerns, and technological advancements imposes pressure on modern society to
utilize renewable energy sources. Sodium (Na)-ion batteries are promising
candidates for large-scale/grid-scale energy storage in terms of availability of
raw sources, cost reduction and its environmentally benign nature. However, the
electrochemical performance of Na-ion batteries suffers from short cycle life
and rapid capacity fade due to severe instabilities in the cathode materials.
Lack of understanding of instability mechanisms limits the design of novel
cathode materials for Na-ion batteries. The research program will generate
fundamental knowledge of the underlying governing forces behind the
instabilities and deformations in Na-ion cathodes. This knowledge is a
potentially transformative concept for other “beyond Li-ion battery”
technologies such as K-ion, Mg-ion, and Ca-ion batteries. The overarching
educational objective in this CAREER proposal is to facilitate learning the
fundamentals of batteries at K-12, undergraduate and graduate student levels as
well as increase public knowledge of the fundamentals of battery operations. The
educational and outreach activities include developing graphic novels about
battery operation mechanisms for K-12 students, providing an educational
platform for future K-12 teachers in STEM fields, preparing battery exhibits at
a Science Museum, and integrating research outputs into college education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal addresses the scientific problem
related to poor interfacial and structural stabilities of transition metal oxide
cathodes in Na-ion batteries. The proposal will focus on transition metal oxides
made of earth abundant minerals such as manganese and iron. The goal of the
research activities is to identify the impact of transition metals, operation
voltage and electrolyte chemistry on chemo-mechanical instabilities in
transition metal oxides cathodes. The guiding hypothesis is that intercalation
of Na+ ions in transition metal oxide structure inevitably alters the coupled
transport-reaction processes, leading to chemo-mechanical instabilities in the
surface and structure of the electrode, resulting in rapid capacity fade. The
project will examine the coupling between reaction-transport behavior and
mechanical deformations in single and binary transition metal oxide cathodes
cycled in organic liquid electrolytes. In operando stress / strain measurements
will be coupled with chemical and structural characterization techniques to
identify the governing force on interfacial and structural
deformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.