* 2142918
* Global analysis of stratification impacts on seabirds through food resources
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Marisol Garcia-Reyes, Farallon Institute for Advanced Ecosystem Research
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 486,243.00

Global warming is affecting the world’s oceans by altering marine habitats, yet
the effects on marine life vary by ocean region. One factor that may explain
these observations is that ocean surface waters have warmed faster than deeper
waters. Temperature differences may act as a physical barrier to mixing, thereby
impeding deeper nutrients from reaching the sunlit surface where they are used
by ocean plants in photosynthesis. With less mixing, the upper layers of the
ocean may have become less productive, which may in turn impact marine fish,
bird, and mammal populations of economic and cultural (ecological) value to
society. To conduct this study, the investigators are examining the effects of
ocean warming by depth on the abundance of plankton, small fish, and the
breeding success of marine birds across the world using existing long-term data.
They are developing mathematical relationships to understand how ocean warming
at various depths is linked to plankton, fish, and bird productivity. Results
will provide key information for selecting which seabird species may be best
suited as ecological indicators of change for different ecosystems across the
globe, and therefore has implications for remote-ocean monitoring. The project
will contribute new scientific understanding for upcoming United Nation
assessment reports and enhance public awareness of ocean health through outreach
materials centered on popular seabirds such as puffins and penguins. It will
support early career and postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean
thermal stratification is an important factor determining primary productivity
in epipelagic zones of the world’s oceans. A recent global analysis showed
declining trends in the breeding productivity of fish-eating seabirds that
forage in the epipelagic zone, but increasing stratification has yet to be
investigated as an explanatory factor. The primary objective of this project is
to test the hypothesis that seabird species groups vary in their responses to
increasing thermal stratification through the indirect effects of stratification
on epipelagic food resource availability and/or prey use by the birds. The
investigators are testing the prediction that thermal stratification has the
largest effect on breeding productivity of piscivorous, surface-foraging
species. They are integrating a new global database on seabird productivity with
high-resolution data on thermal stratification available from the European
GLORYS model, as well as satellite-based chlorophyll-a data from NASA. They are
using Generalized Linear Mixed Models to test for variation between seabird
groups and Structural Equation Models to test direct and indirect pathways of
response from stratification through prey availability to seabird productivity,
focusing on mid-to-high latitude ecosystems across ocean basins in both the
northern and southern hemispheres. Results will improve understanding of how
seabirds respond to increasing thermal stratification in relation to fundamental
differences in seabird life history traits. The retrospective analysis will
advance knowledge of how seabirds that feed on different prey, and in different
epipelagic habitats of the world’s oceans, have responded to recent increases in
stratification. More generally, the study will contribute insight into how
physical changes in the upper ocean affect predators through the availability of
food resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.