* 2142964
* CAREER: Measuring and Modeling the Multi-Modal Networks and Demographics of People Experiencing Homelessness
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Zack Almquist, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2027
* USD 191,971.00

This research develops novel methods for counting the homeless that improve upon
existing ways of doing so. Collecting rich data on sheltered and unsheltered
homeless populations is difficult and represents a major complication for
researchers and decision makers. The methods developed in this project are based
on newly available data collection strategies made possible by the high
prevalence of online access among homeless persons via free Wi-Fi through
smartphones, free computers in libraries, and other programs. This study
examines the demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity) of the online and
offline homeless populations and their social relationships to understand their
impact on the timing and longevity of homelessness. It contributes to research
by improving the estimation of hard-to-reach homeless populations and by
increasing understanding of the social support mechanisms that affect the
duration of homelessness. Findings will inform decision makers and healthcare
leaders about best methods for counting people experiencing homelessness for
resource allocation, best practices for disseminating information, and new
strategies centered around social support networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research concentrates on a US region that contains a large portion of people
experiencing homelessness, with targeted samples in a few cities. The study
integrates recent developments in survey sampling and estimation to obtain the
demographics and social network data from online sources to compare with offline
samples, including the Housing and Urban Development Point-in-Time population
count. Novel uses of new and old strategies for measuring hard-to-reach
populations are employed through four methods: two methods for online sampling
(generalized network scale-up methods and network sampling) and two methods for
in-person sampling (respondent driven sampling and space-based sampling). These
are compared against the current federal standard Point in Time count. The
project leverages the resulting data by extending spatial network models --
which have been shown to provide insight into the networks of people
experiencing homelessness -- to fully understand the effects of geography and
demographics on the social network structure of people experiencing homelessness
and its resultant impact on the timing and duration of homelessness. Results of
this study provide needed information on the spatial dimension of homelessness
and new statistical network methods for providing update-able simulation models
for diffusion of information (online and offline) and disease (offline) through
homeless communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.