* 2142725
* CAREER: Towards Long-term Fairness in Sequential Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Lu Zhang, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2027
* USD 228,269.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fair machine learning, a research
topic that aims to reduce discrimination and bias in machine-automated
decisions, is one of the keys for enabling broad societal acceptance of large-
scale deployments of AI systems including automated decision-making systems.
Currently the majority of studies in fair machine learning are based on static
settings where the machine model makes the decision only once for each
individual after its deployment. However, in practical situations, the machine
learning model will usually be deployed to make sequential decisions over a
period of time. In such sequential decision-making settings, ensuring fairness
for each single step does not guarantee fairness in the long-term, presenting a
challenging and urgent problem to the fair machine learning community about
achieving long-term fairness. This project will make a transformative change to
fair machine learning by greatly advancing the understanding of fundamental
issues of fairness in dynamic settings, shedding light on the path to addressing
conflicts between inconsistent fairness concepts, and contributing to the
limited base of knowledge in long-term fair machine learning which is imperative
for many real-world applications. The education program will involve
undergraduates, graduates and high school students to enhance their knowledge
and skills in solving problems in machine learning and artificial intelligence,
and attract students especially those from underrepresented groups to pursue
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will set up the foundation
for long-term fair machine learning by leveraging Pearl's Structural Causal
Model. The investigator will focus on the sequential decision-making setting
where decisions made in the past may have an impact on future data. Soft
intervention will be utilized to capture the causal effect of the deployment of
decision models. The investigator will develop universal formulations for the
long-term fairness based on the causal model so that it can be measured by
causal inference techniques. Then, depending on whether the decision maker has
access to adequate historical data, the investigator will study both offline and
online learning settings via three progressive research tasks: (1) to study
strategies and algorithms for achieving long-term fairness given sufficient
historical training data; (2) to study how to not only capture the dynamics in
the history but also predict the data in the future so that the decision model
built would be fair in the predictable future; and (3) to move on to online
learning where the decision maker has few or no training data but could update
the decision model in an online manner and wants to achieve fairness eventually.
Finally, two realistic extensions including unidentifiable situations and semi-
Markovian models will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.