* 2142516
* Collaborative Research:  Using Communities of Practice to Transform STEM education for Latinx Students at Two-Year Hispanic Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Milagros Castillo-Montoya, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 267,822.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
improving STEM education for Latinx students at two-year Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs). The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that Latinx people are the
fastest-growing segment, nearly 30%, of the U.S. population, and yet the demand
for skilled workers in STEM fields will be difficult to meet unless the nationâ€™s
STEM workforce reflects the diversity of the population. While Latinx students
have shown to be just as likely as White students to major in STEM, their
numbers drop dramatically when it comes to completing STEM degrees, lagging
behind other ethnicities. Two-year HSIs wishing to serve their Latinx students
are at the forefront of the efforts to close achievement gaps in STEM education
and improve Latinx STEM student outcomes. This project will focus strictly on
STEM Planning Teams (faculty, staff, administrators, and students) as
Communities of Practice (CoPs) at 16 two-year HSIs as a promising element
leading to institutional transformation of STEM teaching and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to study the CoPs influence on STEM
teaching and learning to transform the institution and signal intentionality to
improve outcomes for Latinx STEM students across 2-yr HSIs. The project scope is
to provide 2-yr HSIs with a framework that brings together cross-functional,
cross-disciplinary STEM teams to perform college-wide STEM assessments, develop
multi-year STEM Plans, and act upon those plans. The framework is a STEM
Evidence-based Student Serving (STEM-ESS) self-assessment and planning process
that incorporates research outcomes from Subject Matter Experts on Latinx
student servingness, equity, and intentionality. STEM teams at participating
institutions will be assisted by project leadership and subject matter experts
as they self-assess, analyze strengths and gaps, prioritize high impact
activities, and develop a strategic STEM plan. In pursuing high impact
activities, teams will look to adapt and implement evidence-based solutions
and/or develop proposals for federal funding. Regular professional development
webinars and workshops are planned for high-impact topics, e.g., undergraduate
research at community colleges (CCs), industry connections, and active learning.
Individualized and team support will be provided monthly, with more frequent
meetings for teams needing additional support. The methodology of this four-year
project will validate the STEM-ESS framework using a mixed methods, embedded
case study design. Quantitative and qualitative data will be collected and
analyzed at the individual, CoP, and institutional levels to provide evidence
for organizational transformation. Triangulated findings and outcomes of the
formative and summative evaluation reports will add new knowledge to the STEM
teaching and learning field and advance understanding of how cross-disciplinary
and cross-functional STEM CoPs serve as institutional change agents to advance
institutional capacity-building for STEM educational equity for Latinx students.
Findings will also be disseminated to practitioner- and scholar- focused
audiences through virtual, conference, and journal outlets, and collaborations
with broader networks. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities. This project is
also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which seeks to enhance undergraduate
STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.