* 2142575
* CAREER: Curvature, Topology, and Geometric Partial Differential Equations, with new tools from Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Renato Ghini Bettiol, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2027
* USD 234,045.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
202 (Public Law 117-2). This project will harness methods associated with
applied mathematics to answer fundamental questions in geometry regarding how
the curvature of a multi-dimensional object constrains its global shape, and how
rigid or malleable geometric configurations can be under various intrinsic or
extrinsic conditions. The anticipated findings of this agenda should be
applicable to mathematical models used to predict the stability and optimal
shape of a wide range of small and large parts of our physical world: from cell
membranes, fluid droplets, and airplane wings, to the interface between
different layers of the Earth's atmosphere, the event horizon of a black hole,
and even the entire universe. Pedagogical efforts will engage graduate and
undergraduate students in the discovery process. The latter will be supported by
the creation of a 3D printing and visualization lab at CUNY Lehman College,
which will be the first of its kind in any public institution of higher
education in the Bronx borough of New York City, enabling new forms of inquiry-
based instruction grounded on experiential learning. This facility will also be
used to host events in partnership with CUNY Bronx Community College, to attract
more students to Mathematics and help address the current lack of diversity and
overall shortage of workers with STEM qualifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
lines of investigation in this project can be separated in two main categories,
involving novel applications of either convex algebraic geometry or bifurcation
theory to geometric analysis. In the first category, new topological
obstructions to curvature conditions on closed manifolds will be sought through
strategies that combine recently developed convex optimization tools, such as
semidefinite programming, and classical local-to-global methods, including
Chern-Weil theory, Index theory for twisted Dirac operators, and the Bochner
technique. In particular, extremal values of polynomials on spectrahedral
shadows of curvature operators will be used to bound characteristic numbers of
certain manifolds with nonnegative or nonpositive sectional curvature, or
special holonomy. These bounds are expected to shed new light on the Hopf
Questions about existence of positively curved metrics in products of spheres,
and the sign of the Euler characteristic in nonnegative or nonpositive
curvature, as well as on the Stolz conjecture on the Witten genus of string
manifolds with positive Ricci curvature. In the second category, global results
from bifurcation theory will be used to analyze issues regarding symmetry,
stability, rigidity, and multiplicity of minimal and constant mean curvature
hypersurfaces, Einstein metrics, and solutions to other partial differential
equations that arise in conformal or complex geometry, such as the Yamabe
problem and its many variants. This bifurcation-theoretic approach provides
several advantages which complement existing variational methods, including a
finer control on the topology and regularity of the solutions
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.