* 2142821
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Molecular Physical Electrochemistry at Interfaces - Visualizing and Modeling Charge Transfer at the Anode and Cathode
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Lydia Kisley, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2027
* USD 625,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Lydia Kisley of Case Western Reserve
University is using microscopy and modeling methods to investigate the movement
of negatively charged electrons and positively charged metal ions at metal
surfaces. These reactions are relevant to battery and solar energy technologies,
energy-efficient catalytic reactions, and the corrosion of infrastructure. Dr.
Kisley is developing microscopic methods that detect when and where individual
electrons and ions undergo reaction at small length scales. In parallel,
computational modeling methods are being undertaken to facilitate the
understanding of these experimental data. Dr. Kisley will lead community events
at the Cleveland Cultural Gardens to connect individuals, including those from
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM), to historic stories of scientists in their culture to make science more
personably relatable. In addition, she will be mentoring high school girls in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research under this CAREER award in the
Kisley lab at Case Western Reserve University aims to develop a molecular scale
understanding of how individual electrons and metal ions undergo reaction,
diffusion, and/or dissolution at electrode surfaces as a function of space and
time. Single-molecule experimental and statistical methods are being developed
that reveal detailed energetic and physical relationships between anodic and
cathodic reactions at metal/liquid interfaces. In situ charge transfer will be
observed using super-resolution analysis of fluorescent dyes that turn on after
receiving an electron or metal ion. Advances in experimental single-molecule
techniques should allow for the characterization of both charge transfer by
metal ions and electrons by applying dyes to metallic surfaces. The dyes will
then be used at iron and iron alloy surfaces under variable solvent dielectric
environments. A stochastic model that includes fluorescent and non-fluorescent
reactions is being developed to better understand the mechanisms of the anodic
and cathodic experimental reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.