* 2142356
* Developing Simulations with Noise to Investigate Students' Understanding and Views of Measurement Uncertainty in Experimental Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* William Finzer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,922.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students'
understanding of uncertainty in measurement, which is a key concept in the
process of experimentation across science and engineering. Understanding
measurement uncertainty is critical for evaluating experimental data and
conclusions made from those data. Introductory physics lab classes are where
many undergraduate STEM students are intended to learn about measurement
uncertainty, but studies have shown that the learning goals around this topic
are often not met. By creating computer simulations and associated course
materials that are based on sound research practices, the investigators aim to
improve students' learning about measurement uncertainty. The knowledge and
skills will allow the students to reason better about, and make decisions with,
data in their future studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve
students' conceptual knowledge of and views about measurement uncertainty, the
project team will develop and study the impact of the use of simulations (sims)
with adjustable "noise." Specifically, they will add statistical (random) noise
to a selection of Physics Education Technology (PhET) Interactive Simulations of
common introductory lab experiments. In addition, to allow students to easily
and intuitively collect and analyze data, the team will integrate the noise-
enhanced PhET sims with the Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP). The
impact of the use of this new, integrated platform on students' understanding of
measurement uncertainty and how students view measurements in experimental
science will be studied in a clinical setting as well as in the classrooms of
diverse partner institutions. Through this process, the project team will also
develop strategies and associated curricular materials for implementing this new
platform in lab courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.