* 2142908
* CAREER: Developing Elementary Teachers’ Self-Efficacy to Teach about Climate Change Using Community-Based Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Amal Ibourk, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2027
* USD 274,384.00

Climate change is a critical 21st-century issue. This project will support pre-
service and in-service teachers in professional development that will prepare
them to teach about climate change in community-specific ways. This project aims
to advance elementary teachers’ development in three high-impact areas: (a)
their self-efficacy toward teaching climate change science or beliefs and
attitudes about teaching climate change science; (b) their science content
knowledge around climate change; and (c) their climate change identity, or how
they view their agency and role in climate change. Participating in-service
teachers will co-design a justice-centered climate change instructional model by
adding activities to the Global Climate Change and Urban Heat Island WISE unit.
The newly designed lessons will focus on issues related to the local context,
such as how climate change disproportionately affects vulnerable communities in
Florida. Further, the lessons will address local and state policies that impact
climate change. This CAREER award is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will implement a community-based science instructional model using the
web-based inquiry science environment (WISE) as a tool to support pre-service
and in-service teachers’ self-efficacy, climate change identity, and science
content knowledge and examine the effect of participation across the three high-
impact areas. Data collected include pre- and post-test of teachers’ climate
change knowledge, interview data and survey data from a survey to be developed
that measures teachers’ climate change identity. Results from this project will
contribute developmentally appropriate foundational knowledge around climate
change education in elementary science education programs by introducing pre-
service teachers to climate change education and building their self-efficacy
for teaching it. It will also provide in-service elementary teachers with
professional activities to increase their climate change self-efficacy. Key
contributions include the development, refinement, and dissemination of climate
change instructional models (e.g., instructional materials, website materials,
teacher workshops) to understand and enhance pre-service and in-service
elementary teachers’ self-efficacy toward climate change education as a part of
the project’s educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.