* 2142792
* CAREER: Testing the mismatch hypothesis for climate change-driven mutualism breakdown
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Nicole Rafferty, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2027
* USD 812,945.00

In the mutually beneficial interaction between flowering plants and pollinators,
plants benefit from pollen transfer among flowers, and pollinators benefit from
nutrition in the form of nectar and pollen. Plant-pollinator mutualisms are
essential for natural ecosystems as well as agricultural supply; about 90% of
flowering plants and 35% of crop species rely on animals for pollination. For
pollination mutualisms to be maintained, plants must flower during the same time
of year that their pollinators are foraging. Similarly, the traits of each
partner, such as flower size and bee body size, must match. However, changing
environmental conditions, such as warming temperatures, may cause mismatches in
the timing of life events and the traits of flowers and pollinators, potentially
leading to breakdown of the mutualism. This research will test how environmental
change affects the maintenance of plant and pollinator mutualisms, and
ultimately pollination services. The proposed research will contribute to the
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce and help to
improve STEM education by training undergraduates at the University of
California, Riverside, a Hispanic Serving Institution, in scientific inquiry.
The educational plan uses experimental plant and pollinator communities to
involve hundreds of undergraduate students in data collection and interpretation
at multiple points in their college careers, improving learning outcomes and
advancing project research goals at the same time. The project will improve
public scientific understanding by creating a pop-up outreach program that
travels to Riverside neighborhoods, community centers, and parks to raise
awareness about the importance of pollination services that are threatened by
environmental change. Finally, the research will advance the health of the
public by informing predictions for how pollination services for natural and
agricultural communities will fare under novel environmental conditions.
Altogether, the results will broaden understanding of the effects of
environmental change on species interactions in the scientific community, the
classroom, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1)
experimentally test, for the first time, how simultaneous warming affects plant
and pollinator phenology; (2) investigate how warming affects plant and
pollinator morphological, physiological, and behavioral traits; and (3) measure
the multigenerational effects of warming on plant and pollinator interactions
and fitness. Using foraging arenas in temperature-controlled greenhouses, native
wildflowers and solitary bees will be concurrently exposed to warming before
flowering and emergence to measure phenological and phenotypic responses of
these interdependent species over three generations. Key aspects of the
experiment will be replicated in a field setting to test how temperature-induced
phenological changes affect plant-bee interactions, traits, and fitness in
natural communities. The proposed project tests the hypothesis that
environmental change will generate phenological mismatches between plants and
pollinators and alter traits, thereby threatening an ecologically and
economically critical mutualism. The work will also provide insight into the
evolutionary processes shaping plant and pollinator responses to environmental
change by quantifying the phenotypic and fitness effects of different
temperature treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.