* 2142622
* Enhancing Undergraduate Cybersecurity Education using a Mission-Based Learning Model
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gaby Dagher, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 292,359.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing undergraduate
cybersecurity education and equipping college students with the technical and
cognitive skills that are needed to satisfy the needs of the cybersecurity
workforce. This project uses an evidence-based approach in which student teams
are sent on classroom missions to solve contemporary cybersecurity problems.
Mission-based learning increases student engagement and helps to improve the
technical, problem-solving, metacognitive, and interpersonal skills that are
needed to apply cybersecurity principles in the cybersecurity workforce. As
students complete their missions, they learn cybersecurity theories and the
approaches cybercriminals take to identify and exploit vulnerabilities. The
missions will also provide students with an opportunity to develop the skills
required to work individually and in teams. Students will conduct research and
learn to think like cybercriminals to better understand adversarial practices
and to develop the defensive skills required to respond to these practices. The
lesson plans for the cybersecurity missions will serve as a blueprint for other
instructors interested in transforming their teaching approach by adopting
mission-based learning into their cybersecurity
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our knowledge and
understanding of cybersecurity education, by introducing the mission-based
learning model, and evaluating its effectiveness as a learning method in
cybersecurity. The project team will develop instructor and student lesson plan
materials for a set of missions in an existing computer science course. Senior
undergraduate or graduate computer science students will be recruited and
trained to serve as coaches for students during their missions. The project aims
to answer the following research question: how does mission-based learning
improve cybersecurity education with respect to student achievement, competency,
and attitude? This project will advance our understanding of the advantages and
disadvantages of using adversarial practices to teach cybersecurity and will
help instructors to design cybersecurity educational materials that utilize the
adversarial practice approach. To extend the impact of this project, the lesson
plans will be disseminated to the national cybersecurity community through
publications, websites, and workshops. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools. Co-funding for this project is being provided by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) Program because the goals of the project align
with the overall aims of the education track of that funding
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.