* 2142798
* CAREER: Bifunctional and Bimetallic Single-Site Catalysts for Sustainable Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Dianne Xiao, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 01/31/2027
* USD 699,548.00

With funding from both the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE) and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR), Dr. Dianne Xiao and her research group at
the University of Washington will design new heterogeneous catalysts that will
enable more sustainable chemical synthesis, including the use of renewable
feedstocks and the replacement of hazardous reagents. Her group will explore how
multiple metal centers and organic functional groups can work together to
catalyze transformations not achievable by a single component in isolation. Dr.
Xiao will also be engaged in multiple outreach and educational activities aimed
at broadening STEM participation and enhancing public scientific literacy. These
will include developing outreach activities in partnership with local museums
and organizations, designing new inquiry-based labs and educational resources at
the college level, and creating a series of science lectures aimed at informing
the public on energy and environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In enzymes,
multiple organic and inorganic functional groups work together to lower
activation barriers and enhance reaction rates. Applying these bioinspired
concepts to the design of new heterogeneous catalysts, this project will explore
a simple yet versatile templating strategy for precisely positioning multiple
functional groups within metal–organic framework pores. Current approaches for
tethering bimetallic and bifunctional sites to solid surfaces suffer from active
site non-uniformity, low structural precision, and poor chemical tunability.
These synthetic limitations have, in turn, greatly limited our knowledge of how
these structural motifs behave and react in a heterogeneous catalysis context.
Our proposed templating strategy provides an opportunity to explore the
chemistry of bimetallic and bifunctional active sites and identify nuanced
catalyst structure–activity relationships. For example, how do acid-base
distance, pKa, and structural flexibility influence the activity and stability
of bifunctional aldol condensation catalysts? Similarly, what roles do metal
identity, nuclearity, and ligand environment play in facilitating bimetallic O2
activation and transfer? Answers to these questions will help inform the
development of future condensation and oxidation catalysts that enable waste
valorization and promote green chemistry principles. Using these new synthetic
tools, Dr. Xiao will interrogate sophisticated surface-supported active sites,
including bifunctional acid–base sites for biomass utilization and bimetallic
species for aerobic oxidation catalysis. Dr. Xiao will also be actively engaged
in STEM outreach programs across multiple age demographics, from K–12 to college
and the older adult population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.