* 2142761
* CAREER: Flood Attenuation as an Ecosystem Service: Does it Scale Upward through Catchment-Scale River Restoration?
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Ryan Morrison, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2027
* USD 405,348.00

Floodplains provide an important ecosystem service of attenuating downstream
flood magnitudes by slowing flow velocities as water moves across floodplain
surfaces. In a sense, floodplains are a natural infrastructure that protect
human development within a river basin. Unfortunately, rivers and floodplains
have been extensively altered around the globe, largely due to engineering
efforts to restrain the dynamic nature of river systems, through the
construction of levees, dams, and other flood control measures. Unfortunately,
these river engineering projects have likely increased the risk of flooding due
to loss of natural flood reduction services provided by floodplains. Flood
attenuation may be improved, however, by implementing river restoration at large
scales, though gaps still remain in understanding of how strategically dispersed
restoration, river-floodplain interactions, and characteristics of river
networks can enhance the ecosystem service of flood attenuation. This research
focuses on building fundamental knowledge of these interactions through a
combination of field studies and modeling efforts that examine how human risk to
flooding can be reducing while improving floodplain ecosystem services. This
project includes an integrated research and education program aimed at mentoring
first- generation students, increasing public exposure to river science, and
redeveloping and disseminating undergraduate and graduate curriculum to include
concepts of sustainable river-floodplain engineering and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance understanding of how
flood attenuation is regulated by both the structure of a river network and the
physical characteristics of floodplain environments. The complex cross-scale
dependencies of catchment configurations (large scale) and physical floodplain
characteristics (small scale) in controlling flood movement through a river
basin is still not understood. This research will investigate the importance of
catchment-scale restoration, river-floodplain interactions, and the organization
of river networks in enhancing the ecosystem service of flood attenuation, which
together comprise the foundations of natural flood management. The principal
intellectual outcomes of this work will include: 1) a new cross-scale conceptual
model describing the relationships between river network structure, floodplain
characteristics, and degree of flood attenuation; 2) advanced understanding
about the role of catchment-scale river restoration in sustainable water
resource management and the strengthening of floodplain ecosystem services; and
3) a novel hydrologic modeling framework that can be used to generate
transferrable knowledge about the impacts of river restoration strategies on
large-scale floodplain ecosystem services. This research will provide greater
insight into how society can harmoniously blend the benefits of river
restoration and natural flood attenuation within river catchments. In addition,
the model developed potentially may be incorporated into the National Water
Model, which is used by the USGS to monitor flooding around the nation. This
project will positively impact engineering and river science education by
supporting the success of first-generation students at Colorado State
University, introducing youth to river science with a placed-based curriculum,
and integrating research results into all education and outreach components of
this project. The project will support the involvement of multiple first-
generation students through the Scott Undergraduate Research Experience program
at CSU. Similarly, this project will expand the Girls Advancing Scientific
Progress summer program and promote interest in river science through place-
based learning. Field data collection and river monitoring activities in this
project will be incorporated into two courses that will be redeveloped, enabling
students to learn data collection methodologies, modeling approaches, and the
importance of supporting catchment-scale river processes in water resources
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.