* 2142269
* A unified theory for perception of physical and social dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Hongjing Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2025
* USD 500,307.00

Humans spontaneously endow the world we see with physical and social meaning: we
“see” not only physical interactions among inanimate objects, but also the
intentional behaviors of interacting humans. This project will investigate how
humans perceive and understand physical and social dynamics from the movements
of objects and people. The larger goal is to explain how perception and
reasoning operate together to guide behavior in dynamic situations. Findings
from this project will help equip the next generation of intelligent systems
with the visual reasoning ability required to operate in novel situations. Such
systems will need to perform complex tasks that are challenging and time-
consuming for humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate behavioral
experiments with computational modeling to develop and test a unified theory.
The theory specifies how force representations can be constructed directly from
images and how the discovered force structures can be used to infer causal
relations involved in dynamic stimuli. Specifically, Bayesian models will be
developed with two basic computational components: (1) generative models to
learn representations of latent force structures governing movements of
inanimate objects and human agents in physical and social scenes, and (2)
reasoning models to identify causal relations and hidden states of intentions
based on spatial-temporal configurations of force structures. Computational
models will be used to synthesize dynamic stimuli that instantiate a large range
of physical and social situations. These stimuli will then be used to analyze
human behaviors at a large scale. A series of psychophysical experiments and
model comparisons will test the key computational components of the theory. The
project will also provide excellent training opportunities for students who are
interested in interdisciplinary research at the interface between cognitive
science and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.