* 2142406
* CAREER: Enhancing Energy Efficiency in Mobile Augmented Reality Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Marco Brocanelli, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2027
* USD 223,217.00

Mobile Augmented Reality (MAR) apps leverage the camera of mobile devices to
augment the real user environment with a set of virtual objects. Users can thus
achieve a high level of engagement by interacting with the augmented environment
through the mobile user interface. Typical MAR apps require executing several
compute-intensive tasks to render virtual objects and, using Artificial
Intelligence (AI), analyze the environment. However, due to their relatively
small form factor, mobile devices only have limited computing resources and
energy available for the MAR app execution, which may lead to short battery life
and poor user experience. To ensure the future success of MAR, it is thus
important not only to conduct novel research on how to enable high energy
efficiency in MAR apps but also to educate the future workforce in the best
practices for energy efficient mobile software design. To achieve these goals,
this project will propose an edge-assisted and energy-efficient framework for
MAR apps. Specifically, the project designs runtime algorithms that (1), on each
mobile device, control user-perceived performance and energy consumption by
manipulating virtual object quality, AI-model complexity, and AI-task allocation
on the heterogeneous computing resources, (2), on the supporting edge servers,
ensure scalability by grouping similar virtual object decimation requests for
minimized cross-user performance cost under limited edge computing and storage
resources, and (3) will be implemented and tested on a physical
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing a framework that makes MAR apps more
energy-efficient, this project will help speed up the adoption of augmented
reality in many different key sectors of modern society, such as education and
workforce training, and will unlock the full potential of new technologies such
as augmented remote meetings and augmented experiences in public places. The
project will also result in the creation of new graduate-level courses to
educate the future workforce on energy-efficient mobile resource management, new
research opportunities for undergraduate students, and new summer camps for K12
students. The course material will be made available to other universities
interested to introduce similar courses, projects, and summer camps. The results
of this project will be disseminated through publications in top-tier
conferences and journals. Similarly, all the source code of the proposed
algorithms will be made available as open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.