* 2142500
* Computational Modeling of Complex Interfacial Structures with Nonlinear and Nonlocal Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Yanxiang Zhao, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,537.00

Modeling interfacial structures and dynamics is of great importance in many
applications such as biology, physics, and materials science. Many existing
computational models can sometimes predict unphysical structures and also suffer
from inefficiency in large scale computations, especially when the system of
interest involves nonlinear and nonlocal interactions. On the other hand, some
powerful numerical methods have been designed to approximate the interfacial
structures in a stable and efficient manner. This can only happen if numerical
methods are designed to preserve the underlying physical structures of the
system of interest. The purpose of this project is to bring together researchers
with complementary backgrounds to come up with a unified computational model to
investigate the interfacial structure and dynamics with nonlocal and nonlinear
interactions. The model will largely improve the efficiency of computations for
interfacial structures, as well as correctly describe key quantities of interest
in equilibria and dynamic structures of an underlying interfacial system. In
addition, the mathematical modeling techniques and computational methods of this
project will address key scientific challenges in applied mathematics, and meet
basic research needs and provide necessary modeling tools for the applications
to other systems involving interface problems. Besides, the computational model
can provide theoretical guidance on producing nanostructured materials, which
will ultimately promote a wide range of contemporary engineering applications
such as materials synthesis, nanomedicine, and nanotechnology. Further important
impacts will be research oriented curriculum development, mentoring
undergraduate/graduate students to take part in the project, and the engagement
of various outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
developing a unified computational phase field model to investigate the complex
interfacial structures with nonlinear and nonlocal interactions. Though some
existing phase field approaches can be applied to model simple periodic
structures such as lamellar, spherical, bicontinuous syroidsin block copolymers,
some other interesting patterns are overlooked and have not been well studied
theoretically. Therefore one needs to examine the variational problem in its
full generality from a mathematically more sophisticated point of view, one
which in particular allows for a fuller analysis of the competition between
different terms in the system of interest. The inclusion of the general nonlocal
and nonlinear interactions in this research project can characterize a broader
class of features of microphase separation and pattern formation for interfacial
structures, and provide more insights on theoretical studies of these subjects.
The PIs will develop efficient, stable and accurate numerical methods for the
system of interest. More specifically, asymptotically compatible, maximum
principle preserving and energy stable schemes will be explored to preserve
specific physical structures of the system of interest at the level of numerical
approximations. Additionally, the designed numerical solvers will be used for
the systematic study of materials science applications such as block copolymer
melts and the bubble assemblies of the block copolymer
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.