* 2142846
* CAREER: Circuit Quantum Optics with Piezoelectric Surface Acoustic Waves
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Johannes Pollanen, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Hybrid quantum systems and technologies exhibiting exciting properties and novel
functionality can be created by bringing together quantum circuits and devices
with fundamentally different, but complementary, properties. This is
particularly true of hybrid systems based on superconducting quantum bits
(qubits) coupled to piezoelectric surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices. These
engineered systems, in which quantum information stored in the qubit can be
controllably coupled to the microscopic surface waves of a piezoelectric
crystal, are an ideal platform for understanding the exotic behavior of
strongly-coupled synthetic quantum systems. Additionally, SAW devices are
already a key component in many classical electronic devices such as cell
phones, touch screens and chemical sensors. Given their wide applicability in
classical electronics it is natural to ask if SAW-based devices might find
similar success in the field of quantum information science (QIS). Developing
piezoelectric SAW-devices for quantum applications is in its infancy, with much
uncharted territory ripe for the development of new technologies and exciting
discoveries. By harnessing the controlled quantum behavior of superconducting
qubits, the proposed program will investigate the fundamental properties of SAW-
based quantum systems and advance the development of next-generation
technologies for quantum sensing, computation and communication. The program
will also advance the education and research experiences of a diverse group of
graduate students and strengthen the QIS educational initiatives that the
principal investigator (PI) is developing at Michigan State University (MSU). As
the Associate Director of the MSU Center for Quantum Computing, Science and
Engineering the PI is also working to enhance the diversity of QIS researchers
at MSU by helping to recruit graduate and undergraduate students from under-
represented groups and provide support to find local research opportunities and
private sector internships for the Center’s junior QIS
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is focused on the experimental
investigation of novel regimes of circuit quantum optics using hybrid quantum
systems composed of superconducting circuit-based qubits coupled to
piezoelectric surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices. The projects cover new topics
ranging from quantum acoustic bath engineering to the generation of squeezed
states of high-frequency SAW piezo-phonons. Transmon qubits coupled to precisely
designed SAW-resonators will leverage controllable levels of acoustic
dissipation to autonomously stabilize coherent qubit superpositions and engineer
exotic quantum states via acoustic loss. Additionally non-classical states of
SAWs will be transduced from non-classical states of microwave photons using
parametric Josephson junction devices, creating the opportunity to investigate
non-Markovian properties of itinerant piezo-phonons coupled to superconducting
qubits. The program will also explore the possibility of developing novel SAW-
based devices with qubits beyond transmons (i.e. via the incorporation of flux-
qubits or fluxonium-based devices). The realization and understanding of these
“quantum acoustic” systems and devices will greatly expand the fundamental
knowledge of highly-controlled synthetic quantum systems and how they might
realize new quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.