* 2142348
* Enhancing Undergraduate Education in Botany through Teaching, Research, Representation, and Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Lisa Wallace, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 291,099.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing plant awareness
and professional preparedness among undergraduate students for future careers in
botanical sciences. A strong knowledge foundation in plant biology is needed to
confront numerous issues of national and global significance (e.g., food
security, habitat conservation, climate change mitigation, the biodiversity
crisis, and human mental health and well-being). Despite the overwhelming
applicability of plant biology, professional and educational training in botany
has been in decline since the mid-20th century. This project intends to
reinvigorate plant biology at Old Dominion University (ODU), a minority serving
institution. The project will enhance course offerings, increase student
involvement and representation, and prepare students for individualized futures
through tailored mentorship, professional development, and research experiences.
Through these actions, this project aims to make significant advances in student
recruitment to plant biology courses, research experiences, and professional
careers post-graduation. Additionally, this project has potential to increase
diversity in ODU’s plant biology courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
an integrated approach will be implemented for undergraduate plant biology
training within a biology department. The approach will emphasize experiential
learning opportunities across all academic levels. This project builds on
traditional curriculum reform through the formation of an Impact Learning
Community focused on plant biology, provision of professional development
opportunities, and mentoring of students. Regular assessments of the program and
student surveys will aid in determining the effectiveness of experiential
learning activities for promoting positive student outcomes in plant biology.
The ultimate goal of this project is to increase student opportunities,
involvement, and representation in plant biology courses and research
experiences at Old Dominion University, thus bolstering knowledge, skills, and
confidence in tomorrow’s plant professionals. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.