* 2142037
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The ecological context of early ape evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Abigail Hall, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 22,585.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the early diversification of apes
within the broader context of mammalian community evolution. Leveraging rich
fossil collections, the investigators characterize mammal assemblages from
multiple, well-studied localities to examine how time, space and environmental
factors impacted mammalian community structure. The scientific importance of
this project lies in providing a comparative backdrop of mammalian evolution to
better understand the ecological setting for major adaptations in the ape and
human lineage. More broadly, this project can have significant impacts for
science and society by expanding participation in science through graduate
training and research opportunities for undergraduate students from groups
underrepresented in STEM research. A relational database of paleontological data
assembled through this project is planned for public distribution to scientists
and educators via the Data Repository at the University of Minnesota (DRUM).
Other results will be made available through peer-reviewed publications,
conference presentations, and public outreach opportunities aimed at providing
scientific engagement at public schools and museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
early divergence of ape lineages, during which several major adaptive
characteristics of the ape-human clade were established, is primarily recorded
in the early Miocene (ca. 23-16 Ma). Although fossil apes from this time have
been the subject of intense study, little work has been done to properly situate
the diversity of these species within the broader context of mammalian community
evolution. This project asks the central question: how did environment, time,
and geographic distance influence the structure of early Miocene mammalian
communities? Using large fossil assemblages, this project pursues four specific
questions: 1) do fossil assemblages from major collecting areas represent
differences in mammalian community structure? 2) do changes in mammalian
community structure track environmental differences inferred from associated
paleoecological proxies? 3) are mammalian community structures most similar
among assemblages that are closest in age? and 4) does similarity in mammalian
community structure decrease with increasing geographic distance between
assemblages? These questions are addressed by analyzing the mammalian community
structure across 13 fossil localities that are already well-characterized in
terms of age and paleoenvironment. By situating mammalian community succession
within temporal, geographic, and environmental contexts, this project can inform
our understanding of how these factors influenced changes among mammal species,
thereby clarifying the ecological parameters within which major adaptations in
the ape and human lineage arose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.