* 2142177
* CAREER: Past, Present, and Future of the Peatlands of the Caribbean: Implications for the Carbon Cycle in a Changing Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Julie Loisel, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 816,374.00

Tropical ecosystems are subject to some of the highest rates of land-use change
and degradation globally. These ecosystems are also being affected by climate
variability and warming. Changes in land-use have the potential for important
feedbacks on our climate, especially via the carbon cycle. However, the
magnitude of these feedbacks on ecosystems are uncertain. This is particularly
the case for soil carbon in the tropics. Field measurements of the extent and
location of carbon stored in tropical soils, and the processes that control net
carbon balance remain sparse. This study specifically looks at tropical
peatlands, a very carbon-rich type of habitat. Current maps are believed to
significantly underestimate tropical wetland (and peatland) areas resulting in
unreliable carbon stock estimates. Likewise, the origin, timing, and
developmental history of peatland complexes across the tropics are poorly known,
making it challenging to identify and quantify the main controls on peat
formation. These data and knowledge gaps make it difficult to predict peatland
evolution and their associated carbon content under present and future
conditions. As such, ecologists don’t quite understand where or why peat forms
under tropical conditions, and what controls accumulation rates. This project is
the first to aim at gaining an integrated understanding of the origin and
development of Caribbean peatlands, and will use extensive field surveys,
detailed peat-core data and synthesis, as well as process-based computer
modeling. This CAREER project will contribute to the US world-leading expertise
in Earth System Science, advance the peatland community’s research needs, and
guide policy and land management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project combines new field work with paleoecological and modeling studies as
well as extensive student training on the terrestrial carbon balance of
Caribbean peatlands. The PI and her team will be integrating 1) new data
collection from multiple sites along the Caribbean coast of Nicaragua and Costa
Rica, 2) a synthesis of existing data from other Caribbean peatlands, and 3)
processed-based ecological simulations. The overarching question this project
addresses is: what are the conditions that enable peatland initiation,
facilitate peat development, and control peatland C balance over decadal to
millennial timescales? The existence of peat deposits across the study region
will be mapped and confirmed using extensive field surveys. How and when
Caribbean peatlands became established will be determined by using detailed
peat-core data and synthesis of published records. C stocks will be estimated,
and the relationships between the rate of peat formation and paleoenvironmental
change will be examined. Using process-based peatland models, C sequestration
rates will be simulated and quantified to elucidate the current function of
Carribean peatlands, and forecast how they might respond to natural and
anthropogenic forcings in the future. Overall, this project will produce the
first comprehensive assessment of the location, extent, genesis, and development
of Caribbean peatlands. This work is necessary to assess the past, present, and
future resilience of tropical ecosystems and to help inform land management
decisions; it will also allow ecologists to benchmark Earth System Models and
test hypotheses about the role of tropical peatlands in the Holocene global C
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.