* 2142051
* Collaborative Research: A Virtual and Active Learning Approach to Digital Manufacturing Education for the Future of Manufacturing Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Kurfess, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2025
* USD 255,043.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the use of
virtual and active learning approaches in undergraduate education in digital
manufacturing. Virtual learning can enable participation for those who may not
be able to be present on a physical campus, due to financial restrictions, full-
time employment, disability, or immigration, among many other circumstances.
Teaching of digital manufacturing for undergraduate engineering students,
whether in virtual or in-person learning environments, is critical to the future
of manufacturing domestically and abroad. The focus of the project will be on
developing effective approaches for educating students about transformative
advances in manufacturing productivity through digital technologies,
particularly through use of embedded systems, big data and their integration
using rapidly maturing cloud computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to understand how virtual learning affects student ability to
understand and retain core concepts in digital manufacturing and how active
learning experiences can be deployed in fully virtual learning environments for
digital manufacturing. To accomplish this, a digital manufacturing course will
be deployed in a virtual learning environment using a mixture of traditional
lecture and active learning activities in order to improve student engagement,
retention of core concepts, and self-efficacy. A new undergraduate digital
manufacturing course for virtual learning environments will be developed and
iteratively deployed at Georgia Tech incorporating active learning approaches.
Different types of virtual-based, hands-on learning experiences for
manufacturing will be designed and piloted, including virtual training
simulators for embedded systems for cybermanufacturing. Course materials will be
disseminated to partner organizations and institutions for broad deployment
nationally. Finally, the project team will evaluate materials for facilitating
learning of concepts fundamental to digital manufacturing through virtual active
learning environments. This unified effort will drive educational innovation in
the domain of digital technologies applied to manufacturing systems. By enabling
virtual delivery of this training, more students will be able to access
opportunities to understand digital manufacturing theory more deeply and will
become stronger members of the future manufacturing workforce when they
graduate. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.