* 2142153
* Collaborative Research: Building Confidence through Culturally Relevant Co-requisite Mathematics Courses within Math Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dan Yasaki, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2025
* USD 87,650.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating strategies
aimed to improve the outcomes of undergraduate Black or African-American men in
entry-level mathematics courses. This study contributes to the larger effort to
grow and diversify the STEM workforce. The goals of this effort are to increase
the success, confidence, and sense of belonging of Black or African-American men
in required early college mathematics courses by implementing and studying four
strategies that have shown promise in other areas: 1) careful placement
strategies that match students with appropriate mathematics courses; 2)
improving advising practices to increase positive attitudes towards mathematics
courses; 3) offering supportive mentoring; and 4) offering co-requisite courses
for students who would benefit from targeted support in their mathematics
courses. This project builds upon an ongoing Math Pathways effort across the
University of North Carolina system, a collaboration that will support the
development, evaluation, and sharing of effective practices. Identifying and
refining practices that effectively support Black or African-American men will
provide insights that can serve as the basis for interventions to support other
students. The project anticipates that as mathematics pedagogy and other support
structures improve, a broader population of students will be retained at UNC
System institutions and in STEM majors. With these increases, the presence of a
critical mass of successful students will make STEM majors more welcoming and
attractive to incoming students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to determine the extent to
which improved placement procedures coupled with culturally-relevant advising,
mentoring, and co-requisite support courses impact Black or African-American
men's course outcomes, mathematical self-efficacy and sense of belonging, goal
orientation, content relevance, and growth mindset. Over 1,900 Black or African-
American men at four institutions (University of North Carolina Charlotte,
University of North Carolina Greensboro, North Carolina Agricultural &amp;
Technical State University, and North Carolina Central University) will directly
benefit from the project components, and strong relationships between
mathematics faculty members at participating institutions will facilitate data
collection and analysis across the project. The project will collect data from
validated measures to evaluate outcomes for Black or African-American men who
participate in the co-requisite support course and mentoring as well as those
who participate in the supported course but do not participate in either
mentoring or the co-requisite courses. Further insights will be gained through
focus groups with Black or African-American men enrolled in the supported
courses, regardless of individual course outcomes. The project's findings will
be shared with communities of interest, and progress towards the project's
stated goals will be assessed through a rigorous evaluation plan. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.