* 2142430
* CAREER: Furthering Our Understanding of Fast Magnetic Reconnection in the Geospace Environment â€” from Electron-only Reconnection to Turbulent Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Yi-Hsin Liu, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2027
* USD 208,559.00

Magnetic reconnection is one of the most important energy conversion and
transport processes in geospace plasmas. One important fundamental question is
how fast magnetic reconnection occurs, causing an explosive release of magnetic
energy in nature. This project will address this important fundamental question
through numerical simulations. The educational component is a unique combination
of Science and Art. The PI will work with undergraduate student animators at the
Digital Arts Leadership and Innovation Lab of Dartmouth College to produce high-
quality animations that elevate the awareness and accessibility of space plasma
physics to the next generation of the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
novel theoretical framework that includes ultra-relativistic effects, asymmetry,
back-pressure and pressure anisotropy will be used to test against newly
observed types of magnetic reconnection. These include electron-only
reconnection first found in the magnetosheath downstream of the bow shock and
collisionless turbulent reconnection captured in the magnetotail. The project
will use the particle-in-cell code VPIC, complemented with the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) code Athena/Athena++ and the Hall-MHD code F3D to (1)
explain and predict the observed fast rate of electron-only reconnection and (2)
explain and predict the fast rate of collisionless turbulent
reconnection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.