* 2142692
* A Data Visualization Experience for Preservice STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Melissa Zrada, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,935.00

The majority of teacher preparation programs do not explicitly teach data
literacy skills or how to teach those skills. As a result, in-service teachers
often do not feel confident with their own data competencies, and do not
integrate data skills and practices into their teaching. Yet the presence of
data and data visualizations in society continues to grow. Schools should be
training students in how to collect, analyze, visualize, and interpret this
data. This project intends to provide higher education faculty with the tools to
teach their students (preservice teachers) how to integrate data skills into
their future K-8 classrooms. The overarching goal is to create a more data
literate society, starting with the youngest learners by setting their teachers
up for success to teach them these critical data
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support higher education faculty
in guided efforts to implement data literacy skills into existing STEM education
methods courses, thereby providing K-8 preservice teachers the skills and self-
efficacy to work with data and integrate data literacy into their future
classrooms. Four cohorts of five faculty members each will attend a two-day
Faculty Training Institute (FTI) in which they are trained to integrate the five
session Curriculum Supplement Initiative (CSI) into their courses. Following the
training, faculty will implement the content during an existing education
methods course, providing preservice teachers the opportunity to collect,
analyze, synthesize, and visualize data. The project has five objectives: (1)
scale implementation of the CSI materials to 20 new-to-the-program faculty
across the United States over 3 years, (2) examine the development of
exploratory data and question-asking skills of preservice K-8 STEM teachers (at
least 400 in total), (3) examine preservice teachers’ self-efficacy in teaching
with STEM data, (4) refine and publish CSI materials aimed at increasing
preservice K-8 STEM teachers' exploratory data skills and self-efficacy with the
larger community, and (5) broaden the reach of the approach by supporting
faculty to share the project with wider audiences through broader impact
initiatives. To achieve each of the above objectives, the project team plans to:
(1) recruit a geographically and demographically diverse set of faculty teaching
education methods courses through STEM education professional organizations, (2)
assess preservice teachers’ data literacy skills at the beginning and end of the
semester in which the CSI is implemented, (3) assess preservice teachers’ data
self efficacy at the beginning and end of the semester in which the CSI is
implemented, (4) complete two evidence-based revision iterations of the CSI
materials, then make the CSI available for public use, and (5) provide support
for faculty who have implemented the CSI to attend conferences and design
professional development sessions to share with the broader community. This
project intends to refine and disseminate a model for training preservice K-8
teachers to work with and use STEM data in their future classes, and contribute
to theory by investigating how preservice teachers’ skills about asking
questions related to data changes over time. The project has the potential to
fundamentally change the way teacher education programs train preservice
teachers to work with data, which can in turn improve the quality of data
education for the nation’s youngest learners, resulting in a more data literate
society. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools. Partial funding for this
project is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.