* 2142866
* CAREER: Universal Dynamics of Many-Body Quantum Systems Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Mohammad Faghfoor Maghrebi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2027
* USD 231,053.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports integrated research, education and outreach activities focused on
the universal dynamics of quantum many-body systems that are far from
equilibrium. Universality is ubiquitous in physical phenomena: a magnet and a
liquid, while very different systems, are governed by the same principles near
their phase transitions. While the notion of universality is well established in
equilibrium, universal aspects of non-equilibrium quantum systems have remained
largely elusive, owing to their vast variety and rich dynamics. In this project,
the PI and his team will investigate two general settings of isolated quantum
systems and open quantum systems coupled to an environment. The latter systems
have emerged not only as a new paradigm for realizing novel phases of matter but
also as a leading platform for quantum computation. The research team will
revisit and extend the principles of statistical mechanics to quantum systems
far from equilibrium, using connections to quantum information, and closely
collaborating with experimental groups to realize the emerging universal
dynamics in experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the research will
benefit other disciplines from classical non-equilibrium statistical mechanics
to quantum information science and technology, in synergy with the research
activities. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students in the
research projects, this award also supports the PI's outreach activities to the
general public. These include (i) the organization of the new phase of the
“Schroedinger's Cat is in Town!” workshop series that brings together
physicists, artists and the public to communicate physics through art at
Michigan State University Broad Museum Art Lab, and (ii) the launch of the next
phase of the interactive simulation website “Bohring Art”, which is a
collaborative project with Science Gallery Detroit, that will convey the modern
face of quantum physics to young science
enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports integrated research, education and outreach activities focused on
the universal dynamics of quantum many-body systems that are far from
equilibrium. Non-equilibrium many-body quantum systems are particularly
challenging systems to study: They come in an astonishing variety; they often
exhibit an effectively classical behavior; overarching equilibrium paradigms
such as time reversal symmetry, fluctuation-dissipation relations, quantum-to-
classical mapping are unavailable far from equilibrium; and beyond one dimension
or small systems, exact numerical techniques are extremely difficult. These
fundamental challenges are particularly relevant in the new era of non-
equilibrium quantum systems, afforded by the remarkable progress in quantum
simulation platforms as well as ultrafast experiments in condensed matter
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI and his team will
identify the universal dynamics of quantum many-body systems far from
equilibrium. The research will be conducted for two generic non-equilibrium
settings of isolated systems after a sudden quench and driven-dissipative
quantum systems characterized by an external drive and relaxation due to
coupling to environment. The latter is emerging as a leading platform in quantum
computation, and will be the larger focus of this project. The PI will expand
the toolbox of non-equilibrium quantum many-body systems, characterize scenarios
that evade an effectively classical behavior, and elucidate the emergence of
time reversal far from equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the
research will benefit other disciplines from classical non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics to quantum information science and technology, in synergy
with the research activities. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate
students in the research projects, this award also supports the PI's outreach
activities to the general public. These include (i) the organization of the new
phase of the “Schroedinger's Cat is in Town!” workshop series that brings
together physicists, artists and the public to communicate physics through art
at Michigan State University Broad Museum Art Lab, and (ii) the launch of the
next phase of the interactive simulation website “Bohring Art”, which is a
collaborative project with Science Gallery Detroit, that will convey the modern
face of quantum physics to young science enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.