* 2142476
* CAREER: High-dimensional inference and applications to modern biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Zhou Fan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 160,064.00

In recent years, a burgeoning field of high-dimensional statistical inference
has witnessed astounding advances, providing new theoretical tools to
characterize exact distributional behavior for an increasingly large class of
statistical and machine-learning methods. These advances hold the promise of
improved statistical procedures with more precise quantifications of uncertainty
across many fields of modern biology. This research will extend the scope of
these high-dimensional inferential methods, which currently remain restricted to
more stylized statistical models, to address a broader range of scientific
problems having complex latent structure. The research will also enable the PI
to continue his educational outreach activities in the K-12 levels in
Connecticut public schools, as well as his experimentation in the teaching of
introductory courses at Yale University by focusing the discussion of
statistical concepts and ideas on motivating real-life
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the theoretical front, this research will
improve our understanding of mean-field phenomena in non-i.i.d. contexts,
including disordered systems and spin glass models with statistically dependent
couplings, as well as variational Bayesian approximations to regression models
with correlated designs. This research will also further our understanding of
asymptotic freeness phenomena for random matrix models arising in statistical
settings. On the applications front, this research will improve our
understanding of likelihood-based inference for molecular structure
determination in cryo-electron microscropy, and investigate possibilities for
more robust and efficient reconstruction algorithms. This research will also
develop new Bayes and empirical Bayes procedures for fine-mapping of genetic
causal variants and for dimensionality reduction of genetic sequence
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.