* 2142489
* CAREER: From slow to fast, micro to macro, single events to cascades: A multi-scale study of seismic event triggering in lab and nature
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Thomas Goebel, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2027
* USD 372,020.00

"Earthquake triggering" refers to an earthquake causing other earthquakes to
happen seconds to years later, both nearby and up to thousands of miles away.
Most earthquakes are thought to result from this process, yet the underlying
causes remain unclear. Earthquake triggering results in clustered "families" of
earthquakes, with foreshocks, mainshocks and aftershocks. Foreshocks may provide
information about possible upcoming, larger-magnitude mainshocks, and mainshock
size and location may be used to forecast aftershocks. Still, there is much to
learn, for example, what is it about a fault that makes it likely to be
triggered by another earthquake, and can we use this knowledge to improve
earthquake forecasts? Using newly-available instruments, Goebel and his group
will record tiny earthquakes during abrupt fault slip between blocks of rock in
their laboratory. They will see earthquake triggering as it happens in the lab,
test conditions that make triggering more or less likely to occur, and apply
this knowledge to real-world earthquakes. This research will contribute directly
to improvements in assessing seismic hazard and forecasting aftershocks in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake triggering is ubiquitous throughout
different tectonic and stress regimes. Triggering processes involve static and
dynamic stress transfer, post-seismic creep, poroelastic effects, sub-critical
crack growth and rate- and state-dependent friction; however primary mechanisms
and conditions that amplify aftershock triggering remain largely unresolved. Is
triggering solely controlled by mainshock characteristics or also by local
conditions such as fault stress and damage, and are there specific crustal
properties that enhance triggering? What controls changes in triggering time-
scales and are such changes indicative of stress state and proximity to large
failure events? To address these questions, this study will concentrate on a
multi-scale investigation of stress relaxation and triggering in lab and nature.
Only a few studies have focused on seismic triggering in controlled frictional-
sliding experiments that mimic earthquake behavior. Full waveforms of sub-
millimeter lab-fractures and slip can now be recorded using high-speed, broad-
band seismic instrumentation. Based on such records, this work will advance the
ability to detect triggering during natural stress relaxation in the lab and
test the hypothesis that triggering is not only a function of source
characteristics but also of fault stress and damage state. The proposed research
addresses three primary questions: 1) What conditions and mechanisms amplify
earthquake triggering? 2) Are triggering time scales indicative of fault stress
state and proximity to large failure events? 3) Which laboratory processes are
scale-invariant and thus help advance the understanding of fault constitutive
behavior? To address these questions, a series of triaxial and direct-shear
tests on lab-generated faults at mid-crustal stresses will be conducted. These
tests will assess the roles of i) fault roughness; ii) normal stress, iii) fault
damage, iv) pore fluid pressure and v) stiffness in enhancing or inhibiting
triggering. This research aims to unravel how these components are linked and
how lab results can be transferred to the natural system. The results are
expected to help identify key factors that govern triggering and their
implications for earthquake predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.