* 2142938
* CAREER: Advancing Scientific Knowledge of Tropical Mutualistic Network Science and Public Knowledge of Tropical Bee Importance
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Valerie Peters, Eastern Kentucky University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2027
* USD 479,443.00

Tropical forests are the lungs of our planet and home to most species that live
on land. Bees play an important role in maintaining tropical diversity by
pollinating plants, which can then grow seeds and fruits that animals eat.
Tropical bees help provide humans with vanilla, avocados, cashews, passion fruit
and coffee, to name a few. In fact, tropical bees are one of the most essential
organisms on the planet for their central role in crop production and
biodiversity maintenance. This project will test a restoration strategy to
recover and protect tropical bees. It features a big experiment and observations
of bees pollinating plants at many sites along the side of a mountain range in
Costa Rica. Researchers will determine which species of bees visit which species
of flowers, allowing them to create a detailed map (or “network”) of
interactions. Another goal is to raise public awareness of tropical bees and
their importance. Through targeted outreach, students and the public will learn
about the many different services provided by native species of stingless
bees.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Network theory is a useful tool to achieve a greater
understanding of the connections between communities and ecosystem function.
This project will quantify bee-plant network properties along a tropical
elevational gradient and relate those network-level metrics to pollination
success in an economically important crop species. A primary goal is to quantify
the degree of vulnerability of pollination services among elevations in tropical
ecosystems. Network theory will be used to select plant species for use in a
restoration experiment. This is important because plant species differ by orders
of magnitude in the number of interactions they can support and in the tropics,
restoration and conservation practitioners have thousands of plant species to
choose among. Plant species determined to be highly connected (based on
empirical bee-plant networks) will be tested for their role in restoring bee
communities and ecosystem function. If network theory is supported, this study
will provide guidelines to land managers and practitioners on best practices to
accelerate tropical forest restoration broadly. Locally, the results will be
used to inform restoration within the Bellbird Biological Corridor, an
internationally recognized model corridor project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Population and Community Ecology program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.