* 2142466
* CAREER: Thermodynamic Limits to Nonequilibrium Response
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Jordan Horowitz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2026
* USD 229,797.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;One of the most basic ways scientists learn
about a material is to manipulate it and then quantitatively measure how it
responds: for example, we say a rubber ball is elastic because it rebounds
quickly after we squeeze it, or we say honey is viscous because it flows slowly
when we pour it. These materials are examples of systems at equilibrium; left on
their own, they are static, passive, and lifeless. For these systems, we have a
well-established and robust theoretical framework for analyzing how they respond
to external perturbations. However, when we look at the world around us, we see
situations that are dynamic, evolving, and alive; these systems are out of
equilibrium. Here, our understanding is not nearly as robust, and no
comprehensive theory exists. This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education focused on the early steps in developing a novel theoretical framework
for understanding response in nonequilibrium systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
aim of this project is to develop quantitative predictions that capture the
trade-offs between how a system responds and how far a system is away from
equilibrium. Such quantitative trade-offs not only inform us about fundamental
principles of nature, but they also provide guidance on how to design the most
responsive nonequilibrium materials. Coupled with experimental data, this
approach offers constraints on possible theoretical models. To accomplish this
goal, the project will analyze specific theoretical models drawn from diverse
disciplines using modern tools of nonequilibrium physics that can then be
generalized to make fundamental and generic statements. These activities will
involve students, providing cross-disciplinary training in statistical physics
and biophysics, as well as mentorship and professional development
skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major part of this project is a partnership with
the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History to create outreach programs
that engage the public with the scientific principles that underpin this
research. Included is the development of a hands-on museum exhibit as well as an
inquiry-based middle school curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;Many of the basic characteristics of any physical system are captured
by how the system responds to perturbations. Near thermodynamic equilibrium,
response is completely characterized by the nature of spontaneous fluctuations
according to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. This deep connection between
response and fluctuations is not only the cornerstone of statistical mechanics
and hydrodynamics, but finds practical application in microrheology,
spectroscopy and dynamic light scattering. Whereas the fluctuation-dissipation
theorem is limited to static near-equilibrium situations, most of the natural
world is driven out of equilibrium by the constant consumption of energy. This
CAREER award supports fundamental theoretical research and education aimed at
unraveling how energy dissipation shapes the response properties of far-from-
equilibrium matter.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The remarkable utility of the
fluctuation-dissipation theorem has led to significant interest in expanding its
validity and developing generalizations for nonequilibrium situations. Though to
date many of those predictions have been quite formal. This project puts forward
a new perspective on how to analyze nonequilibrium matter, allowing the PI to
develop informative quantitative bounds on response in terms of the
thermodynamic forces driving the system out of equilibrium. In particular, the
project focuses on current response and violations of Onsager reciprocity for
discrete and continuous dynamics. Systems of interest include nonequilibrium
response of diffusing colloidal particles, chemical reaction networks, and
processive molecular motors, all of which have important applications across
engineering, chemistry, and biology. This work is carried out by combining
numerical exploration of model systems with detailed theoretical analysis to
make universal thermodynamic statements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.