* 2142464
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: The Hydrologic Connection between Permafrost-Plateaus and Thaw-Bogs:  Impact on Methane Emissions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Jessica Lundquist, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 01/31/2025
* USD 579,258.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas and wetlands are the largest natural source
of methane to the atmosphere. In areas with permafrost, wetlands can develop
when permafrost thaws and the land subsides. This process creates a landscape
with pockets of low-elevation wetlands couched within higher elevation
permafrost plateaus. This project investigates how the flow of water from
permafrost plateaus into wetlands affects the amount of methane emitted from the
wetlands. It may be that the water transports thermal energy and nutrients from
the permafrost plateau into the wetland, that support methane production. This
project could fundamentally change the way researchers study and model wetland
methane emissions. The project researchers will collaborate with the Fostering
Science and Climate Scholars programs at University of Alaska Fairbanks to
create educational and research opportunities for university students, and
youths in foster care in the State of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
research at a thaw bog in Interior Alaska showed that spring rainfall
facilitated about 30% increase in methane emissions. Soil water from the
permafrost-plateau flowed into the bog and rapidly warmed bog soils, stimulating
microbial and plant processes that enhanced methane emissions. These results
highlight how the plateau-bog hydrologic connection can influence methane.
However, many aspects of this connection remain unclear. Most notably, the
previous study captured two of the rainiest years on record, but bog methane
emissions only increased in one of the two years. Therefore, to improve the
prediction of methane emissions from northern latitudes, the scientists will:
&lt;br/&gt;1) determine the meteorological, soil and ecological conditions
within the permafrost plateau that facilitate transport of thermal energy and
nutrients from the plateau into the bog, &lt;br/&gt;2) identify if and when
these inputs affect bog methane emissions, and &lt;br/&gt;3) assess how winter
conditions impact these processes. &lt;br/&gt;These tasks will be accomplished
by conducting fieldwork and by using a hydrologic model to examine historic data
from multiple different thermokarst bogs to identify the subset of processes and
conditions that facilitate plateau-bog transport and enhance bog methane
emissions. The project team will then look for the co-occurrence of these
processes and conditions throughout the thermokarst wetland landscape and update
methane models to appropriately respond to identified circumstances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and
Arctic Natural Sciences programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.