* 2142916
* CAREER: Unraveling predictive and multiscale dynamics in turbulence for flow control
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Jae Sung Park, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 392,841.00

Turbulent flow plays a crucial role in health and engineering across a range of
important issues, from climate to aviation and cardiovascular disease. A better
understanding of turbulence is thus central to human health and the
sustainability of natural resources. The most essential features of turbulence
are its chaotic and multiscale natures, posing both challenges and
opportunities. To address this challenge, the principal aim of this project is
to provide a new theoretical and computational research avenue that uses a
deterministic framework to unravel predictable and multiscale characteristics in
turbulence for flow control. In addition to providing the fundamental knowledge
necessary to advance energy-saving flow-control strategies, this project will
also provide the perfect educational platform to promote practical workforce
training in academia as the real-world importance of turbulence and flow control
will excite students at various levels. To this end, industry-relevant projects
will be developed to cultivate a highly qualified industrial workforce by
bridging the gap between academic work and industrial
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to apply recent
advances in the dynamical systems viewpoint of turbulence to solve the problem
of the chaotic and multiscale nature embedded in turbulence for rigorous flow
control. The key idea is to uncover the predictability and multiscale
interactions in turbulence using so-called exact coherent solutions to the
governing Navier-Stokes equations. The new knowledge obtained will be exploited
for cost-effective turbulence control. In pursuit of this goal, the specific
objectives are: (i) identify the predictive dynamics using small-scale exact
coherent solutions and (ii) characterize the multiscale interactions between
small-scale and large-scale exact coherent solutions and exploit them for flow
control. Direct numerical simulation and large-eddy simulation will be employed
to simulate and analyze small-scale and large-scale exact coherent solutions,
respectively, along with a suite of analysis tools, including linear instability
analysis and resolvent analysis. The discovery that predictive and multiscale
dynamics exist will lead to a more rigorous control strategy that can steer
turbulence toward desirable states, whereby targeted larger scales are
controlled by controlling smaller ones. As energy losses in various industrial
flow systems are largely associated with turbulent drag, this project has far-
reaching implications in effectively improving the energy efficiency of the
systems by taking full advantage of the predictive and multiscale dynamics in
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.