* 2142558
* Using Artificial Intelligence to Generate Interventions for Enhancing Student Performance in College STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Bilal Khan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 599,891.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing, developing, and
evaluating a novel platform to improve academic performance in undergraduate
STEM courses. The “Messages from A Future You” (MFAFY) application will send
students just-in-time messages via a smartphone to create a coaching
relationship with a future self or other student-selected avatar. The timing and
content of these messages will be automatically generated using artificial
intelligence based on student scores, attitudes, behaviors, and social
interactions. Students who face academic difficulties, and are hesitant to take
advantage of formal advising, will benefit from this personalized delivery
system. The MFAFY system will contribute to a strong STEM workforce by
increasing retention rates, and by improving both the number and quality of STEM
degree students. The data collected by the application will add to understanding
of the types of experiences faced by undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize data on socio-economic
factors, science identity, in-course assessments, and fine-grained
multidimensional measures of daily attitudes, behaviors, and social
interactions. Data will be collected using the ODIN app which prompts students
based on rules referencing time/date, location (GPS), and social interaction
(Bluetooth). Data will be clustered to discover a typology of student “stories”
(experiential trajectories). Counselors will customize messages for each story
type, over the semester. The MFAFY app will incorporate machine learning models
which forecast story type, together with these messages. MFAFY will be evaluated
via a randomized controlled effectiveness trial. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.