* 2142705
* Building a sustainable national network for developing and disseminating Sports Content for Outreach, Research, and Education in data science
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Michael Schuckers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring approaches to
engage and prepare the next generation of data scientists through sports
analytics. This collaborative effort will create a national network of academic
and sports industry partners to develop modules paired with data, code, example
problems. All materials will be housed on the Integrated Statistics Learning
Environment (ISLE) platform, which will be freely accessible to students and
faculty. Industry partners from over 50 sports teams and leagues will work with
educators to create authentic modules that will focus on introducing
foundational data science topics via sports applications. Resources will be
primarily geared towards undergraduate students and will cover a wide array of
men’s and women’s sports including baseball, basketball, hockey, tennis, cricket
and much more. The project will also offer professional development
opportunities for faculty and work to engage a diverse collection of
institutions and students with an additional goal of broadening participation in
the data science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration brings
together educators from five institutions (Carnegie Mellon University, Baylor
University, St. Lawrence University, University of Pittsburgh and the United
States Military Academy) together with sports industry professionals to create
authentic curricular materials. Industry partners will lead the development of
each module with guidance from a team of expert educators. As a result,
educators will better understand skills and approaches used by sports analytics
professionals, and will also have access to case studies build from real-world
data. Each module will be reviewed and refined to ensure clarity and
accessibility for undergraduates at varying educational stages and within
multiple disciplines. Modules will showcase multiple steps for working with
data: deciding how to collect and wrangle data, building and assessing
appropriate models, and communicating the results. Project materials will be
hosted on an Integrated Statistics Learning Environment (ISLE) platform, which
will provide user data to help the network better understand how the modules are
used, identify areas for improvement, and explore engagement across subgroups of
students and educators. Evaluation and knowledge generation will focus on
exploring three key ideas: 1) incorporating industry partners into the creation
of education materials at scale, 2) exploring the directed module structure
utilized in the project; and 3) analyzing user data to explore the engagement of
students and educators via the ISLE platform. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.