* 2142587
* Teaching and Learning in Online Laboratories in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Keith Sheppard, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,949.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving teaching and
learning in online laboratory environments in college physics courses. During
the COVID-19 pandemic, many colleges and universities were forced to move
traditionally face-to-face classes and labs to online formats. Because many
typical lab experiences involve hands-on interaction with equipment, as well as
demonstrations and close supervision by instructors, it is challenging to create
online variations that teach the same concepts and skills and that meet
individual students' needs. It is important for educators to understand whether
remote lab experiences, which proliferated during the pandemic, are equitable,
rigorous, comprehensive, and responsive to students' individual learning and
social needs. This research will study those issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate how undergraduate physics instructors and students
engage and perform in online laboratories. It will focus on the decision-making
processes and implementation of teaching in an online learning environment from
the perspective of instructors (faculty and graduate students), with a
particular emphasis on laboratory instruction. The research will also explore
the attitudes and academic performance of undergraduate physics students with
regard to their lab experiences, including whether the students have
differentiated experiences with respect to gender, ethnicity, or social class.
The research will identify ways in which pedagogy in undergraduate science,
students' performance in physics, and students' attitudes toward physics and
online learning may be improved, particularly for students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM. Research questions will include the
following:&lt;br/&gt;(1) How have physics faculty and graduate teaching
assistants adapted laboratory course materials to transition to remote learning,
and how are their pedagogical practices characterized in the online
medium?&lt;br/&gt;(2) What factors influence their online teaching in terms of
prior knowledge and training, peer collaboration, and external
directives?&lt;br/&gt;(3) To what extent is online lab instruction characterized
by technical, logistical, and pedagogical tensions, and how are these challenges
formatively mitigated throughout the semester?&lt;br/&gt;(4) How are students'
sociocognitive views of physics self-efficacy, self-concept, identity,
epistemology, motivation, and career intentions influenced by participation in
online physics instruction?&lt;br/&gt;(5) How is students' acquisition of
physics knowledge and skills influenced by participation in online
labs?&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.