* 2142935
* CAREER: Advancing nanostructure &amp; interface science for permanent magnets without rare earth materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Mahmood Mamivand, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2027
* USD 361,454.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical,
computational, and educational activities that aim to advance the fundamental
understanding of mechanisms underlying nanostructure formation in multicomponent
permanent magnet alloys during magnetic-field-assisted manufacturing. This
knowledge paves the path toward developing a novel permanent magnet composed of
earth-abundant elements that can outperform the state-of-the-art permanent
magnets at high temperatures. Current high-temperature permanent magnets, used
in electric vehicles and wind power production industries, are based on rare
earth elements. The U.S. produces a small fraction globally of industrial rare-
earth elements like neodymium and dysprosium. Therefore, developing alternatives
to their use can reduce U.S. dependence on these materials and have a positive
impact on U.S. national economic and energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI and his team will develop a new computational model by incorporating novel
artificial intelligence methods to unravel the mechanisms that can improve the
desirable magnetic properties in a class of alloys made of earth-abundant
elements such as iron, aluminum, nickel, and cobalt. A proof-of-concept
permanent magnet, based on the chemistry and processing routes predicted by
computational modeling, will be fabricated and characterized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports a unique educational activity for
Idaho high school and college students to gain hands-on experience on machine
learning through a novel educational curriculum and involvement in authentic
machine learning projects together. The project will also provide professional
training for high school teachers. The education plan of the project addresses
both national and regional workforce shortages in the areas of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics that primarily originate from low
entrance and retention rates, particularly for underserved
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities that aim to develop a fundamental
understanding of mechanisms underlying nanostructure formation in multicomponent
permanent magnets alloys during thermo-magnetic treatment. The PI and his team
will develop an atomistically informed phase-field model to unravel the
mechanism of nanostructure formation in FeAlNiCo-based alloys during thermo-
magnetic treatment with a particular focus on understanding and engineering the
Cu-rich and Ni-rich interfacial phases as solutions for FeCo-rich phase
isolation and consequently magnetic property improvement. The team will also
develop a new mixed-data three-dimensional convolutional neural network
framework to construct the process-structure linkages for FeAlNiCo-based alloys.
A proof-of-concept permanent magnet, based on the chemistry and processing
routes predicted by the neural network, will be fabricated and characterized.
The project outcomes can potentially displace rare earth-based permanent magnets
in high-temperature applications, such as electric vehicle and wind generator
traction motors, with a more widely available
alternative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports a unique educational
activity for Idaho high school and college students to gain hands-on experience
on machine learning through a novel educational curriculum and involvement in
authentic machine learning projects together. The project will also provide
professional training for high school teachers. The education plan of the
project addresses both national and regional workforce shortages in the areas of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics that primarily originate from
low entrance and retention rates, particularly for underserved
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research through the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program,
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.