* 2142531
* Cultivating Performance-Aware Software Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Gail Baxter, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,754.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing curricular
materials that utilize problem-based learning to improve student knowledge of
software performance engineering. Performance and capacity are desirable
properties of every software system. Despite this, performance seldom receives
adequate attention when software systems are developed, resulting in software
that when overloaded crashes and causes system outages. Fixing software
performance issues can be very expensive, and often, requires significant
redesign and re-implementation. These issues may lead to cost and schedule
overruns and even project cancellations. The performance implications of
software design choices are often only incidentally mentioned in undergraduate
courses and are rarely taught in a systematic way. Most undergraduate students
lack awareness of the performance implications for designing and constructing
software as well as the associated quantitative skills for planning for and
analyzing typical performance issues. The goal of this project is to develop
innovative and systematic approaches to enhance performance engineering skills
in existing undergraduate curricula. Project outcomes will include college
graduates who are better prepared for careers as professional software
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate innovative problem-
based learning technologies to engage and enable student learning of software
performance engineering (SPE) concepts and skills in undergraduate courses. It
will bring together software engineering faculty at Stevens Institute of
Technology with education researchers and industry leaders in the field of
software performance engineering to develop a systematic approach for instilling
essential knowledge, skills, and techniques for software performance modeling
and analysis into learning outcomes. In particular, the project will design and
implement a set of curricular units and problem-based learning activities that
can be easily adopted in a variety of undergraduate course settings. The
research and evaluation of the project will focus on engaging faculty in the
implementation of the curricular units and improving student learning outcomes.
This project has potential to make important contributions to the field of
software engineering education through increasing knowledge on understanding the
value of SPE and the development of engaging problem-based learning activities
for cultivating proactive SPE mindset and competency skills in undergraduate
students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.