* 2142097
* CAREER: Polymer dynamics near surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Svetlana Morozova, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2027
* USD 254,558.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on developing an
understanding of the fundamental science behind how surfaces affect polymer
gels. Polymer gels are networks of polymers (long-chain molecules) swollen with
a solvent. Gel adhesion to other materials merges attributes such as dry and
wet, soft and hard, artificial and natural. These interfaces are fundamental to
many applications, including body tissue repair, soft electronics, drug
delivery, and more generally how biology interacts with machines and bulk
materials. Despite the transformative advances in recent years, both fundamental
and practical challenges remain that could revolutionize gel materials that
interface with tissues, skin and eyes. Using recently-developed techniques, the
PIs propose to directly determine gel interactions with different surfaces. By a
multifaceted investigation of both hard and soft (gel) interfaces, this work
will advance the development of wet-adhesion, anti-fouling, and gel-gel
adhesion. In addition to the potential transformative knowledge, the research
will have direct impact on STEM training of underserved communities at the local
Cleveland-area, undergraduate, and graduate levels. In particular, the PI will
partner with Cuyahoga Community College to create a series of educational demos
designed to help adults in primary education learn scientific concepts, with an
emphasis on polymer science and recycling. Looking to the future, the proposed
research, education, and outreach activities will influence important areas,
such as soft material technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to develop
an integrated educational and research program to advance the field of
interfacial polymer gel physics. The primary research goal is to investigate how
surfaces and external forces impact spatially-resolved polymer network dynamics.
The PI's group will evaluate local polymer gel dynamics and resolve the
fundamental elements of hydrogel adhesion (1) as a function of interactions
using charged polyelectrolyte gels, (2) as a function of the surface topology by
templating geometrically-controlled patterns to the interface, and (3) as a
function of the modulus difference at the interface of two hydrogels. By testing
both hard and soft (gel) surfaces, this work will advance the development of
wet-adhesion, fouling, gel-gel adhesion, and the unique interactions at gel
interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal will be integrated with the
overall education program to build trust in the local communities and engage
industry and young scientists. This will be achieved in three stages: 1) Partner
with Cuyahoga Community College to create a series of educational demos designed
to help adults in secondary education learn scientific concepts, with an
emphasis on polymer science and recycling. 2) Establish a new week-long annual
workshop to educate and engage local polymer industries on the new scattering
techniques used in this study. 3) Educate new leaders in polymer science by
mentoring and educational outreach to Cleveland high school students through the
Polymer Envoy program, yearly showcases at inverse science fairs presented at
John Hay High School, and laboratory experiences for undergraduates. Overall,
the educational program will advance local knowledge and appreciation of polymer
science, which is one of the leading industries in the Cleveland
area.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.