* 2142931
* CAREER: Deconstructing the Fitness Tradeoffs that Limit Viral Host Range
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* David Rasmussen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2027
* USD 599,448.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will explore
how viruses adapt to multiple host species. Viruses have a remarkable capacity
to adapt to novel environments, but their potential to infect new hosts is not
necessarily limitless. Adapting to a novel host is largely thought to decrease
pathogen performance or fitness in other hosts, limiting the range of hosts a
given pathogen can infect. Understanding how these tradeoffs could therefore
provide major insights into how best to control and manage viral pathogens. This
research project will develop new computational methods to estimate pathogen
fitness across different environments and scales. These methods will be applied
to study viral fitness tradeoffs in tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV). TSWV is a
major pathogen of several important crops and its wide range of plant hosts has
allowed it to become a major agricultural threat worldwide. In addition, the
project will involve undergraduate and graduate students in the research, and
develop a virtual environment in which students can interact and respond to a
series of simulated epidemic threat scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying how
TSWV adapts to novel hosts will therefore provide insight into how a generalist
virus with an already broad host range evolves, how fitness tradeoffs between
hosts limit simultaneous adaptation to multiple hosts, and whether selection can
resolve these fitness tradeoffs over time, leading to further host range
expansion. Through this project, the researchers will develop new phylodynamic
birth-death models for studying adaptive evolution. These methods will be used
to estimate the transmission fitness of pathogens in different environments and
can even reveal how particular mutations influence fitness. Along with
developing these methods, the researchers will conduct an extensive field survey
of TSWV genomic diversity across multiple hosts to determine the fitness of
individual viral genotypes on a panel of crops and native plant hosts. By
combining the newly developed phylodynamic methods with empirical measures of
viral fitness on different hosts, the researchers will then be able to explore
how fitness tradeoffs shape the host range of a generalist viral pathogen and
how these fitness tradeoffs evolve over time. Viral isolates will also be
further experimentally passaged between alternate hosts in the lab to explore
how selection can breakdown or resolve fitness tradeoffs between alternate
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.