* 2142794
* CAREER: Realizing the Potential of Behavioral Data Science for Population Health
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Tim Althoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 599,173.00

CAREER: Realizing the Potential of Behavioral Data Science for Population
Health&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed behavioral data from phones, watches,
fitness trackers and health apps offer an unparalleled opportunity to quantify
and act upon previously unmeasurable behavioral changes in order to improve
mental health and accelerate responses to emerging diseases. This is possible
because these conditions often manifest themselves through behavioral and
physiological changes (e.g., reduced activity, increased heart rate, depressed
mood). Currently, such conditions exact a massive toll, with mental health
conditions representing 19% of all years of life lost to disability and
premature mortality and viral infections, such as COVID-19 and influenza, rising
to the third leading cause of death in the US in 2020. Despite the significant
potential of increasingly available data, broad and tangible impacts have yet to
be realized, in part due to the unique challenges of integrating and modeling a
broad range of behavioral and health data. This project seeks to address these
challenges by developing and sharing computational tools that will enable
researchers, clinicians and practitioners to improve mental health treatment and
more rapidly respond to emerging diseases. The project will also provide an
integrated research and educational program by: (1) increasing high-school
students' exposure to computer science with a focus on health and well-being
applications; (2) creating and disseminating materials for high-school teachers
to use in their classrooms; (3) preparing undergraduate students to address
health and well-being challenges through an interdisciplinary data science
class; and (4) broadly disseminating the results of this work through public
open-source software and workshops for researchers and practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a unified
representation learning framework that addresses the unique challenges of
modeling fine-grained behavioral data. Specifically, the learned compressed
representations must: (1) be highly predictive in spite of the challenges of
integrating heterogeneous data sources from sensors, devices, app use,
demographic and health information (e.g., highly seasonal time series, discrete
events, and static features), (2) effectively generalize to new users,
populations, and outcomes outside the training data and source domain, (3) be
robust to commonly missing data, and (4) protect private identifying information
when considering how to share data or models with others. Additionally, due to
recruiting and participation costs, most behavioral health applications
represent small data problems, making it particularly challenging to learn
effective predictive models from individual datasets alone. To address these
challenges, this project will develop and integrate new methods for
representation learning, self-supervision, transfer learning, robustness to
missing data, and the protection of identifying information. The research team
will demonstrate and evaluate the performance of the representation learning
framework across a diverse set of health applications, including behavioral
monitoring of influenza and COVID-19 symptoms and personalizing sleep and mental
health interventions. With these advancements, the project seeks to enable rapid
model customization, significantly reduce the expertise and effort required to
build new behavioral health research and applications, and help scientists and
health professionals answer fundamental research questions about the impact of
behavioral health conditions and the design of personalized
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.