* 2142874
* CAREER: Investigating the Molecular Corking Effect for Potential Hydrogen Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Scott Simpson, Saint Bonaventure University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2027
* USD 440,290.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen is a versatile, energy-
dense gas that can be used as an alternative to fossil fuels in many
applications, including transportation and power generation. However, widespread
adoption of hydrogen fuels is limited, in part, by the inability to safely store
and transport hydrogen gas outside of carefully controlled industrial
environments. This project will study an intriguing chemical phenomenon called
the "molecular corking effect," which may prove useful as a hydrogen gas storage
mechanism. The molecular corking effect has been observed when hydrogen gas
(diatomic hydrogen or H2) interacts with a class of materials called single-atom
alloys. Single-atom alloys consist of a relatively inert noble metal surface
interspersed with single atoms of catalytically-active metals such as platinum
and palladium. When diatomic hydrogen gas contacts the single-atom alloy, the
bond between the two hydrogen atoms is broken by the catalytically-active metal.
The individual hydrogen atoms then spill over on the inert metal surface. A
"cork" molecule that preferentially binds to the catalytically-active metal can
be added to prevent the hydrogen atoms from reforming gaseous hydrogen. Hydrogen
can be safely stored in this manner until the temperature is increased to remove
the cork molecule and release the hydrogen gas from the surface. Fundamental
insights into the entire molecular corking process must be developed to fully
realize the potential of single-atom alloy hydrogen storage. The research
objectives of this project will examine how molecular corks interact with
single-atom alloys and describe the chemical characteristics of effective
molecular corks. The project also includes an education plan focused on
preparing students to integrate computational chemistry and experimental
research in their pursuit of chemical and physical knowledge. Self-contained
educational materials will be developed such that any chemistry instructor,
regardless of comfort with computational methods, can integrate computational
chemistry modules into their curriculum. These materials, along with outreach
activities at local high schools, will encourage the participation of students
from primarily undergraduate institutions and other resource-limited
environments in computational chemistry-driven
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project, led by Dr. Scott
Simpson at St. Bonaventure University, is to explore the limits of the
"molecular corking effect" to control hydrogen spillover on single-atom alloys.
Diatomic hydrogen introduced to a palladium/copper or platinum/copper single-
atom alloy will adsorb at the surface, where the hydrogen-hydrogen bond will be
cleaved by the catalytically-active metal. The dissociated atomic hydrogen
spills over on the noble metal surface. Subsequent selective adsorption of a
poisoning ligand to the catalytically-active metal prevents the dissociated
hydrogen from desorbing and reforming diatomic hydrogen. This ligand, thus,
serves as a "molecular cork" until heat is applied to dissociate the ligand,
liberating hydrogen gas from the surface. This phenomenon can potentially be
leveraged in hydrogen storage applications. However, single-atom alloys are a
relatively new class of materials, and the many factors governing the molecular
corking effect are unknown. Accordingly, the research plan is designed to (1)
generate fundamental knowledge of how molecular corks interact with surfaces,
(2) explore the viability of various molecular corks for hydrogen storage, and
(3) examine the impacts of molecular cork adsorption on single-atom alloys
aggregation. State-of-the-art computational methods, including density
functional theory calculations and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, will be
employed to reveal the molecular-level phenomena underlying hydrogen spillover
and desorption from single-atom alloys. Experimental validation via scanning
tunneling microscopy and temperature-programed desorption studies will be
conducted through collaborations. The outcomes of this project have the
potential to advance hydrogen storage technologies and will be broadly relevant
to the interfacial engineering and heterogenous catalysis research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.