* 2142953
* CAREER: Narrowing the Spread: Process Understanding for Reduced Uncertainty in Future El Nino/Southern Oscillation Projections
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Samantha Stevenson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 522,823.00

The El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) dominates worldwide climate variability,
yet its overall sensitivity to climate change remains unknown. Climate models
project distinctly different changes to future ENSO-driven oceanic variability,
which are related in part to differences in simulated tropical Pacific mean
climate changes. This project will improve understanding of ENSO response to
climate change. The project will synthesize observational data with existing
model ensembles and novel, targeted sensitivity experiments to provide both
physical understanding of the ENSO climate change response and improved
observational constraints on future ENSO projections. The project will train
undergraduate and PhD students and postdoctoral researchers. Research results
will be incorporated into a series of instructional modules on climate and ocean
modeling (the “Climate DataLab”). Introductory modules will familiarize
environmental science professionals with climate model fundamentals, and more
advanced modules will describe ocean model parameterizations and dynamics.
Climate DataLab will also be used to train underrepresented minority
undergraduates through the Bren/Environmental Studies Leadership Program,
providing data science skills and facilitating retention in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to improve
constraints on future ENSO projections. The project will address how forced
changes in ENSO are related to mean climate and mesoscale and submesoscale ocean
dynamics. It will also examine how the mesoscale influences the interactions
between ENSO and the mean state. The primary tool to be used will be an
unprecedented array of CMIP-class ensembles. The project will also investigate
whether the relationships between ENSO and mean and mesoscale dynamics are
consistent across CMIP-class models. A suite of idealized ocean-only experiments
and novel diagnostics for Tropical Instability Wave (TIW) activity will allow
isolation of the influences of individual processes on mesoscale eddy behavior,
and their interactions with mean climate. Additionally, the first set of fully
coupled perturbed physics ensembles optimized for elucidating ocean physical
controls on ENSO projections will be created and contrasted with the behavior of
existing coupled model ensembles. When combined with the proposed development of
new, more detailed emergent constraint diagnostics, the result will be more
robust insights into how climate change may affect 21st century
ENSO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.