* 2142000
* CAREER: Covariational and Algebraic Reasoning: A New Path to Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Teo Paoletti, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2027
* USD 360,225.00

For many students, algebra presents challenges that have long-term economic and
social impacts, as algebra can serve as a gatekeeper for future STEM coursework
and careers. Thus, it is critical for K-12 education to support all students in
developing algebraic knowledge. Covariational reasoning, or the ability to
reason about relationships as quantities change together, is one way of thinking
that can provide a foundation for students to build their more abstract
algebraic knowledge. The research builds a foundation for integrating education
and research at the intersection of students’ developing algebraic knowledge,
covariational reasoning, and new educational technologies to create a new path
into algebra. This path can help remove barriers that have historically
restricted access to mathematics and STEM coursework and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop this new path into algebra, the project extends
prior research exploring how middle-school students can reason covariationally
to develop understandings for ideas critical to algebra. Two research questions
guide the project: (i) How can middle-school students’ covariational reasoning
serve as a foundation for their development of algebraic reasoning and
knowledge? (ii) What general paths support students to develop algebraic
reasoning and knowledge via their covariational reasoning? The project addresses
these questions by enacting multiple phases of small-group and whole-class
design-based research cycles with middle-school students. Each phase will
produce new insights into students’ learning by characterizing ways individual
students build their algebraic knowledge via their covariational reasoning.
Comparing and contrasting individual students’ progressions will support the
articulation of general paths students progress through as they develop their
algebraic knowledge via their covariational reasoning. In each phase, the
project will iteratively generate and test tasks situated in the free, publicly-
available, Desmos platform to create a research-based sequence of Desmos
activities, including teacher support materials, that have been effective in
supporting students’ algebraic and covariational reasoning. These efforts will
also allow for the development of principles for designing dynamic digital tasks
to support students’ covariational reasoning and algebra
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award is also funded in
part by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.