* 2142514
* Distributed Learning for Undergraduate Programs in Data Science at Diverse Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ming Wang, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 970,809.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
education in data science. This project will develop and deliver ten Data
Sciences (DS) courses to students from a consortium of eleven diverse
universities by using a flexible distributed learning (DL) platform. This
consortium will provide increased opportunities for DS instruction at
institutions with limited infrastructure and resources, including seven
minority-serving institutions. The courses will adapt the United States
military's advanced DL technology to an academic setting in order to harness the
power of artificial intelligence (AI) in tailoring optimal learning experiences
for the specific needs of each individual student. Pervasive DL technologies
help to overcome inefficiencies found at individual institutions due to small
enrollments and limited faculty expertise. At least two hundred undergraduates
will gain research experiences from taking the consortium's DS coursework,
participating in a summer research workshop, and obtaining a DS consortium
certification. To broaden this project’s overall impact on equal learning
opportunities and social mobility this project will recruit students from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to implement data-
driven pedagogical research on innovative DL practices across diverse
universities through the use of adaptive distributed learning (ADL). The
difference between DL and ADL courses is that the latter utilizes the
interoperable data exchange standard of the U.S. Department of Defense to
leverage the power of AI, big data, and communication technologies. ADL provides
learning that can be personalized and delivered anytime and anywhere to an
individual student. The adaptation of ADL technologies in an academic setting
remains largely untested and would benefit greatly from an analysis of its
efficacy. The consortium is organized into four organizational clusters headed
by Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (FL), the University of North Texas, and
Florida A&amp;M University. Institutions within each cluster include Bethune-
Cookman University (FL), California State University at Los Angeles, Hampden-
Sydney College (VA), Jackson State University (MS), Jarvis Christian College
(TX), Lane College (TN), Morgan State University (MD), and Simmons University
(MA). Leveraging the combined physical and intellectual resources of this
alliance of diverse institutions with DL technology provides students at these
institutions with the opportunity to pursue DS training on par with what would
be expected in a research university setting, thereby removing barriers that may
exist for these students to prepare for competition in the STEM job marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.