* 2142659
* CAREER: From Research to Meta-Research to Practice - The Development of an Educational Learning Environment Framework for School Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Sheree Sharpe, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 01/31/2027
* USD 411,447.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This is also funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the understanding of
teaching and learning of algebra in grades 6 through 12 by using a methodology
that leverages the cumulative power of an analysis of many studies on a topic.
This work will synthesize results aggregated from 40 years of research in the
field of mathematics education and develop a unified framework to inform
parents, students, teachers, other educators, and researchers. The project will
promote the transformation of research into practice by summarizing data-driven
practices of positive educational experiences for students learning algebra in
middle and secondary grades. The framework will support a deeper practical
understanding of how to teach school algebra. This new understanding formally
recognizes the important independent roles of teachers, students. and parents,
and how these different roles can be acted on in unison. In addition, the
principal investigator will mentor post-doctoral and doctoral students and
develop and implement a new course on meta-research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will conduct meta-research that integrates the results from quantitative
meta-analysis, and qualitative meta-synthesis to inform our understanding of
four constructs (i.e., parental involvement, school climate, algebra teaching
approach, and student engagement) on the algebra achievements of secondary
students. The synthesis methods rely on gathering information from existing
research to analyze patterns and themes across algebra projects over time. The
results will be used to develop an educational learning environment framework
for school algebra. This work will advance understanding of in-school and out-
of-school factors that influence the teaching and learning of
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.