* 2142641
* Modeling for Understanding Physical Phenomena and Engaging Pre-Service Teachers in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jaclyn Murray, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,939.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing elementary school
teachers to integrate model-based inquiry into the curriculum to enhance student
learning of science. In elementary schools, science is often taught utilizing
English language arts best practices. Children read about and memorize science
facts instead of engaging in science practices to develop scientific knowledge.
In efforts to build prospective elementary science teacher understanding of,
ability to, and preparedness for teaching using model-based inquiry (MBI) the
project aims to situate MBI into a physical science course. The Modeling for
Understanding Physical Phenomena and Engaging Teachers in Science (MUPPETS)
project will develop a physical science course for prospective elementary
teachers (to be taken prior to the science education methods course) in which
the preservice teachers are learners of science in an environment that utilizes
science education research-based pedagogical approaches. Pre-service teacher
gain experience learning science using techniques well suited for elementary
students and in accordance with the Next Generation Science Standards. When
prospective elementary teachers enter the science education methods course, the
physical science course experience is a familiar context to draw upon, an
opportunity not typically found in elementary education teacher preparation
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the MUPPETS project is to
determine how prospective elementary teachers engage with model-based inquiry
(MBI) that centers on gathering and making sense of data and peer-to-peer
discourse. More specifically, this project seeks to understand how making sense
of phenomena through collaborative discussions influences the composition and
substance of models and explanations across model iterations to establish the
impact on their understanding of (1) physical science, science, and universal
epistemological views; (2) meta-modeling knowledge; and (3) modeling practice.
Data is analyzed using a mixed-methods approach employing a quantitative
analysis of pre-and post-survey data to assess prospective elementary teachers’
views of knowledge (epistemology) and meta-modeling knowledge before and after
engaging in MBI. The qualitative data component of the research includes the
observed written explanations and think-aloud protocol to characterize types of
modeling practice that pre-service elementary teachers use to explain phenomena
through the visual, written, and oral representations they create across five
sets of iterative models. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Partial funding is from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.