* 2142911
* CAREER: Distributed spatial neural dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Nicholas Steinmetz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2027
* USD 429,773.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain dynamics – fluctuations in
activity over time – are tightly coordinated across brain regions, and these
coupled dynamics may underlie many perceptual and cognitive processes. Brain
activity varies not only over time but also in space, taking the form of waves
and other spatially extended patterns that evolve dynamically. However, whether
these spatial dynamics are also coordinated across brain regions, similar to the
way temporal patterns are, is unknown. In this proposal new tools will be
leveraged for large-scale spatial measurements and manipulations of neural
activity to answer this question. This work will have impact on our
understanding of brain activity underlying perception and behavior, and may
yield insights important for design of next-generation artificial intelligence
systems. Software, developed for this project will bring large-scale systems
neuroscience to classrooms in low-income settings, and will democratize training
and access for scientists using our novel technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
decipher the coordination of spatial dynamics between cortical and subcortical
brain regions, a combination of widefield calcium imaging in GCaMP7 trangenic
mice coupled with large-scale electrophysiology in deep brain structures using
Neuropixels 2.0 probes, will be used. This work will take advantage of novel
electrode arrays developed by this laboratory, and is suitable for measuring the
spatial pattern of neural activity in thalamus, striatum, midbrain, and pons. In
addition to recordings, the mechanisms underlying spatially coordinated activity
will be measured via a combination of mechanical and optogenetic neural
manipulations. Finally, we will test a hypothesis for the role of propagating
neural activity in the alpha (3-6 Hz) frequency range in behavior and perception
in mice. Together these experiments will uncover the structure of shared
activity patterns across brain regions and have implications for the
computational functions of these regions and for their interactions.
Complementing these studies, software will be developed to bring large-scale
systems neuroscience to classrooms in low-income settings, increasing training
opportunities and access for scientists using our new technology developed in
this laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.