* 2142697
* Examining How Economic, Social, and Cultural Capital Translate to Engineering Degree Attainment
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Joyce Main, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2025
* USD 550,701.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying factors that
contribute to college engineering major choice and degree attainment. The
overarching goal of the project is to address disparities in engineering degree
attainment and to strengthen the scientific and technological workforce
development in the U.S. This project will help advance the understanding of
participation in engineering based on the analysis of factors at the individual,
familial, high school, neighborhood, and community levels that contribute to
college going, engineering major choice, and engineering degree attainment. By
applying an asset-based framework to the examination of multiple dimensions of
students’ experiences over time, this project can contribute to reframing
conversations and reinvigorating the development of strategies that may have the
greatest potential in increasing participation in engineering and enhancing
engineering workforce talent development. Outcomes of this project may provide
important context and information for various applications, such as policy
formation, development of strategies and interventions to promote access and
recruitment, strengthening partnerships between K-12 and postsecondary
educational institutions, and promoting a competitive scientific and
technological workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project emphasizes credible
identification of the patterns and mechanisms associated with the academic
trajectories of students through a mixed methods research design. This project
leverages nationally representative data from the High School Longitudinal Study
and the Education Longitudinal Study to examine the pathways of students from
high school through college engineering using econometric methods. Moreover,
individual interviews with students and their parents/guardians across three
different institutions provide opportunities to uncover students’ experiences
and counter stories. The quantitative and qualitative findings will be
integrated to develop a longitudinal conceptual model to illustrate the
important factors that affect engineering major choice and degree attainment.
This project focuses on critical transition points between K-12 and
postsecondary education, such that research findings have the potential to
advance foundational knowledge to help key stakeholders make informed decisions
in promoting engineering at both the K-12 and early college levels. The project
scope has the potential for broad and meaningful impact across disciplines and
communities given the comprehensive dissemination strategy, which is intended to
reach practitioners, policy makers, and the educational research community
including engineering education, education policy, and economics. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.