* 2142657
* Collaborative Research: Challenging Anti-Black-Racism in Civil and Environmental Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Maya Carrasquillo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing STEM education
practices to improve civil and environmental engineering curriculum for students
working with communities on the equitable development of critical
infrastructure. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was established 50
years ago to ensure that all Americans are protected from significant risks to
human health and the environment where they live, learn, and work. However, low-
income communities of color continue to be disproportionately exposed to air and
water pollution. Disparities in exposure to air and water pollution have led to
scholarship on environmental justice principles, which asserts that communities
are entitled to equal protection of environmental and public health laws and
regulations. Professional societies and national academies are actively involved
in these discussions. For example, the American Society of Civil Engineers’
(ASCE) statement on justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion calls for building
mutually beneficial partnerships with engineering and non-engineering
organizations and advancing a research agenda centered on equitable and
inclusive engineering education, research, and practice. An overarching
challenge for environmental engineering is educational reform to ensure holistic
solutions that build on authentic partnerships with community stakeholders,
especially those whose agency has historically been limited in environmental
decision making. The project team plans to collaborate on the development of
curriculum that focuses on fair treatment and equitable involvement of
communities in the planning and design of critical
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and
implement a suite of integrated, interdisciplinary, community-engaged, anti-
Black-racism training opportunities for civil and environmental engineering
undergraduates to build capacity for addressing complex and interconnected
challenges of our time. The new curricula for undergraduate civil and
environmental engineering and anthropology training is intended to address anti-
Black-racism as it relates to urban infrastructure while partnering with local
entities to build equitable communities. African American communities in the
Tampa Bay and San Francisco Bay regions will serve as the convergence space
where academic educators/researchers, community members, and practitioners begin
to create and implement innovative course materials in a set of five engineering
courses that will help students achieve ABET accredited student learning
outcomes. The project aims to include additional faculty at the two institutions
who have expressed interest in participating in the project’s workshops that
would impact additional engineering courses. Results from the proposed research
will be disseminated through channels to reach diverse stakeholders at multiple
universities through faculty workshops/seminars, community meetings, and an
annual Institute on Black Life conference that focuses on community engaged
partnership and scholarship. Project results will be shared with STEM educators
at national conferences convened by societies such as the Association of
Environmental Engineering and Science Professors, American Society of
Engineering Education conference, and the American Educational Research
Association. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.