* 2142152
* Probing the mechanical properties of the crust and upper mantle using geodetic, remote sensing and seismological observations
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2023
* USD 193,590.00

The Accomplishments Based Renewal will shed light on the laws that govern
continental deformation and the seismic cycle, such as the processes of strain
release during large earthquakes and the slow strain build up between successive
earthquakes. This topic is of broad interest in geology and the result of the
research could significantly advance methods for seismic hazard assessment.
These are questions that the recent National Academies of Science, Engineering
and Medicine report Earth in Time note as grand challenge questions in the Earth
sciences. The researchers will analyze and model high precision GPS measurements
of ground deformation before, during and after large earthquakes in California
and Tibet using novel methods developed by the lead researcher. The project will
support educational and outreach activities by the PI to train students and
postdoctoral researcher involved in the project. The project will foster
international scientific collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to advance the knowledge of crustal and upper mantle rheology
and to improve the quantitative understanding of how seismicity relates to
geodetic strain. The researchers will analyze High-Rate GNSS measurements of
postseismic deformation and aseismic transients using a new methodology based on
an Independent Component Analysis technique. They will compare the geodetic and
seismicity observations with model predictions to constrain the friction
properties governing the earthquake nucleation process and aseismic slip, and
the viscosity structure. They will analyze data from California, related to the
2019, Mw7.1 Ridgecrest earthquake and the 2020 Westmorland swarm in particular,
and data related to the Mw 7.4, 2021a Madoi earthquake in
Tibet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.