* 2142092
* Collaborative Research: Early life effects on later life biological outcomes: evolutionary and molecular mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Thomas Kraft, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 89,690.00

The environments that people are born and raised in can have profound and long-
lasting effects on their biology, but precisely how and why early life
environmental factors “get under the skin” to influence physiology and health in
later life remains poorly understood. This project explores the mechanistic and
evolutionary bases of early life effects on later life biological outcomes in
groups living in environments that are dramatically different from those they
encountered early in life. Insights from such groups, who are undergoing rapid
lifestyle changes due to increasing market integration, acculturation, and
urbanization, advance knowledge about biological connections across the
lifespan, in the context of biocultural theory. The project may also inform
global health research, given that many human groups are undergoing similar
lifestyle changes, as well as inform our understanding of the complex causes of
some of the greatest health threats faced by people in the United States and
other high-income countries. The research provides many scientific training
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, as well as
participating community members. Through partnerships with mobile clinics, this
research is also directly contributing to improving health care among
participating groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to uncover the mechanistic
and evolutionary bases of early life effects on later life biological outcomes,
this research has three general goals. First, the researchers use detailed
interviews and direct measurements of numerous behavioral, anthropometric, and
physiological traits to characterize the early life and current environments of
study participants and their current physiological status. Second, using these
data and previously established modeling methods, the researchers test competing
explanations for how early life effects on later life health evolve, including
the well-known but insufficiently tested “developmental constraints'' and
“predictive adaptive responses” hypotheses. Third, the researchers are using
cutting-edge genomic techniques to identify the genes and gene regulatory
processes that mediate early life environmental influences on later life health
by measuring genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression levels and linking
these genomic mechanisms to both the environmental stimuli to which they are
responsive and their downstream health consequences. An especially innovative
and promising feature of this research is that it integrates theory and methods
from a variety of scientific fields including human evolutionary biology,
behavioral ecology, epidemiology, biomedicine, and
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.