* 2142229
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Preparing Future Cybersecurity Professionals with Data Science Expertise
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Thaier Hayajneh, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2027
* USD 2,130,848.00

As increasingly sophisticated and varied cyberattacks become common, it is
crucial that well-trained and agile cybersecurity professionals enter industry
and government positions. These professionals should be adept at analyzing the
enormous amounts of data generated by modern computing systems to facilitate
processing at the scale and rates necessary to identify new attacks. The
CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) project at Fordham University will
help address these workforce needs by providing scholarships to educate a new
breed of cybersecurity professionals trained in data science methods and tools.
Fordham SFS recipients will earn an M.S. in Cybersecurity with either a
concentration in Data Science or an Advanced Certificate in Data Science for
Cybersecurity. The program will afford students a well-rounded cybersecurity
education, including its technical and ethical components, which are vital for
government positions. The project team will leverage recent awards made to
Fordham focused on increasing diversity, including GenCyber and National
Security Agency Cybersecurity Education Diversity Initiative awards. These and
other efforts by the project team aim to increase the participation of groups
who have thus far remained underrepresented in the cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of inspiring new cybersecurity
personnel towards a career in government service will benefit from Fordham’s
collaboration with numerous government agencies, its small class sizes, and
numerous opportunities to participate in research and outreach activities, such
as cyber-defense competitions. Students will have the option of pursuing a
cyber-operations or a policy/law/management track for the cybersecurity
coursework. Data science coursework will provide students with the programming
skills, tools, and experience required to manipulate, analyze, and visualize
large and complex datasets. The student-centered curriculum that leverages the
synergies between the traditional cybersecurity and data science curricula will
result in cybersecurity professionals who are well-prepared to meet evolving
cybersecurity threats to our nation’s information systems and data
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a Federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.