* 2142246
* CAREER: Expanding the Photo-Manufacturing Toolbox to Enable Production of Bio-sourced Multi-scaled Biomimicking Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kristan Worthington, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2027
* USD 500,076.00

Modern discoveries and advancement in biology and medicine are enhanced by the
use of engineered materials that mimic the structural, mechanical, and
biochemical complexities of human tissue. The research supported by this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award will generate new knowledge as the
investigators leverage light-based three-dimensional printing to address three
key barriers that currently limit the fabrication of biomimetic materials:
toxicity of printing resins, tunability of properties, and ability to create
features that span biologically relevant length scales. This research project
will expand the breadth of tools available for manufacturing advanced
biomaterials and facilitate the development of products and devices that enable
better diagnosis, study, and treatment of numerous diseases and conditions. The
project also includes the creation of a community of historically
underrepresented and underserved rising researchers, from high school to
graduate school. Participants will be connected across the educational continuum
by a cooperative mentoring network and will engage in learning and research
opportunities related to 3D-printed biomaterials. As such, the project will help
to enhance the diversity and technical strength of the biomaterials
manufacturing workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although photo-manufacturing is a
promising technique for the creation of advanced biomaterials, its use is
limited by several major barriers: i) many traditional photoinitiators are
biologically disruptive, ii) controlling mechanophysical properties across the
micro- and meso-scale continuum is challenging, and iii) innovation is hindered
by historical underrepresentation of some groups in STEM and insufficient
practical training opportunities. The research team will address these
limitations by quantifying both the efficiency and cytocompatibility of
biosourced photoinitiator candidates in two-photon polymerization (micro-scale)
and digital light processing (meso-scale). Additionally, the team will develop
mathematical relationships between crosslinking rate and final feature
properties, then employ these relationships to determine appropriate methods for
coupling micro and meso printing to create multiscale features with continuous
and predictable mechanophysical properties. Furthermore, the research team will
help to enhance the diversity and technical skill level of the medical device
and manufacturing workforce by creating the “3D Printing in Bioengineering
Rising Researcher Community.” This community will include education and research
engagement opportunities at all levels, with a strong emphasis on cooperative
mentoring and professional development. The research and educational activities
are tightly integrated: scientific discoveries will be applied to student-driven
projects, and student creativity in these applications will spur innovation for
future advancements in photo-manufacturing and applied fields. Overall, the
outcomes of the project are expected to have a significant positive impact by
catalyzing the advancement of photo-manufacturing for biological applications
and enhancing workforce diversity and technical strength in manufacturing and
biomaterials. This project is jointly funded by the Advanced Manufacturing
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.