* 2142982
* CAREER: Advancing the Understanding of Turbulence-Microphysics Interactions in Clouds Through Multiscale Numerical Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Scott Salesky, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 01/31/2027
* USD 301,133.00

Clouds are critical for many processes in the Earth system, including
precipitation formation, water resources, and climate feedbacks; the role of
clouds is a major source of uncertainty in present and future climate. Computer
models of weather and climate often fail to accurately capture the effects of
random, turbulent fluctuations of temperature, humidity, and wind speed on cloud
droplet formation and growth. These turbulent fluctuations can impact cloud
lifetimes, precipitation formation, and climate feedbacks and therefore are
important to model accurately for both weather and climate prediction. The
central aims of this project are to understand the small-scale interactions
between turbulence and cloud droplet formation and growth and to improve the
representation of these processes in weather and climate forecasting models. The
educational component of this project is intended to increase engagement of
undergraduates from physics and other STEM fields in atmospheric science through
the development of lesson plans following principles of authentic instruction.
These lessons will be piloted by instructors at teaching-intensive Oklahoma
universities and are intended to promote interest in the geosciences among a
diverse pool of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
importance of small-scale interactions between turbulence and microphysical
processes in clouds, these interactions remain poorly represented in both large
eddy simulations and weather and climate forecasting models. Using direct
numerical simulations (DNS) that capture the formation and growth of millions of
Lagrangian droplets in a turbulent flow, the researchers will develop new
subgrid-scale models for turbulence-microphysics interactions that accurately
capture the governing physics. These subgrid-scale models will be validated
against DNS and laboratory cloud chamber data; the resulting large eddy
simulations will be used to investigate the extent to which interactions between
turbulence and microphysics—at spatial scales larger than those attainable in
DNS—influence cloud lifetimes, precipitation formation, albedo, and other large-
scale cloud properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.