* 2142757
* CAREER: Improving Bicycling Safety by Developing a Research Framework for Studying Driver-Bicyclist Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Fred Feng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2027
* USD 549,037.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
advance the safety of environmentally sustainable, active, and equitable
mobility modes by exploring ways to improve bicycling safety. Bicycling has long
been an important mobility mode for its environmental, health, and economic
benefits. Nonetheless, bicycling is still largely underutilized in the U.S. The
perceived danger of bicycling in motorized traffic has deterred many from
considering it as a viable mobility option. This NSF grant will fill the
knowledge gap to better understand how drivers and bicyclists interact with each
other in the context of real-world roadway designs, and the key factors that
shape their behaviors. The outcome of this research will support engineers and
practitioners, city planners, and policymakers and legislators by providing
data-driven insights to design safer road infrastructures, bicycle facilities,
traffic laws and regulations, training and education programs, and safety
technologies. The research activities are integrated with educational activities
to foster local K-12 students' interests in STEM fields and train the next
generation of scientists and engineers to work towards the urban future in which
sustainable and active mobility will play a key role. The outreach to the local
communities and dissemination of the online free educational materials on
bicycling safety will promote active mobility modes to the general public
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research questions of this project are
(a) how do drivers and bicyclists interact with each other in the context of
roadways designs, (b) what are the key factors and underlying mechanisms for
driver-bicyclist crashes and conflicts, and (c) how can researchers
systematically generate data-driven insights in active mobility safety research?
To this end, this grant will develop a bicycling safety research framework that
incorporates a variety of complementary methodologies and technologies,
including (1) observational studies in real-world natural settings from
complementary perspectives using naturalistic driving, cycling, and drone data;
(2) laboratory experiments in a safe, controlled, and replicable environment
using high-fidelity virtual reality cycling and driving simulators; (3) crash
data analysis of bicyclist fatalities and injuries; and (4) computational
modeling and simulation. A number of common and dangerous driver-bicyclist
interaction types will be examined, including overtaking bicyclists and
intersection-related conflicts. A wide range of factors involving driver and
vehicle, bicyclist, and road infrastructure will be examined for their effects
on bicycling safety measured by surrogate safety measures. This research also
integrates many tools including big data, causal inference, human factors,
virtual reality, lidar sensing, and computational human modeling. In addition,
an open-source data repository of driver-bicyclist interactions will be
developed to support the broader transportation research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.