* 2142309
* Supporting Learning and Enhancement of Programming Competencies Through Use of Immediate Critiques of Antipatterns in Novice Programmer Code
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Leo Ureel, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2025
* USD 616,008.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a system that
will automatically detect coding mistakes made by students in programming
classes. Providing rich, immediate feedback to students significantly improves
learning outcomes resulting in better coding skills. Providing feedback in a
timely manner using human graders is difficult due to rapidly increasing class
sizes and instructor shortages. The goal of this project is to develop a system
that can automatically provide high-quality feedback to students in introductory
programming classes. Once developed, the system can be used by departments with
limited resources to provide timely feedback to students. The result will be
students with strong coding skills who will be ready to meet the current demand
for programmers in the technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
team will extend an existing system, WebTA, to study the common errors that are
made by students in introductory programming courses. A mixed-methods approach
will be used to evaluate the impacts of using WebTA as a learning tool in a
first-year engineering course. The hypothesis is that this intervention will:
(a) improve students’ computing skills, (b) improve students’ computing and
engineering self-efficacy, and (c) enable students and instructors to converse
in a common language around antipatterns. Students will use WebTA to engage in a
tight learning cycle of coding, reflecting on feedback, and making changes.
First-year instructors will assist in identifying and encoding novice
antipatterns, resulting in a MATLAB antipattern library. The project team will
partner with course instructors to embed the terminology and examples of
antipatterns in their instructional materials. WebTA will be developed as a
freely available software system. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.