* 2142686
* Collaborative Research: Informing River Corridor Transport Modeling by Harnessing Community Data and Physics-Aware Machine Learning
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Kenneth Carroll, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 43,854.00

River corridors, including their adjacent and underlying sediments, are
ecosystems where waters from different sources mix. This mixing controls the
fate of a multitude of dissolved solutes, such as nutrients essential to the
ecosystem, dissolved minerals from natural weathering, pharmaceuticals from
wastewater treatment plant discharge, and contaminants from nearby sources.
Practically useful computer models of how solutes are transported, including how
they are exchanged back and forth between riverbed sediments and the river
itself, are needed to understand water quality in rivers. Recent research
suggests that these transport processes are missed by state-of-the-art computer
models. This project will develop a general approach to building adaptable
computer models based on recently developed tools in mathematical modeling,
including artificial intelligence, to investigate how to specialize general
models for particular rivers. The project will generate a large database of
experimental results from river transport studies from around the globe. The
database will be used to extract patterns associated with solute transport and
will be disseminated broadly with the scientific community. The project team
will host annual workshops to enhance database sharing, distribute educational
modules on the use of artificial intelligence in hydrological sciences, and
discuss approaches to standardize data collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to develop a comprehensive database of river tracer
testing data for open sharing with the scientific community, and to develop and
test a novel generalized model of solute transport in river corridors. The
activities proposed center around the construction of a community-available,
large database of tracer tests performed in streams and rivers worldwide, and
its use as curricula for machine learning of model properties. Congruent data
analytics will be performed to identify correlations among key variables of both
river and tracer test properties, treating breakthrough curves not individually
but in the tracer test sets in which they are measured. Uncertainty in
experimentally measured solute concentrations will be formally addressed and
used to describe model predictive power. The models selected for evaluation
range from the classical transient storage model to a new model designed to
address the hypothesis that residence time in the river and in the hyporheic
zone both matter to exchange fluxes. Both conventional inverse modeling and
machine learning tools will be applied in dual model calibration tasks, bringing
uniquely powerful physics-informed neural networks to bear on this challenging
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.