* 2142337
* CAREER: An Integrated Experimental and Numerical Vulnerability Assessment of Aging Housing Infrastructure and Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Maria Koliou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2027
* USD 608,512.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will advance understanding
of the interplay between chronic and acute natural hazard effects on wood
residential buildings and will enable the development and evaluation of
mitigation strategies that will improve housing functional recovery. The project
outcomes will be applicable to wood housing infrastructure for post-disaster
rehabilitation or pre-disaster preparedness solutions by local communities and
governments considering various socioeconomic indicators. Additionally, the
outcomes will inform building codes on the response and capacity of aging
infrastructure and for the adoption of environmental degradation in the design
of new homes. The education and outreach plans will contribute to developing and
preparing a future diverse STEM workforce with interdisciplinary training to
tackle the housing challenges of the 21st century. This research will contribute
to the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to develop a comprehensive framework for understanding, assessing,
and enhancing the performance of aging wood residential infrastructure subjected
to combined chronic and acute (seismic) natural hazards and its impact on
housing communities. The research objectives of this project are to (a) quantify
the dominant environmentally induced deterioration mechanisms of aging wood
members and (b) link the structural performance of wood members and buildings
under combined chronic and acute hazards to post-disaster functional recovery
time, health, and social disruption of housing communities. To achieve these
objectives, the research plan will comprise two thrust areas, namely, building-
level and community-level vulnerability assessment of aging wood infrastructure
with tasks on: (a) experimental investigations of wood members aged due to
biotic decay and mechanical deterioration; (b) development of Bayesian-based
predictive models for major mechanical properties of wood members considering
individual and combined aging mechanisms, and accounting for uncertainties; (c)
structural performance assessment of wood buildings under combined chronic and
acute hazards; (d) risk analysis of aging housing infrastructure and communities
through holistic agent-based models of housing communities accounting for social
vulnerability indicators; and (e) mitigation strategies for improved functional
recovery of housing communities through integrated optimization analyses and
expert feedback solicitation. Data generated from this project will be archived
and made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https:/www.DesignSafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.