* 2142262
* Collaborative Research: Developing Biology Undergraduates’ Scientific Literacy and Identity Through Peer Review of Scientific Manuscripts
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Sarah Fankhauser, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 11/30/2024
* USD 20,693.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by educating undergraduates
about peer review. Peer review is the process where scientists evaluate the
credibility of each other's research articles before they are published. A
course in peer review is a significant innovation in undergraduate science
education. Such a course has potential to increase students’ scientific literacy
by providing deeper understanding of how experimental results are translated
into published knowledge. Additionally, it can lead to an increase in students’
sense of identity as a scientist by giving them authentic opportunities to act
as a peer reviewer. Improving the scientific literacy of undergraduates is
critical for creating a scientifically-literate public that values and can
discriminate peer-reviewed scientific literature from pseudoscience.
Facilitating undergraduates’ science identity formation will enhance their sense
of belonging in the scientific community. This is critical for broadening
participation and preparing students for success in the STEM workforce. By
providing biology undergraduates with authentic experiences in the rapidly
changing field of scientific peer review and publishing, this project will
uncover part of hidden science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
curriculum aligned with anti-racism efforts within the academy and STEM
workforce. This project seeks to provide an evidence base for an innovative
undergraduate curriculum on peer review that increases scientific literacy and
provides a means for broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to evaluate a new, constructivist curriculum in which
biology undergraduates learn about the importance and mechanisms of peer review,
then write and publish their own reviews of preprints. Changes in students'
scientific literacy and scientific identity as a result of the curriculum will
be measured by validated pre-post surveys and thematic analysis of students’
writing. This project will extend the literature on undergraduates’ scientific
literacy and identity formation to the underexplored topic of manuscript peer
review, an authentic scholarly practice less commonly available to
undergraduates than authentic laboratory experiences. The curriculum will be
tested at 3 institutions to evaluate its efficacy, its transferability to
different instructors, student populations (biology majors, non-majors), course
types (introductory, advanced disciplinary), and institution types (private,
public, college, university, 2-year, 4-year). Its utility for educators will
also be assessed via a survey of undergraduate biology instructors that asks
about their experience with and interest in using authentic peer review in the
classroom. This survey, the results of this research, and the evidenced-based
curricular materials created by this project will be disseminated across the
education and research networks of the project personnel. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.