* 2142045
* Changing physics and astronomy education culture: A reflective practice model of faculty development to support diversity, equity, inclusion, and excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Marilyne Stains, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 04/30/2027
* USD 589,739.00

This project aims to improve and broaden participation in undergraduate STEM
education through faculty use of student centered pedagogical practices in their
teaching that also foster diversity, equity, and inclusion in physics and
astronomy. Most new college and university faculty in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) begin their teaching careers with little or
no experience with methods of effective pedagogy, including methods for
addressing and improving diversity, equity, and inclusion. To remedy this
problem in physics and astronomy, the American Association of Physics Teachers,
the American Astronomical Society, and the American Physical Society propose to
build on and bolster the successful series of Physics and Astronomy Faculty
Workshops. With partners from the University of Virginia, the University of
Washington (Bothell), and the University of Arizona, the project will implement
a significant redesign of the workshops based on what has been learned from
participant feedback, workshop evaluations, research into faculty professional
development, and the needs of today’s faculty. Effective practices for enhancing
diversity, equity and inclusion will be integrated throughout the workshops. In
addition to tenure-track faculty, the project will foster the participation of
adjunct, part-time, and primarily instructional faculty, who, collectively,
teach an increasing fraction of physics and astronomy courses across the
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project redesign will add four new
components: (1) a restructured program delivered by a core set of well-prepared
presenters, focusing on the development of participants’ Individual Development
Plans; (2) an overarching emphasis on the professional development of the “whole
faculty member,” as faculty members grow as educators, researchers, and
professionals; (3) an enhanced set of post-workshop activities to provide
coaching and feedback for the workshop participants as they implement student-
centered instructional practices; and (4) a research program focusing on how
faculty develop from novices to reflective practitioners in their role as
educators. Despite the successes of the New Faculty Workshops to date, studies
show that some faculty members do not persist in implementing those pedagogical
practices. The redesigned program will directly address this "implementation
dip" by developing habits of mind that support resilience, reflection, and
continuous improvement of teaching, and engaging faculty in an inclusive
community of educators that helps them navigate and integrate student-centered
teaching practices throughout their careers. The research and evaluation are
designed to inform the improvement of workshops and post-workshop activities and
contribute to an understanding of the role of reflective practice in tackling
the implementation gap associated with sustaining student centered pedagogical
practice in undergraduate STEM education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.