* 2142967
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Socio hydrology to link climate change and its societal impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Marc Muller, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 05/31/2027
* USD 208,928.00

Water mediates the relation between climate change and its most dramatic
societal impacts, including food shortages, migration, and conflict. Yet,
questions remain about how specific changes in rain patterns can cause excess or
insufficient water with the potential to beget such crises. There is poor
integration between disciplines studying the causes and societal impact of
climate change. Climate variables are often directly used as proxies for water
availability in climate impact studies, thus missing the important role of
hydrology in dampening (or amplifying) the effect of climate change and shaping
people's response to it. This project develops the theoretical, empirical,
experimental, and educational tools necessary for hydrology to be properly
leveraged to understand — and mitigate — the societal impacts of climate change.
These new tools incorporate four key hydrologic characteristics of climate-
related crises that are not currently simultaneously addressed: local scale,
non-stationary drivers, human- water feedback, and data-scarcity. The project
provides interdisciplinary training for one graduate and nine undergraduate
students and creates valuable education and outreach material (including a web-
based simulation game) for easy use by researchers, policy makers and community
educators outside of hydrology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the theoretical realm,
the project clarifies the effect of irrigation withdrawals on changing flow
regimes by incorporating human- water feedbacks into a widely used process-based
probabilistic model of catchment-scale water storage dynamics. In the empirical
realm, the project introduces statistical tools to leverage natural experiments
for causal inferences in observational studies. This allows hydrological changes
in data-limited regions to be attributed ex-post to their natural and
anthropogenic drivers. In the experimental and educational realms, the web-based
simulation game will serve as an experimental platform to determine the
relationship between the properties of hydrological change and water users’
response to it. The game will simultaneously serve as an open platform to
integrate research, outreach, and education at scale. It will be leveraged for
high school and undergraduate education and used to support climate preparedness
training for water and policy professionals in the US and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the GEO/EAR
Hydrologic Sciences Program and the SBE/BCS Human-Environment and Geographical
Sciences Program, with additional support from the Directorate of Education and
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.