* 2142825
* CAREER: Reactions of Volatile Organics in Aerosol Articles as a Source of Persistent Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Eric Vejerano, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2027
* USD 608,794.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WIth support from the
Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of Chemistry, Eric P.
Vejerano at the University of South Carolina will study the formation of
environmentally persistent free radicals (EPFRs) in secondary organic aerosols
(SOA). EPFRs are a recently identified class of stable and persistent pollutants
that contribute to some of the adverse health effects of atmospheric particulate
matter. Knowledge gaps on understanding the sources, nature, and formation of
EPFRs remain, for instance, the contribution of atmospheric processing of
organic contaminants in forming EPFRs. This project will investigate the
formation of EPFRs when volatile organic compounds (VOCs), such as those
released by plants and from human-related activities, react with atmospheric
oxidants (e.g., ozone) to form particles. Also of interest are subsequent
reactions that may result in the loss of EPFRs after their formation. The
project will utilize a suite of analytical methods to probe changes in the
particles and characterize size distributions and concentrations. The broader
impacts of this project include providing knowledge of the classes of chemicals
responsible for forming EPFRs, which integrates research on EPFRs with
atmospheric chemistry. Concepts and results from the project will be
incorporated in developing publicly accessible electronic and online educational
tools for K-12 students. Additionally, this project will equip undergraduate
students with scientific and technical skills through research participation and
give them insight to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
career paths. The PI seeks to cultivate excellence through diversity and is
engaged in training students from groups underrepresented in chemistry.
Specifically, the PI is actively training early career female and African-
American students tol strengthen diversity, equity, and inclusion in
chemistryresearch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atmospheric processes leading to
the conversion of VOCs to SOA are a potentially significant contributor to
EPFRs, since many anthropogenic and biogenic VOCs and their oxidation byproducts
have similar chemical structures to those known to form EPFRs from primary
emission sources. Mass spectrometry will be used to determine chemical
identities and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to measure EPFR
formation and identify possible chemical structures. Diverse chemical classes of
VOCs will be tested in their ability to form EPFRs using a potential aerosol
mass chamber to explore structure-EPFR relationships. In addition, the impact of
seed particles, temperature, irradiation, and humidity that regulate the
formation and loss of EPFRs via subsequent atmospheric processes will be
explored. The objectives of this career-development plan are therefore to: (1)
conduct a lab-scale chamber study to understand the impact of atmospheric
processes in the transformation of VOC to SOA that subsequently form EPFRs; (2)
determine the factors that affect the formation and loss of EPFRs; and (3)
integrate the research outcomes in implementing educational and outreach
programs to improve science education on the research topic by developing
electronic and online educational tools for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.