* 2142694
* CAREER: Floer theories and Reeb dynamics of contact manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Joanna Nelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2027
* USD 244,346.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The mathematical structures known as contact and
symplectic manifolds have their origins in the study of classical mechanical
systems from physics, which allow one to describe systems such as planetary
motion and wave propagation. The equations of motion can be described in terms
of mathematical objects known as flow lines of Hamiltonian and Reeb vector
fields. Understanding the dynamics of these vector fields led to the development
of global Floer theoretic invariants of symplectic and contact manifolds. By
developing foundations and applications of these invariants, the PI's work will
illuminate the interconnectedness of dynamics, embeddings, knot theory,
geometry, and topology. The PI will expand her efforts to increase the access
and success of underrepresented students in mathematics and academia more
broadly. She is conducting, jointly with others, two national studies to
delineate forms of antiracism in academic advising in STEM fields and to examine
the effect of academic advisors' practices on BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and
people of color) PhD student psychological experiences and outcomes. Based on
the results of the studies, she will construct a set of best practices and
effective behaviors in academic advising. To train future generations, the PI
will co-organize two international conferences with professional development
programming for early-career mathematicians, including a panel discussion on
academic jobs for graduate students. She will also develop and implement summer
research programs for undergraduates that will include graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project concerns Floer
theoretic invariants and Reeb dynamics of contact manifolds. The dynamics of
Reeb vector fields are subtly related to the underlying contact structure as
well as the topology and geometry of the underlying manifold. Reeb vector fields
realize distance minimizing flow and arise as the restriction of Hamiltonian
vector fields to contact type hypersurfaces and boundaries of symplectic
manifolds. Reeb dynamics additionally govern embeddings between symplectic
manifolds with contact type boundary as well as the topology of symplectic
fillings of contact manifolds. The PI's research has a particular emphasis on
the study of closed periodic Reeb orbits (circular flow lines) by way of the
development of various Floer theories, so as to capture different dynamical,
geometric, and topological phenomenon. She will also provide applications to
surface dynamics and the study of contact and symplectic manifolds. The project
includes community building, mentorship, recruitment, and retention programming
for undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, as well as the training
of students in communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.