* 2142987
* EAGER:Real Time Federated Learning using Kernel Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Kuh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 253,231.00

We are increasingly seeing increasing amounts of dynamic data coming from a
variety of different applications ranging from the electric power grid to
transportation systems to healthcare networks to social network data. This data
comes from a variety of sources including sensor networks and IoT applications.
A common feature is that much of this data is that it is distributed (at the
edge) and methodologies need to be established to process, learn, and make
decisions from this data. One approach is to gather all the data together at a
central processor (in the cloud) and to process, learn, and make decisions here
where computing resources are greater. The edge devices however are often
constrained by communication costs which results in considerable power
consumption especially if edge devices need to send information over wireless
networks. Federated learning has been proposed where edge devices do not send
data to the central processor, but send model parameters (weights) of model to
edge devices. Each edge device modifies the weights based on data it receives
and then send the modified weights back to the central processor. This proposal
develops simple real-time learning algorithms at the edge processor based on
unconstrained optimization methods using principles of federated learning and
studies applications for power systems. The research results will be
incorporated to both graduate and undergraduate courses in machine learning and
signal processing. Special attention will be given to recruitment and retention
of underrepresented students through the Native Hawaiian Science and Engineering
Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) and the Society of Woman Engineers
(SWE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes advances in the field of real-time
distributed learning and decision making using principles of federated learning,
adaptive signal processing, graph signal processing, optimization, and kernel
methods. The research is convergent bringing in the fields of signal processing,
mathematics, statistics, and computer science together. The contributions are in
three areas: algorithm development, analysis, and applications&lt;br/&gt;to the
electric power grid. A focus is to design simple online kernel algorithms that
are applicable for both supervised learning (regression, prediction,
classification) and unsupervised learning (principal component analysis,
probability density estimation). The algorithms focus on edge computing using
optimization methods from online least squares kernel methods using variants of
stochastic gradient and the temporal and spatial relationships between nodes
represented as graphs. Tradeoffs are considered between optimizing objective
functions, convergence, computational complexity, and communication costs. The
online distributed kernel algorithms are then applied to detect bad data on the
power grid and providing distributed learning capabilities for demand response
(DR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.