* 2142672
* CAREER: An Efficient Computational Framework for Data Driven Feedback Control
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Feng Bao, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2027
* USD 164,055.00

Optimal control is a mathematical challenge that aims to find control actions
that guide a controlled system to achieve optimal-cost performance. Most
existing methods for optimal control assume that the state of the controlled
system is fully observed, and therefore that the feedback from the controlled
state is explicitly available. In many practical cases, however, the controlled
system is not directly observable. In this project, the investigator aims to
develop efficient and accurate data assimilation methods to analyze indirect
observational data and to construct an efficient computational framework to
design optimal control based on the information contained in the observational
data. This new framework has the potential to benefit the control and design
materials at the nano-scale as well as the controls of power systems at various
scales to support reliable and an efficient electric grid. The project
incorporates activities to train the next generation of data scientists with
both mathematical insight and technical skills to address important practical
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an
efficient computational framework that will allow data to optimally drive
control actions. The primary efforts will be dedicated to the development of
data driven optimal control methods, incorporating state-of-the-art data
assimilation methods into stochastic optimal control solvers. The research
carried out in this project also aims to elucidate inherent connections between
data and actions. The research has two thrusts. The first thrust will focus on
the development of mathematical and computational methods to establish an
efficient data driven feedback control framework. Then, the methods developed in
the first thrust will be applied to solve practical scientific and engineering
feedback control problems in the second thrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.