* 2142611
* NSF IUSE Institutional and Community Transformation Level II: Upholding Active Learning Reform in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Mark Baillie, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,999,986.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
teaching practices in a wide-range of STEM courses. Recognizing the power of
evidence-based instructional practices (EBIPs) to enhance teaching and learning,
the project is designed to create institution-wide change in the teaching
culture of undergraduate STEM education. Based on the successful instantiations
of active learning / EBIPs in STEM, the project is designed to promote and
propagate EBIPs through faculty development and implementation of several key
activities: a week-long mobile summer institute; faculty communities of practice
and transformation; the addition of learning assistants in selected courses; and
the use of social network analysis and interviews to track growth of faculty
interest and participation in synergistic activities. The mixed methods research
study is designed to answer questions about the efficacy of project activities
and the association of activities with expected outcomes (e.g., mobile summer
institute; faculty peer support; learning assistants; implementation and
sustainability of EBIPs; student performance, and changes in the valuing of
teaching). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects’ main goal is to shift faculty
culture from “sort and select” to “success for all students” in order to reduce
the equity gap between students who are members of historically underserved
groups and students who are not. Grounded in expectancy-value theory and the 4I
(Intuiting, Interpreting, Integrating, and Institutionalizing) theory of
institutional change, a tri-support model that includes faculty peer support,
student support, and administrative support will be developed and investigated
to understand what guides the reform of undergraduate STEM education. To support
the propagation of EBIPs and institutional change, the research will use Social
Network Analysis (SNA) to examine the growth of teaching networks, including how
they form, grow, and change over time. Based on the idea that the social capital
of faculty members is a significant factor in determining whether faculty
members feel confident in adopting EBIPs, the project examines the idea that
changes in social capital are associated with participation in faculty
development activities. Classroom observations and semi-structured interviews
will be used to investigate the implementation and spread of teaching
innovations and educational reform over time. Classroom observations;
assessments of student success and faculty knowledge; institutional data; data
from semi-structure interviews with students, faculty, and administrators; and
document analyses of syllabi, teaching artifacts, and policy documents will be
used to elaborate upon patterns derived from SNA. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.