* 2142311
* Collaborative Research: An Exploration of the Impact of Molecular Representations on Organic Chemistry Students’ Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Melissa Weinrich, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 172,921.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by better understanding how
college students learn about, interpret, and use representations of molecules to
solve organic chemistry problems. Chemists rely on representations to describe,
communicate about, and understand the behavior of particles that are far too
small to be seen. Examples of representations include chemical formulas and
graphical representations that use lines and symbols to show how atoms are
arranged. College students enrolled in organic chemistry courses must learn to
interpret and use such representations at the same time they are learning about
complex chemical processes. This NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE: EHR) project will generate new knowledge about how organic chemistry
students learn to interpret a variety of representations and use them to solve
problems. The project team will use the results of this research to develop and
evaluate instructional modules to better support organic chemistry students’
learning and problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IUSE: EHR project
intends to systematically investigate the effects of different molecular
representations on students’ success in solving organic chemistry problems. The
representation types that will be explored include chemical formulae, line angle
formulae, ball and stick figures, and electrostatic potential maps. The work
will be guided by an Abstraction Framework, the Multimedia Learning Theory on
Learning with Textual and Visual Representations, and the Actor-Oriented
Transfer Framework to facilitate understanding of how students extract encoded
information from each representation, make connections to prior instances, and
extrapolate that knowledge for use in new problem contexts. The project team
plans to use a mixed method approach across three studies conducted at the
University of Northern Colorado and the University of South Florida. First, to
identify which representations best facilitate student success in solving a
variety of organic chemistry problem types, end-of-semester students will be
randomly assigned to one of four problem sets that differ only in the
representations provided and the results will be analyzed. Next, student
problem-solving sessions using think-aloud protocols will be conducted to
generate hypotheses regarding how particular representations facilitate student
success. The foci of these analyses will be on how the different representations
support student abstraction and transfer from one problem context to another.
Finally, the hypotheses generated from these studies will be used to develop and
evaluate an instructional intervention that will include the development of
instructional materials and online modules. The intervention will be evaluated
with respect to its impact on student learning, which will also serve as a
measure for the utility of the hypothesized relationships. The materials
developed will be disseminated and made freely available to faculty teaching
organic chemistry. The research results will be presented at conferences and in
peer-reviewed journals. To broaden the impact even further, the project team
intends to conduct four workshops involving a total of forty faculty members who
teach organic chemistry. During the workshops, the team will assist the faculty
members in integrating project materials and findings into organic chemistry
instruction at their institutions. NSF’s Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE: EHR) program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.