* 2142146
* CAREER: Integrating Optimal Design and Inference for Modern Observational Studies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Samuel Pimentel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2027
* USD 183,119.00

This research project will develop new methods for inference about causal
relationships in large administrative datasets. These datasets are an
increasingly important source of evidence about causal effects in health
services, public policy, and the social sciences. Procedures for measuring the
causal effect of a treatment of interest emphasize creating similar subgroups of
individuals, one receiving treatment and another receiving control. In practice,
however, this process is not able to achieve perfect similarity in large
administrative datasets, especially when the units in the study exhibit
structure over time or space. The methods to be developed will produce
confidence intervals and hypothesis tests that account explicitly for imperfect
design and structure over units. Careful analysis of these methods will lead to
valuable guidance for how to make initial designs less imperfect. The resulting
tools will pair effectively with modern machine learning methods in a modular
framework and will immediately be applicable to large-scale studies of health
and educational outcomes. Supported educational activities will engage
undergraduate researchers from diverse backgrounds, groom graduate students for
future roles as faculty mentors, and produce pedagogical materials valuable for
training undergraduate students in the principles of causal inference. Open-
source software also will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on integrating design and inference for two widely used causal inference
designs that attempt to create credible comparisons from initially different
treatment and control samples: matching, which groups similar treated and
control individuals together into small homogenous matched sets; and weighting,
which constructs weights for study units with the goal of downplaying
dissimilarities and emphasizing similarities between the groups. Four specific
tasks will be undertaken. First, existing methods of permutation inference for
matched designs, which reshuffle labels for treated and control units within
matched groups to construct hypothesis tests, will be transformed by allowing
permutation probabilities to vary according to the degree of remaining
discrepancy in individual matched sets. The resulting method, which will be easy
to implement using estimated probabilities of treatment, permits sensitivity
analysis for unobserved variables and suggests a new method of choosing an
initial match that effectively manages tradeoffs between similarity on
probability of treatment and similarity on outcome risk. Second, new algorithms
will be designed to efficiently sample from conditional permutation
distributions that respect design constraints in matching including optimal
pairing on estimated probabilities of treatment and constrained imbalance on
multiple variables. These tools will lead to reduced bias and improved precision
by paying attention to aspects of the study's design. Third, tools for matched
permutation inference will be extended to clustered observational studies with
treatment given at both cluster and individual levels and possible spillover
effects. An accompanying sensitivity analysis that addresses unobserved
variables at both individual and cluster levels also will be constructed.
Finally, a new measure for large-sample performance of weighting methods in the
presence of unobserved variables will be constructed, quantifying the impact of
design choices on robustness to bias from unobserved
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.