* 2142137
* Embedding Personal Narratives in Engineering Courses to Improve Engineering Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eric Jankowski, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 06/30/2025
* USD 595,444.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student
persistence, particularly among historically marginalized student groups,
through storytelling activities embedded in engineering courses. Students’ sense
of belonging and engineering identity are predictors of students’ persistence in
in engineering programs. Effective educational interventions are needed that are
intentionally designed to improve students’ sense of belonging and engineering
identity. This project will examine how engaging engineering students in
personal and professional reflection activities at a time when they are
encountering the most intellectually rigorous part of their engineering programs
affects student persistence. A storytelling curriculum will be developed and
implemented in existing engineering courses and will target undergraduate
engineering students in their second and third years. Students will learn how to
write personal narratives about their engineering education experiences and
communicate them to audiences through live performances or video recordings.
Each semester will culminate in a public storytelling session attended by
students and the broader community in which engineering students will have the
opportunity to share their stories. The storytelling curriculum will be made
available to the engineering education community through an online public
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop,
implement, and examine the mechanisms and effects of a new storytelling
intervention designed to help shape and reinforce engineering students’ self-
view. Past work suggests that storytelling pedagogy can support identity
development. However, individual reflection and storytelling are typically not
included in a traditional engineering curriculum that is focused on the
application of scientific knowledge to solve engineering problems. This project
will incorporate the element of storytelling and public performance into the
pedagogy of multiple engineering courses. Undergraduate engineering students
will learn storytelling techniques and apply these techniques to narratively
communicate their personal experiences in engineering education. Using a mixed
methods approach, this project will examine the efficacy of storytelling on
student success in terms of students’ sense of belonging, professional identity,
and persistence in the major. This project will identify themes in students’
stories that are associated with the most substantial impact on student success
outcomes. This study will provide insights on why storytelling assignments
enhance student success, and what types of stories have the most impact on
student success. Project results will contribute to the literature on narrative
identity and inform subsequent efforts to refine storytelling assignments to
enhance its influence on aspects of engineering students’ self-view. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.