* 2142302
* CAREER: Understanding the Origins of Mechanical Hysteresis and Functional Fatigue in Martensitic Phase Transforming Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ashley Bucsek, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2027
* USD 719,755.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will elucidate long-
lasting challenges facing materials that have reversibly tunable properties by
way of a solid-to-solid phase transformation called martensitic phase
transformation. For example, "switchable" multiferroics are materials that have
distinct elastic, electric, and/or magnetic properties that can be reversibly
"switched on or off" by inducing martensitic phase transformations. Switchable
multiferroics have inspired novel energy conversion, energy harvesting, and
actuator technologies, but hysteresis (loss of work capacity) and functional
fatigue or failure remain major barriers for the cycle lifetime demands of these
technologies. The goal of this research is to advance the understanding of
mechanical hysteresis and functional fatigue in these materials through
multiscale, multimodal in-situ experimentation. The award will also launch a
comprehensive education and outreach platform with two main thrusts: (1)
interactive extended reality (XR) learning tools for undergraduate and graduate
courses as well as dissemination of research, and (2) hands-on demos on concepts
of physics/mechanics for public outreach. These demos will also be used in
workshops for underrepresented K–12 students through a Detroit-based summer
camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Martensitic phase transformations are the enabling
mechanism behind the advanced performances of many diverse materials including
"switchable" multiferroics, steels, elastomers, high entropy alloys,
superconductors, and many materials at high strain rates. Due to the
complexities of martensitic phase transformations, understanding these behaviors
is a significant scientific challenge, and the hysteresis and functional fatigue
associated with reversible martensitic transformations remain major
technological barriers. The objective of this work is to understand mechanical
hysteresis and functional fatigue by investigating the cyclic activation and
propagation of martensitic microstructures. The approach is to resolve the
hierarchical nature of the underlying micromechanics in situ, in 3D, and across
five orders of magnitude in length scale, from the motion of the individual
interfaces to the aggregate behavior of hundreds of grains. This multiscale
approach will be achieved using multimodal 3D/4D in-situ characterization with
dark-field X-ray microscopy, X-ray topo-tomography, and high-energy diffraction
microscopy on magnesium-scandium shape memory alloys. The expected outcome is a
new framework for understanding the mechanics of martensitic phase transforming
materials that emerges from a multiscale understanding of stress-activated habit
plane variant selection, incorporates the important role of defects, interfacial
stress fields, and microstructural repeatability, and has broad implications for
imperative cross¬cutting micromechanics challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.