* 2142891
* CAREER: Understanding workplace risk-taking behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Don Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2027
* USD 170,515.00

Risk taking is quintessential for innovation, growth, and social change. In a
future of work rife with uncertainty, there will be an increasing demand for
employees who are willing to take risks for the benefit of their organization
and its members. Risk taking, however, plays a double-edged role in
organizational settings. Multiple corporate catastrophes, such as the financial
crisis of 2008 and the Enron scandal, can be traced to reckless and unethical
risky behaviors of bankers, investors, and accountants. Indeed, risk takers can
be both assets and liabilities for their organization and the society. This
project examines the impact of risk taking in work settings and explores how
organizations can best identify and manage risk takers to leverage their
appetite for risks toward achieving organizational and societal
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the significance of risk taking in
organizational life, there is little research on how to best select, place, and
manage risk takers at work to maximize organizational effectiveness. Research to
date has primarily focused on the risk taking of executives, while less is known
about how employee risk taking affects organizational outcomes. This project
integrates economic, evolutionary, and psychological theories of risk to 1)
examine the role of dispositional risk taking (i.e., risk propensity) on
employee performance through longitudinal and multi-source survey studies; 2)
understand the within-person dynamics of employee risk taking behaviors using
daily-diary methods; and 3) develop a contextualized measure of workplace risk
taking using a situational judgment test. Besides understanding who takes risks
at work, the project also sheds light on employee behaviors through the lens of
risk perceptions. Finally, this project develops a multi-disciplinary
educational curriculum aimed at management, psychology, and human resource
development students. Results from this project will advance the science of risk
taking at work while providing industry and the public with a valid assessment
of workplace employee risk taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.