* 2142570
* CAREER: Organic Materials Discovery with the Aid of Digital Crystallography
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Qiang Zhu, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2027
* USD 213,937.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and educational activities to advance the
understanding of organic materials. Currently, systematic predictive models for
developing new organic materials with targeted physical properties are largely
missing, due to the fact that molecules can be packed in enormous number of ways
in the three dimensional space. This research aims to develop a new
computational scheme that allows more efficient discovery of organic materials
based on modern crystallography. To achieve this objective, the PI will first
digitize the complex crystallographic data into low-dimensional representations
that retain the key information about the molecular packing and crystal
symmetry. Second, a computational pipeline will be developed to model the
organic materials though different levels of theory. Finally, the power of the
new infrastructure will be validated by conducting computational screening of
organic materials with superior mechanical and ferroelectric properties that can
find potential applications in modern technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award also provides support for education and outreach activities that
are centered on promoting open-source software development. Specific objectives
include (i) training undergraduate and graduate students in computational
physics; (ii) holding the summer/winter camps in scientific computing and Python
programming for K-12 students; and (iii) organizing workshops for learning about
open-source codes in crystallography and materials
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award aims to develop a computational pipeline for digital
crystallography that can speed up the discovery of small molecule organic
materials for various applications. Nowadays, scientists are seeking to improve
the functionalities of organic materials by using chemical and structural
manipulations with a design space that can be astronomically large. To develop
new organic solids, crystal engineers resort to predictive guidelines. However,
systematically discovering new organic crystals from computer simulations
remains challenging due to the complex molecular packing as compared to the
inorganic counterpart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the goal is to
develop a new approach to design organic materials by performing a data-
intensive investigation of complex crystal packing and its impacts on the
physical properties. Specifically, the PI will introduce a digitized description
for organic crystal data based on modern mathematical theory and implement them
into the open-source code PyXtal. A computational pipeline will be developed to
allow high-throughput materials modeling at different levels from molecular
mechanics, machine learning to quantum mechanics. Based on this infrastructure,
computational screenings of organic materials with superior mechanical strength
and ferroelectric properties will be conducted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this CAREER project will be centered on promoting open-
source software development. Specific objectives include (i) training
undergraduate and graduate students in computational physics; (ii) holding the
summer/winter camps in scientific computing and Python programming for K-12
students; and (iii) organizing workshops for learning about open-source codes in
crystallography and materials modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.