* 2143725
* CAREER: Tensor Factorization Methods for High-Level Electronic Structure Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Devin Matthews, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Devin Matthews of Southern Methodist University
will endeavor to advance the development of complex quantum chemical Couple
Cluster methods to enable practitioners of theory to model with very high
accuracy much larger molecular systems than has been possible heretofore. Novel
state-of-the-art algorithms and GPU (Graphics Processing Unit)-implementations
will enable these high-accuracy predictions of parameters such as molecular
heats of formation, reaction barrier heights, bond dissociation, ionization, and
electron attachment energies. These developments will have a widespread impact
on chemical modelling and reliable benchmarks, e.g. through hierarchical
reaction models and the Active Thermochemical Tables. The new “model chemistry”
developed by Dr. Matthews and his group has the potential to impact a wide range
of problems, including the development of novel renewable fuels, a better
understanding of our effects on the atmosphere and our environment, and the
formation of complex biological molecules in space and other harsh environments
which led to the origins of life. The Matthews group will also endeavor to
improve awareness of and diversity in theoretical and computational chemistry by
directly involving undergraduates and high school students in cutting-edge
research and incorporating computational chemistry into the undergraduate
physical chemistry curriculum. The Matthews group will also implement an
interactive “knowledge web” spanning diverse topics in quantum chemistry and
related fields. This “Wikipedia for Quantum Chemistry” will help to improve and
accelerate training of graduate students in the field as well as interested non-
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Matthews and his group will be working on
enabling highly accurate coupled cluster calculations on larger molecules by
developing reduced-scaling approximations of CCSDT (Coupled Cluster Single-
Double-Triple) theory methods and CCSDT(Q), as well as analytic gradients
thereof. Graph-based techniques and knowledge-based algorithmic search through
the Design-by-Transformation methodology will be used to produce optimal working
equations, and a high-quality implementation will be produced by utilizing
automated code generation that targets high-level tensor contraction interfaces
for CPUs (Central Processing Units) and potentially GPUs. To this will be added
further optimizations such as coarse-grained parallelism, blocking, and loop
fusion. The efficacy of this implementation in terms of computational
efficiency, scaling, absolute and relative error characteristics, and error
cancellation will be leveraged to create a new model chemistry suitable for
accurate thermochemistry (at the ~1kJ/mol scale) of molecules with as many as 12
first- or second-row atoms. The Matthews group will developing this new protocol
to study substituted Criegee intermediates and possible water-catalysis of
Criegee decomposition as well as oxygenated fuel combustion intermediates
relevant to renewable fuel development. Dr. Matthews’s group will also work to
achieve a more diverse student base in theoretical and computational chemistry
by directly involving undergraduates and high school students from diverse
backgrounds in cutting-edge research and incorporating computational chemistry
into the undergraduate physical chemistry curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.