* 2143656
* CAREER: Testing the neural representation of sequences in nonhuman primate frontal cortex using fMRI-localized electrophysiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Theresa Desrochers, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 745,000.00

Humans and animals are great at keeping track of patterns that are important for
survival and using this information to predict and respond the right way. For
example, when sitting on a bus, we track the order of stops, so we can get
ready, stand-up and exit at the right time. To make these responses, we must
keep track of the order of individual events. In addition to tracking sequences,
our lives are also shaped by our abilities to generate sequences, which are
foundational for everything from tying shoelaces to forming a sentence or
writing a symphony. Understanding and following sequences also underlies our
ability to learn. Illnesses or injuries that impair this tracking can have
devastating effects on normal life. However, despite the fundamental importance
of tracking sequences, how our brain supports this ability is mostly unknown.
Even the most advanced artificial intelligence systems cannot solve many
sequential problems that humans and animals can easily perform. In addition to
scientific research advancing understanding of the neural basis of sequences,
this project also includes an extensive multipronged outreach effort: sharing
the excitement of recent discoveries in neuroscience with educational events in
the community, in schools and during research-themed fairs, teaching
neuroscience to students with diverse backgrounds, and running an annual
conference focused on encouraging and supporting women who wish to pursue a
career in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To deepen our understanding of
sequence representation, researchers will record brain activity from a model
organism (macaque monkeys) during performance of auditory and visual sequence
tracking tasks. This task will illuminate two ways the brain could track
sequential information. For example, if a sequence is “ABCD”, one way to know
what comes after “B” is to learn that “C” always comes after “B”. This would be
a relational representation. Another way to know what comes next is that “C” is
always the third item in the sequence – an ordinal representation. We
hypothesize that different areas of the brain track these two different kinds of
sequence information: the medial part of prefrontal cortex (MPFC) tracks ordinal
position - which item goes with which place in the sequence (C is third), and
the lateral part of prefrontal cortex (LPFC) receives ordinal information from
MPFC to track which item goes with which place (C is third) and combines this
with relational information about which item comes next (C after B). Researchers
will record brain activity in two different ways while monkeys perform the task:
by recording the activity of single cells in the PFC and other brain areas, and
by whole brain neuroimaging (using functional magnetic resonance imaging -
fMRI). Using these two complementary methods provides two independent kinds of
evidence which can be integrated to give more insight into sequence
representation. These experiments hold the promise of leading to a deeper
understanding of how the brain tracks sequences and how the brain learns and
performs complex tasks, which require a sequence of successive actions. The
studies on sequence tracking tasks and sequence representation in non-human
primates will illuminate and give insight into human cognition and the neural
basis of human performance on similar sequencing
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cognitive
Neuroscience Program and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.