* 2143149
* CAREER:  Nuclear Theory for Strongly Interacting Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Kemal Basar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2027
* USD 170,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the America Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microseconds after the Big Bang,
the Universe's temperature was roughly a trillion degrees. At these
temperatures, protons and neutrons melt, and their constituents, quarks and
gluons, roam freely, forming a peculiar phase of matter called quark-gluon
plasma. Today, one can recreate tiny droplets of this quark-gluon plasma in
heavy ion collision experiments and observe its surprising properties. For
example, it behaves like a perfect fluid as opposed to a gas of quarks and
gluons. At the same time, understanding the properties of quark-gluon plasma and
how it transitioned into protons and neutrons as the early Universe cooled down,
is still an outstanding challenge in nuclear physics. The PI will develop new
tools and extend existing ones to tackle this challenge conceptually and
computationally. This will entail developing a new formulation of fluid dynamics
that incorporates the novel properties of quark-gluon plasma and building a
framework that can be used to computationally study its properties at different
temperatures and densities. More broadly, the results of this project will help
shed light on properties of other forms of matter with similar properties. The
PI will mentor graduate and undergraduate students who will actively participate
in the research. The educational activities will also include a computational
physics program dedicated to undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
most important outstanding questions regarding matter at hot and dense
environments is mapping the phase diagram of Quantum-Chromo Dynamics (QCD), the
theory of strong interactions. In particular, due to asymptotic freedom, we know
that at extremely high temperatures, nucleons "melt" and form a new phase known
as the quark-gluon plasma where quarks and gluons are no longer confined within
nucleons. At the same time where this transition happens in the phase diagram
and its properties remains elusive. The applicability of lattice QCD, the only
first-principle method of studying this phase transition in the strongly coupled
regime, is severely limited by the infamous “sign problem” where wild
cancellations between the complex weights of field configurations in the QCD
path integral render its computation intractable. This research aims to i)
develop a new framework of tackling the sign problem with the goal of making the
QCD phase diagram accessible to first-principles computations, by complexifying
the QCD path integral in a way that avoids the large phase oscillations, and ii)
understanding the out-of-equilibrium properties of the quark-gluon plasma by
incorporating fluctuations in relativistic hydrodynamics, with a particular
emphasis on the search for the conjectured critical point in the phase
diagram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.