* 2143435
* CAREER: Uncovering Structure in Human-Robot Systems for Trajectory Prediction and Crowd Navigation
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Katherine Driggs-Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2027
* USD 293,208.00

Intelligent robots and autonomous systems are quickly becoming commonplace in
our daily lives. However, the desirable impacts of autonomy are only achievable
if the underlying algorithms can handle the unique challenges that humans
present. To design safe, trustworthy autonomous systems, there is a need to
transform how intelligent systems interact, influence, and predict human agents.
This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will focus on the
understanding how humans and mobile robots can and should interact. First,
predicting human trajectories in crowded spaces through structured
representations will be considered. Second, robot strategies for using these
predictions for intelligent decision-making will be considered. The aim is to
balance efficiency and safety, guaranteeing reliable performance even in the
presence of erratic human behavior and sensor uncertainty. The approaches will
be evaluated on real-world robots, motivated by high-impact problem domains,
including agricultural robots (which is currently facing a labor crisis,
resulting in an increased demand for robotics); collaborative manufacturing
(which is seeing a rise in popularity of co-robots); and transportation (where
behavior prediction and interaction remains one of key challenges for autonomy).
This project will support robotics education through the development of robotics
coursework in PrairieLearn, an online problem-driven learning system developed
at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), and K-12 outreach to spur
interest in STEM and robotics. On-line tutorials and short courses will also aid
in both integration of research with education and transition to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of robotics and automation research is
reaching a critical turning point: the gap between theory and full-scale
deployment is beginning to close. However, the desirable impacts of autonomy are
only achievable if the underlying algorithms can successfully consider human
behavior. To design trustworthy systems, there is a need to transform how
intelligent systems interact, influence, and predict humans. This project will
examine the interaction between humans and mobile robots, aiming to uncover the
underlying structure within this interaction and enable fluid robot navigation.
Trajectory prediction and crowd navigation will be examined. First, interaction
graphs will be introduced as a formal representation that captures the coupling
between agents and allows for tractability and computational efficiency through
factorizations. This framework allows modeling types of interactions that
capture variable and dynamic relationships between agents. Second, this
representation and prediction insight will be combined into robust navigation,
providing safety even in the presence of uncertainty. Improving mobile robot
interaction will impact many different application sectors, including
agricultural robots, collaborative manufacturing, and transportation. This
project will support robotics education through the development of robotics
coursework in PrairieLearn, an online problem-driven learning system developed
at UIUC, and tutorials for industry partners interested in learning about
research in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.