* 2143970
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Coupling of Inorganic Scaling and Organic Fouling in Reverse Osmosis Desalination: An Integrated Experimental and Computational Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tiezheng Tong, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2025
* USD 258,052.00

Climate change and anthropogenic pollution are contributing to the increasing
scarcity of freshwater resources in many regions around the globe. In the United
States, water stress in arid and semi-arid regions poses a threat to food
production, energy generation, and ecological and human health. Desalination
technologies can harvest purified water from seawater, saline groundwater, and
wastewater and are an important tool to combat water scarcity. Reverse osmosis
(RO) is a commercial desalination technology that relies on the permeation of
freshwater through a dense membrane under an applied pressure. Despite its
widespread application, the RO process is vulnerable to performance decay caused
by fouling, or the unwanted deposition of substances on the membrane surface.
This research aims to understand the interplay between two common types of RO
fouling: organic fouling caused by the adsorption of organic matter and
inorganic scaling caused by the precipitation of minerals. The investigators
will integrate experimental measurements with computational simulations to
reveal how organic foulants and inorganic scale-forming substances interact with
each other during RO desalination. The investigators will lead research-related
public engagement and outreach activities at both George Washington University
and Colorado State University. Water sustainability-themed workshops will be
hosted for students from local communities in Washington, D.C., and Colorado.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reverse osmosis (RO) is currently the state-of-the-art
desalination technology due to its exceptional energy efficiency. Although the
existence of inorganic scalants and organic foulants is known to greatly
constrain the performance of RO, the combined effects of inorganic scaling and
organic fouling are not well understood. The overarching goal of this research
project is to elucidate the interactions of inorganic scalants with organic
foulants at the membrane-water interface. The investigators will study the
performance of thin-film composite polyamide membranes under combined inorganic
scaling and organic fouling in RO and unravel the mechanisms by which organic
foulants impact mineral scaling. Advanced modeling approaches will be employed
to simulate nucleation kinetics of mineral scales in the presence of organic
foulants, elucidating the role of organic foulants in controlling mineral
nucleation at the molecular level. The performance of anti-fouling membranes
under combined scaling and fouling will also be examined to inform membrane
design. The project will close a fundamental knowledge gap by (i) elucidating
the effects of combined scaling and fouling on RO membrane performance, which
cannot be predicted by existing knowledge of individual scaling or fouling, (ii)
advancing mechanistic understanding of how organic foulants regulate mineral
nucleation and growth at engineered membrane surfaces, and (iii) demonstrating
how functional membrane surfaces that are intended to mitigate organic fouling
will respond to combined scaling and fouling. Educational and outreach aspects
of the project will incorporate research findings into undergraduate and
graduate course materials, introduce water sustainability-themed workshops in
local communities, and promote the participation of underrepresented students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.