* 2143679
* CAREER: Risk-Averse Decision Making via Chance-Constrained Programming for Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jianqiang Cheng, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to develop risk-averse decision-making models and
methodologies to manage the integration of highly uncertain, large-scale
renewable energy for society to benefit from cleaner, more reliable, and cost-
effective power systems. The increase in renewable energy presents power systems
with significant challenges due to the intermittency and limited predictability
of production. Traditional operational strategies may be inadequate in the
presence of such increased uncertainty when balancing power supply and demand
economically and reliably. This CAREER project will bridge this pressing
uncertainty gap to effectively integrate renewable energy and thus help to
ensure system reliability and cost-effectiveness, which will bring
transformative change to the power industry. The intellectual merits of the
project include developing new risk-averse decision-making models to accommodate
the nature of power systems and decision makersâ€™ risk preferences, and
developing new computationally efficient solution approaches to enable
practical, useful solutions for all stakeholder and end-user communities. The
broader impacts of the project include: (i) integrating research and education
at the University of Arizona through mentoring undergraduate students in hands-
on research for this CAREER project and connecting the research results with
familiar applications to inspire the next generation of students to pursue a
career in engineering; (ii) sustainable solutions to energy challenges in the
Navajo Nation; and (iii) technology transfer to other applications in the
presence of highly uncertainty for societally important industries in the US
economy, such as transportation and finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will adopt chance-constrained programming (an important variant of risk-averse
stochastic programming against unfavorable randomness) to solve two core
problems in power system operations: real-time dispatch and long-term generation
planning. The research objectives and tasks will: (1) apply sampling-based
methods to develop convex approximations for the chance constraints; and (2)
develop decomposition approaches and implement the decomposition algorithms in a
parallel-computing framework to solve the two example practical problems for
uncertain, large-scale power systems. The developed approaches are expected to
overcome the inherent computational challenges faced in actionable
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.