* 2143972
* CAREER: Determining and Tuning the Impact of Low-Level Metal-Based Nanoparticles on Actin Cytoskeleton in Normal and Cancer Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* CONGZHOU WANG, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 01/31/2027
* USD 575,725.00

Nanomaterials may interact with human cells, due to the unintended release of
nanomaterials into the environment (through air and water pollution), or
intentionally in applications of nanomaterials for treating diseases such as
cancer. Exposure of cells to nanomaterials can have dose-dependent beneficial or
harmful effects. These effects are traditionally evaluated with biochemical
assays such as cell viability and membrane integrity assays. However, these
approaches neglect the impact of nanomaterials on the cell’s actin cytoskeleton,
the “bone structure” of the cells. This CAREER project will generate new
knowledge about how low-level metal-based nanoparticles impact the actin
cytoskeleton in normal and cancer cells. The potential impact of this project
will be in offering a sensitive and quantitative platform based on actin
cytoskeleton of cells for nanomaterial safety assessment, thus enabling the
establishment of regulatory and manufacturing frameworks for safe and
sustainable nanomaterials. The project will also potentially lead to safe,
effective, and versatile approaches for using nanomaterials to treat cancer
metastasis (the cause of 90% of human cancer deaths). The research-integrated
educational plan in this project places a strong emphasis on educating First-
Generation College Students and Native American Students, two underrepresented
groups in South Dakota currently exhibiting high dropout rates. Through well-
planned summer research experiences, a total of 10 students from these two
groups are expected to acquire valuable hands-on skills in the fields of
chemistry, biology, materials science, and nanobiotechnology, as well as
enhanced academic persistence in completing their STEM education. The PI will
also conduct a workshop series entitled “SEE NANO” at Tribal Colleges and
integrate visually appealing and scientifically interesting research results
with Flipped Classroom Methodology to make STEM classrooms more enjoyable and
engaging, thereby promoting active learning and retention in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research on nanomaterial
cytotoxicity relies on macroscopic biochemical assays, including cell viability
and membrane integrity assays, without considering that nanoscale interactions
with nanomaterials, even at low levels, can alter the actin cytoskeleton of
cells. There is a knowledge gap concerning how the actin cytoskeleton of cells
is affected by low concentrations of nanomaterials, when cell viability and
membrane integrity have not been changed. The overall research goal of this
CAREER project is to determine how low-level metal-based nanoparticles affect
the actin cytoskeleton in normal and cancer cells, and to apply this knowledge
to tune their impact on the actin cytoskeleton for inhibition of cancer cell
migration without impacting normal cells. The overarching hypothesis is that the
interaction mechanism of metal-based nanoparticles with actin cytoskeleton will
be dependent on their surface functionality and intracellular degradability, and
these properties can be tuned to selectively disrupt the actin cytoskeleton in
cancer cells without affecting the actin cytoskeleton in normal cells.
Specifically, this project will focus on two model metal-based nanoparticles
including metal-organic frameworks and gold nanoparticles. Objective 1 will
determine how low-level metal-based nanoparticles affect the actin structures
and functions of vascular cells. Objective 2 will reveal the mechanisms of how
these nanoparticles alter the actin structures and migration ability of cancer
cells. Finally, Objective 3 will predict and tune the impact of nanomaterials on
the actin cytoskeleton in vascular and cancer cells by combining atomic force
microscopy techniques with surface functionalization of nanoparticles. The actin
cytoskeleton changes induced by the nanoparticles will be resolved by
nanomechanical atomic force microscopy and super resolution fluorescence
microscopy. The mechanistic knowledge generated from this research will lead to:
(i) a sensitive platform for nanoparticle safety assessment that is based on the
biophysical responses of vascular cells; and (ii) several versatile, effective,
and safe approaches for stopping cancer metastasis. The educational objective of
this project is to improve the retention of undergraduates in STEM education, by
engaging first-year students to specific research tasks focusing on nano-bio
interactions, conducting a workshop series entitled “SEE NANO” at Tribal
Colleges, and bringing Flipped Classroom Methodology to STEM classrooms. The
research integrated educational plan places a strong emphasis on educating
First-Generation College Students and Native American Students, two
underrepresented groups in South Dakota exhibiting high dropout rates after
their first year. Engaging these students in research during their first summer
will motivate and promote their academic persistence in completing STEM
education. The PI will also integrate visually appealing and scientifically
interesting research results with Flipped Classroom Methodology to make STEM
classrooms more enjoyable and engaging, thereby promoting active learning and
retention in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.