* 2143467
* CAREER: Liquid-Phase Processing of Fiber-Based Electronic and Photonic Materials and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Alexander Gumennik, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2027
* USD 646,338.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research advancing
the precision manufacturing of fiber optics with embedded optical structures
enabling new functionalities within the glass fiber. Fiber optics, the workhorse
of digital communication, lags in incorporating emerging device structures into
the global communication network. Growing energy demands in computing across
diverse data processing platforms will require more efficient long-haul
communication links capable of translating data effectively across those
computing platforms. Imparting efficient data transduction and transformation
capabilities into fiber optics requires integrating photonic and optoelectronic
devices and systems into the fiber itself. Standard fiber manufacturing
approaches, such as thermal draw, rely on pulling the fiber from a melt.
Modification of the fiber by melt-shaping of glass is prone to complex, hard to
control fluid dynamics making the process difficult to control. This research
determine the limitations of molten-phase multimaterial fiber processing in
achieving the desired solid-state outcomes, aiming to embed active optical
circuitry in fiber-optics with submicron precision and tight material control.
The research supports enhanced fiber-optics manufacturing processes aimed at
developing efficient interconnects for emerging computation platforms and
educating the workforce, assisting in preserving the US technological and
economic dominance in the global information space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research into development of a manufacturing methodology for
fiber-embedded architectures by defining a fiber cross-section through a thermal
draw of a 3D printed preform, followed by the axial patterning of fiber cores
with a spatially coherent material selective capillary breakup and
resolidification. The geometry and temperature of fiber-encapsulated melts at
every stage of the fabrication process dictates the balance of forces and thus
fully define the fluid dynamics within the melt. Experimental studies
investigate the liquid reshaping kinematics in locally molten fiber under
engineered and controlled spatiotemporal heating conditions. Understanding and
control over the underlying physical mechanisms guide the liquid-phase reshaping
of in-fiber materials towards self-assembly into ordered solid-state
architectures. The award will generate knowledge in the material science of 3D
printed glass and its thermal reflow, fluid mechanics of molten multimaterial
threads, and solid-liquid phase transition science in confined melts. The
research provides a basis for scalable in-fiber manufacturing of photonic and
optoelectronic circuitry, aimed a general interconnect for the large-scale
networks needed for computational platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.