* 2143534
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Linkages Between Glacio-climatic, Hydrothermal, and Volcanic Processes in the Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Michael Kaplan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 04/30/2025
* USD 274,166.00

While volcanic and hydrological responses to glacial activity have been
documented around the globe, the response of hydrothermal systems remains
largely unstudied. Important questions to be addressed include: How do
hydrological, hydrothermal and/or volcanic systems respond to climate change and
glacier expansion and retreat? What are the timing and mechanisms that control
these responses? Answering these questions has significant impacts on hazard
assessments (phreatic eruptions and hydrothermal explosions), geothermal
exploration, and mineral deposits. El Tatio volcanic-hydrothermal system,
Central Andes, provides an ideal natural laboratory to investigate these
interactions. El Tatio has been active since the last deglaciation and preserves
exceptional morpho-stratigraphic evidence of volcanic, glacial, and hydrothermal
activity. Unlike past studies, focusing on large continental ice masses during
the Last Glacial Maximum, El Tatio experienced smaller alpine or mountain
glaciations. That configuration is more representative of the world-wide
distribution of glaciers and the processes occurring due to modern climate
change. Led by an early career Latino-woman, this project will intensify
collaborations with Chilean Universities, and will engage historically
marginalized native communities who own the land.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use an interdisciplinary approach that brings together experts from
different US institutions and Chile, which propose to address the following: (i)
to establish spatial and temporal linkages between glacier fluctuations
including deglaciation and the onset of hydrothermal and/or volcanic activity by
constraining the field distribution and timing of different events; and (ii) to
make quantitative estimation of the hydrothermal responses to glacial unloading,
changes in water and heat supply using field data (ages and estimation of ice
thickness) and numerical models of multiphase flow and deformation in
heterogeneous porous media. Results from this study will provide a better
understanding of the interrelated and competing controls of hydrothermal
responses (for example, glacier distribution, thickness, and rates of
advance/recession; rheology; permeability; and reservoir
depth).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences Program, the Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics Program, and the
Petrology and Geochemistry Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.