* 2143568
* CAREER: Understanding and Quantifying Ion Migration and Diffusion in Two-Dimensional Halide Perovskite Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Letian Dou, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 198,595.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Halide
perovskites semiconductors have recently attracted considerable attention for
devices such as solar cells and light-emitting diodes. However, their poor
stability results in devices with short lifetimes, precluding widespread use.
One particular challenge is that movement of ions alters the electronic
properties of perovskites. Thus, understanding ion transport is essential to
solve the stability problem. The PI will develop novel structures from two-
dimensional perovskites and quantify how ions diffuse and migrate under heat,
light, and electrical bias. Understanding these fundamental questions will help
researchers design perovskites with enhanced stability. This project also
provides interdisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students. They
will gain critical-thinking and problem-solving skills needed for careers in
materials science, chemical and electrical engineering, and semiconductor
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Accurately quantifying
ion transport in halide perovskites is challenging. The current understanding is
based primarily on conventional charge transport studies, where the contribution
from electrons and co-movement of cations and anions is difficult to separate.
Furthermore, ionic diffusion studies have been limited to polycrystalline thin
films where grain boundaries and defects play critical roles. In this project,
novel epitaxially grown 2D perovskite heterostructures, a microscopically well-
defined diffusion couple, will be fabricated and used as a platform to probe
ionic migration and diffusion. This project will establish a comprehensive
family of lateral and vertical 2D halide perovskite heterostructures; quantify
ionic diffusion and migration under different external stimuli; elucidate the
ionic diffusion and migration mechanism; identify the most promising materials
stabilization strategies; and finally demonstrate proof-of-concept devices with
enhanced stability. The education objective of the project is to build an
interdisciplinary materials science program at Purdue University that transcends
traditional boundaries between science and engineering disciplines to educate
our next-generation scientists and engineers. Specifically, new curriculum and
new teaching methods that cut-across traditional boundaries for undergraduate
and graduate education will be developed. Raising public awareness of materials
science and semiconductors is another important objective of this project.
Finally, an impactful global network of science and education through
partnership with developing countries (e.g., Colombia and Indonesia) will be
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.