* 2143856
* CAREER: Characterization and Development of Prokaryotic Argonautes for Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Kevin Solomon, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2027
* USD 555,681.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foundational technologies derived
from bacterial DNA interference or ‘immune’ systems are widely used in modern
biotechnology. These systems have the ability to edit genes and to reprogram
organisms for a variety of purposes, including production of vital medicines
such as insulin and antibody therapies, creating high-yield and nutritious
crops, generating chemicals and materials from renewable resources, and even
treating certain genetic disorders. Prokaryotic Argonaute proteins (pAgos) are
an understudied system with the potential to edit genes at a wider range of
sites, and ultimately the potential to broaden the range of these foundational
technologies. This project aims to identify the components needed for pAgo
function and performance, and to accelerate the development of pAgos for
biotechnology applications. The potential applications for this new
biotechnology tool are broad and include agriculture, sustainability, medicine,
and diagnostics. Elements of this research will be incorporated into
undergraduate and high school curricula and will provide research experiences
for the next generation of biotechnology professionals. American Rescue Plan
funding for this project will support an investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;pAgos constitute a diverse group of programmable
endonucleases that are not known to rely on a protospacer adjacent motif for
efficient cleavage. The overarching goal of this project is to identify and
control the factors that mediate DNA interference by pAgos to accelerate pAgo
development for biotechnology. The central hypothesis is that pAgos rely on
conserved prokaryotic accessory proteins for function. Thus, high-throughput in
vivo functional screens will be leveraged to rapidly characterize pAgo
candidates from sequenced genomes and soil metagenomes. This functional activity
will be integrated with genomic evidence to identify signatures and putative
accessory proteins that predict pAgo substrate preferences and activity. In
parallel, interacting accessory proteins will be isolated and evaluated for
their role in function. These experimental studies will provide new insight into
the mechanisms of pAgo activity and improve annotation of pAgo-related genes in
existing databases. Findings from these studies will be used to develop proof of
concept pAgo-based gene editing for eukaryotes. This research will serve as a
focal point for workforce development through discovery-based undergraduate lab
curricula that mines soil metagenomes for promising pAgo candidates, and engage
high school and undergraduate researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.