* 2143779
* CAREER: Multiscale Osmotic Mechanotransduction within the Intervertebral Disc
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Benjamin Walter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 638,748.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on understanding
how mechanical loads applied to the spine regulate cellular function in health
and disease. The intervertebral disc joint within the spine undergoes millions
of loading cycles during decades of life. The cells embedded within the tissue
sense and respond to these mechanical signals, which play a vital role in
regulating tissue homeostasis and development. This award focuses on answering
fundamental questions regarding the range of mechanical signals the cells
experience within the tissue and how those signals are sensed. This study will
help understand how changes in solute concentration as the tissue is deformed
regulates how cells behave in health and disease. The long-term goal of this
work is to better understand the disease process within the spine and inform
potential treatments for low back pain. This research will also enhance
diversity by engaging students traditionally underrepresented within engineering
in inter-disciplinary orthopaedic research at the interface of biology and
engineering. Specific initiatives to broaden participation by underrepresented
students include establishing partnerships with minority serving institutions,
bringing undergraduates into the research lab, and participating in middle
school outreach in underserved communities to promote STEM awareness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to evaluate the
hypothesis that changes in the dynamics (rate and magnitude) of the osmotic
environment and change in the cells sensitivity to osmotic cycles contribute to
the progression of disease within the intervertebral disc. The first objective
is to utilize micro-osmometer and analytical chemistry techniques to determine
the dynamics of osmotic cycles at both macro (i.e., tissue level) and micro-
(i.e., within the pericellular matrix) scales and determine how the dynamics
change with advancing disease. The second objective is to use microfluidic
devices, live-cell calcium imaging and pharmacologic modifiers of ion channel
activity to determine how osmotic dynamics influence ion channel signaling. This
system will also be used to investigate whether activation of co-receptors,
increased in the diseased state, can sensitize cellular calcium signaling in
response to osmotic cycles. This project will allow the PI to advance the
knowledge base in orthopedics, biomechanics, and mechanobiology and establish
his long-term career in musculoskeletal
mechanobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.