* 2143151
* CAREER: Biomechanical Regulation of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Differentiation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Shue Wang, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2027
* USD 590,511.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
research to study the how mesenchymal stem cell differentiation is regulated.
Mesenchymal stem cells have self-renewal properties. These cells have great
potential in cell-based therapies for tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine. However, the fundamental mechanisms of how mesenchymal stem cells
differentiate into cells that make formation remains poorly understood. This
project will systematically study the interactions of biophysical and
biochemical factors that affect differentiation. This work will use a novel
micro-engineered platform to identify the functions and mechanisms that
influence mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. The educational activities will
provide a goal-oriented, project-based, hands-on learning experience to a broad
audience, with an emphasis on women and underrepresented minorities.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained through project-based
courses and research opportunities. In addition, summer outreach activities will
increase teachers' awareness of STEM careers and enhance the engagement of K-12
students into STEM education. By improving the fundamental understanding of
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, this project will support the development
of biomanufacturing and tissue engineering systems to produce specific stem cell
lineage that are necessary for normal organ function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research goal of this project is to identify the function and
mechanisms of mechanosensitive non-coding RNAs in regulating osteogenic
differentiation. The overarching focus is to investigate how stiffness,
geometric guidance, and traction force regulate non-coding RNAs during
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, using a novel multiplex nanobiosensor, 2D
and 3D culture systems. This will be accomplished through three research
objectives. The first objective is to develop and characterize a novel multiplex
nanobiosensor for non-coding RNAs detection at the single cell level. The second
objective is to elucidate the mechanosensitive role of non-coding RNAs and their
crosstalk with biophysical factors at the tissue, cell, and molecular level. The
final objective is to investigate the mechanoregulation of non-coding RNAs
during osteogenic differentiation in 3D microenvironments. Completion of this
project will provide novel information and insights regarding the mechanisms
underlying non-coding RNAs in response to biophysical factors. The knowledge
gained from these experiments will provide new insights into the fundamental
principles of mechanoregulation of osteogenic differentiation for the
application of cell-based therapies, which will support the advancement of the
biomanufacturing and tissue engineering systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.