* 2143843
* CAREER: Assessing the effect of source credibility on public perceptions of science and    place-based conservation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Dara Wald, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2027
* USD 223,183.00

Public support for scientific influence on policy increases when scientists are
perceived as acting in the public’s best interests. Yet most U.S. adults are
skeptical of scientists’ goodwill (e.g., commitment to public good). Goodwill is
a key dimension of source credibility, a shortcut used by the public to
interpret scientific findings and recommendations. Despite its key role, little
is currently known about how goodwill emerges, varies and is contested across
individuals and groups to motivate (or not) evidence-based action. This project
will address this gap by identifying the key drivers of perceived
technoscientific (TS) source goodwill and determining when and how
technoscientific goodwill and communication shape responses to environmental
messages among agricultural land operators (i.e., farmers, foresters, ranchers).
Research findings will encourage efforts to incentivize evidence-based land
stewardship that mitigates land-based climate emissions and maximizes the
benefits of conservation science for people and the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CAREER project will identify an improved
evidence-based model of the factors shaping public perceptions of
technoscientific (TA) source credibility and further efforts to measure, test,
and employ goodwill as a means of promoting effective public communication. This
research uses latent semantic analysis and mixed-methods content analysis to
identify and compare the socio-cultural beliefs undergirding agricultural land
operators and TS sources’ mental models of source credibility. An online message
experiment will be used to test the effects of goodwill signals and hedging on
perceptions of TS source credibility and support for conservation practices on
agricultural lands. Furthermore, this CAREER project integrates research and
teaching with the development and evaluation of a novel educational curriculum
that engages agricultural communities and prepares natural resource
professionals to signal goodwill and recognize the cultural realities informing
responses to evidence-based messages. As such, this project will provide a
foundation for improved science communication training, more effective and
evidence-based environmental messaging, and enhanced goodwill between
agricultural communities and TS sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.