* 2143243
* CAREER: Uncovering the Geochemical and Biomineralization Processes Responsible for Mercury-Selenium Antagonism in the Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Brett Poulin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2027
* USD 381,761.00

The investigator and his research group at the University of California Davis
will study how interactions between mercury and selenium influence the cycling
and bioaccumulation of mercury in the environment. Mercury is a prevalent global
contaminant that impacts both environmental and human health worldwide. The
research of this project aims to fill critical knowledge gaps in our
understanding of mercury-selenium interactions, which will permit improved
management of complex freshwater environments and accurate risk assessment of
mercury to wildlife and humans. Beyond research, the investigator will work to
broaden public interest in metal contaminants through citizen science at U.S.
national parks and develop new undergraduate curriculum with project data. The
educational materials developed will be published on a public digital library
for educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research hypotheses will be pursued
to establish the mechanisms by which selenium influences the methylation of
mercury, the uptake of neurotoxic methylmercury in food webs, and the
biomineralization of methylmercury to mercury selenide. Natural lakes with
defined inputs of mercury and selenium will be used for field sampling and
experimentation. A suite of interdisciplinary atomic- and molecular-level
techniques will be used, including microbial genomics, X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, and protein purification. These methods will be applied on
sediments, within components of food webs, and with purified protein to
investigate the underlying geochemical and biomineralization reactions
responsible for mercury-selenium antagonism in the environment. Undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers will cross-train with collaborators
within and outside the university, co-convene sessions at conferences, and co-
develop problem-based learning activities for the classroom and educational
materials for the public. These efforts aim to develop a diverse and globally
competitive STEM workforce to address future environmental challenges beyond the
topic of mercury-selenium antagonism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.