* 2143253
* Collaborative Research: OPUS: Understanding the Complexity of Grazing Ecosystems Through Synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Dennis Ojima, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 70,593.00

Much of the plant material on Earth is consumed by large animals. In North
America, these animals include herbivores such as deer, elk, moose, and bison.
These grazers have profound effects on grasslands and forests. Ecosystem
processes such as plant production, nutrient cycling, and carbon storage can
vary widely due to herbivores. Understanding the factors controlling that
variation is critical for management of the ecosystems that support these
animals. Unfortunately, the forces causing spatial and temporal variation on
grazed grasslands are poorly understood. This project helps fill that knowledge
gap by analyzing a large amount of data gathered over more than three decades in
Yellowstone National Park (YNP). The project also provides valuable public
access to a unique dataset, training opportunities for undergraduate students,
and outreach to the public as well as to National Park Service scientists,
managers, and interpretive staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of migratory
herds of elk and bison on grassland soil and plant processes have been measured
in YNP since 1988. Over that period, 11 different field experiments were
conducted at 42 different grassland sites. Together those independent data sets
include measurements of herbivore effects on key plant and soil processes. A
wide range of plant community types, soil conditions and climate conditions are
represented. There are three goals of the project: (1) to compile the data
collected in YNP into a single data set and upload it to a platform for public
access, (2) to determine the relative effects of climate, plant composition,
soil properties, and herbivores on ecosystem processes, and (3) to use the
DayCent model to study the effects of these processes on soil carbon storage in
YNP grasslands. The synthesis of the data provides a rare opportunity to
mechanistically understand how both spatial and temporal variability interact
with large herbivores to determine grassland plant and soil
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.