* 2143559
* CAREER: Towards a Communication Foundation for Distributed and Decentralized Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Cong Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

With the emerging paradigm shift towards moving the data collection and machine
learning (ML) model training to the edge, distributed and decentralized ML has
become increasingly critical to empowering many applications, such as autonomous
driving, recommender systems, and Internet of Things (IoT). This trend imposes
formidable challenges on the underlying communication design and catalyzes its
evolution from connecting people and connecting things to connecting
intelligence. This CAREER project develops fundamental communication
technologies to enable distributed and decentralized ML in next-generation
wireless systems. It transforms wireless communications from pure data transfer
to intelligence transfer, building a synergy between communications and ML in a
closely integrated fashion. In partnership with industry, results enabled by
this project can be prototyped and integrated into real systems, potentially
impacting 6G standardization and other future communication systems. The cross
disciplinary nature of this project naturally translates into case studies and
new development in a number of undergraduate and graduate level courses, by
integrating ML and AI to the curriculum of communications and networking. The
education and outreach activities will collectively promote a common thread of
providing the best opportunities for diverse groups of bright young minds to
develop into future scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims at developing the theoretical foundation and novel communication algorithms
for distributed and decentralized ML, thereby catalyzing a paradigm shift of
wireless communications towards connecting intelligence. Towards this end, this
project will develop a novel random orthogonalization principle that tightly
integrates physical layer communications with ML. Additionally, the research
will study the impact of fading and noisy channels on the performance of ML, and
design communication methods to improve the accuracy and convergence of the ML
tasks. Finally, a novel adaptive communication method for distributed and
decentralized multi-armed bandits will be investigated, where coding and
interleaving designs for online learning with adversarial communications will be
studied. The proposed research promotes the fundamental understanding of the
synergy between distributed and decentralized ML and communications, and will
have broad applications beyond the specific problems studied in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.