* 2143515
* I-Corps: Utilizing Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Early Detection and Identification of Mental Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Fahad Saeed, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of automated
diagnosis tools for neurological disorders. Currently, there is no single
quantitative test (like a blood glucose test) that can be done to diagnose
neurological disorders. The proposed technology is based on advanced deep
learning models applied to multi-modal imaging, such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG), for early detection. The
technology may be used to distinguish abnormal brain scans from healthy scans
and may be able to aid in the diagnosis of neurological disorders such as autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), epilepsy, and Parkinson’s disease (PD). For example,
current ADHD diagnostic tests result in the mis-, over-, or under-diagnosis of
nearly a million children annually. If successful, the proposed technology may
lead to enhanced diagnostic accuracy and improved clinical outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
advanced machine learning algorithms including deep learning (DL), network
science principles, and data-driven approaches that may identify markers for
neurological disorders. The goal is to provide a diagnostic test that is non-
invasive, represents progression of the neurological disorder, correlates with
symptomatology, and provides early-detection. A single quantitative test does
not exist for most neurological disorders or relies on single-modality data for
disorders such as epilepsy. Preliminary data suggests that applying DL methods
to multiple modalities of brain data (functional MRI - fMRI, structural MRI -
sMRI, EEG) will lead to a transformative artificial intelligence (AI)-based,
quantitative strategy to diagnose these disorders – without the limitation of
the current clinical methods. Successful models for the diagnosis of ASD and
ADHD have been designed and results indicate an accuracy improvement of up to
28% using MRI data alone. The technology for early detection of epilepsy and AD
are currently under development. These models will serve as proof-of-concept and
a base for developing solutions for multi-disorder diagnosis and prediction
using multi-modal imaging data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.