* 2143246
* CAREER: Optimal High-Dimensional Estimators Using Sum-of-Squares Proof Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Tselil Schramm, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2027
* USD 249,754.00

Statistical estimation problems are ubiquitous in the modern world. A multitude
of important machine-learning tasks fall under the umbrella of estimation,
including regression, principal components analysis, and clustering. In the
sciences more broadly, estimating parameters from data is crucial to the pursuit
of knowledge: in Biology, estimating protein network structure; in Astronomy and
Physics, estimating the spatial locations of stellar objects from diffraction
patters; in Biochemistry, estimating the three-dimensional structure of a
protein from spectroscopy and imaging data; and so on. In high-dimensional
settings, where the quantities to be estimated describe large, complicated
systems, the role of efficient computation is crucial. Despite the ubiquity of
high-dimensional statistical estimation problems, understanding of their
computational landscape remains primitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop and characterize optimal estimation algorithms through the
lens of the sum-of-squares (SoS) algorithm and proof system. The sum-of-squares
algorithm is a powerful class of semidefinite programming algorithms which are
among the most powerful known algorithms (empirically and in a precise sense),
while their relationship to the sum-of-squares proof system also allows for a
systematic approach to algorithm design. The project is organized into three
primary thrusts: (i) predicting the computational limits of statistical
estimation with SoS, giving a unified theory for automatically predicting the
computational limits of our most powerful algorithms; (ii) giving optimal
algorithms for estimation via SoS for important problems such as clustering,
graphical models, and block models; (iii) making sum-of-squares algorithms
practical, replacing optimization over SoS programs with lightweight
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.