* 2143867
* CAREER: Enabling Transformational Service-Learning in Engineering through Critically Reflexive Practice
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* David A Delaine, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2027
* USD 362,867.00

This CAREER project will substantially help improve the education of future
engineers by preparing them to address societal challenges in meaningful ways.
Undergraduate engineering coursework is heavily focused on technical
preparation. However, in addition to technical skills, engineers should learn
how to understand and address the needs and perspectives of the people who will
be impacted by their technical solutions. This project will address this need by
focusing on service-learning, that is, courses where engineering students work
with communities outside of the university to help resolve a local challenge.
The great benefit of service-learning is that students can learn to be socially
responsible engineering professionals while positively impacting local
communities. However, in practice, service-learning is very difficult which can
lead to harmful impacts on the student and community participants. When not
performed carefully, these courses can teach students to dismiss community
perspectives and treat communities as laboratories rather than as collections of
people with unique social, cultural, and historical backgrounds. Within this
problem, this project will help ensure that the way engineering service-learning
courses are taught maximizes benefits for all participants through
transformational service-learning. More specifically, this project will
investigate how instructors develop the skills, attitudes, and knowledge they
need to design and implement transformational service-learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue transformational service-learning, it is
necessary that educators acknowledge the substantial role that race, power, and
privilege play within this pedagogy. To support educators’ understanding of the
role of these factors in service-learning, a promising approach involves first
developing educators’ critical reflexivity: the process by which an educator
creates an internal dialog and evaluates their own positionality to articulate
its impact on educational processes and outcomes. This project will engage the
framework of critical reflexivity, addressing research questions that explore
(1) service-learning engineering educators’ descriptions of their assumptions
about service-learning and their own positionalities within this context, (2)
the way these assumptions and positionalities impact their approaches to
teaching service-learning, and (3) the impact that critical reflexivity has in
supporting transformational service-learning outcomes. This investigation will
begin with interviews, and findings will be used to engage educators from a
community of practice that focuses on reflection and action to produce further
knowledge. The results will inform the development, assessment, and validation
of a short course and guidebook to propagate this new knowledge while also
refining this project’s findings. Along with dissemination through publications
and conferences, this propagation approach enables widespread impact of these
outcomes by closely engaging potential adopters, thereby increasing the
likelihood that they will pursue transformational service-learning. Through
partnering with large networks of engineering and service-learning educators
both nationally and internationally, these products will be used to promote a
paradigm shift in engineering service-leaning towards impactful community-
oriented approaches. This CAREER project will create new knowledge about (a) how
SL engineering educator positionality and assumptions hinder and enable service-
learning practice; (b) how critical reflexivity influences engineering
educators’ adoption of approaches to elicit transformational service-learning;
and (c) how engineering educators can develop service-learning coursework to
achieve transformational impacts for social justice and equity across
marginalized communities. Collectively, these outcomes will lead to the
development of engineering civic-minded engineering citizens who equitably
engage with local communities and are prepared for resolving complex societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.