* 2143642
* CAREER: Magnetism and Spintronics in Quasi-two-dimensional Magnetic Hybrid Metal Halides: From Bulk to 2D limit
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Dali Sun, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2027
* USD 142,377.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The flow of an electronic charge through
computers enables their efficient data processing, storage, and transfer of
information. In addition to charge, electrons also possess the quantum property
of spin. They can be found either in the ‘spin-up’ state, the ‘spin-down’ state,
or the mixture of both states. Spin-based electronics - spintronics - is an
enabler of quantum information science, where information is carried by spin,
rather than charge. By manipulating spin, information can be processed by
computers using much less power and at lower cost than is currently possible.
Ultrathin films, down to an atomically thin layer, of magnetic materials will be
an ideal platform for exploring fundamental spin phenomena and have great
potential to create novel designs for faster and more energy efficient quantum
computers. This research aims to explore the spin behavior in a new class of
‘hybrid’ magnetic materials which consist of alternating magnetic and
nonmagnetic atomic layers. The interaction between the neighboring magnetic
layers is weak so that they are effectively isolated from one another, from
which the control of spin in ultra-thin materials can be pursued. This class of
materials can be a launching pad into studying the spin states on the atomic
level to enable the next generation of high-performance microprocessors. This
project will also educate both high school and undergraduate students in
Physics, Materials Science, and Chemistry, and provide workforce training for
high technology industries. Students will experience key techniques that are
used in the research through advanced lab courses that also encourage students’
independence and creativity. This wider perspective will help to attract young
people to future STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;2D magnetic materials empower the direct control of spin
information by manipulating magnetization at the 2D limit. This research focuses
on developing a new class of quasi-2D magnetic hybrid metal halides (HMHs) that
possess both low-dimensional magnetism and tailored intra-/inter-layer exchange
couplings benefiting from chemical versatility. Classical 2D magnetic properties
will be demonstrated from bulk crystals down to few-layered ultrathin films
using a suite of magnetometers, magneto-optics, and magnetoresistance
techniques. By substituting organic cations, metal, and halogen elements,
control over static low-dimensional magnetic order and exchange couplings can be
achieved. Variable-temperature ferromagnetic resonance and spin pumping
measurements are applied to study coherently generated magnons at different
magnetic phases of 2D magnetic HMHs as well as a rich structure of resonance
modes induced by tunable dynamic couplings. This research extends 2D magnetism
from inorganic 2D van der Waals crystals to a wide spectrum of uncharted 2D
hybrid metal halides, launching a new strategy for the design of new 2D magnets.
Specific senior lab projects for undergraduate students will be designed through
an ‘Advanced Senior Lab’ course to disseminate the basic concepts of
ferromagnetic resonance and spin pumping. A laser interferometer and magneto-
optics will be disseminated through various outreach platforms and the advanced
senior lab course, to integrate scientific achievements into the high school and
undergraduate students’ educations. These plans provide practice for students
taking a relatively open-ended science project from its early
construction/debugging stages, through careful data analysis, to the point where
it can be communicated clearly to other scientists. Familiarity with the rigors
of this process is the most important part of their training as future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.