* 2143714
* CAREER: Scientific Investigation of Motor Learning to Improve Gait Rehabilitation in Individuals with Neuromuscular Dysfunction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Kristin Morgan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2027
* USD 411,223.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal costs attributed to the
treatment and rehabilitation of individuals suffering from neuromuscular
dysfunction exceeds over $400 billion annually. A major goal of rehabilitation
is to improve or restore an individualâ€™s gait, reduce fall risk, increase
mobility, and return independence. Recent advancements in computer modeling can
help to develop better personalized rehabilitation plans for injured
individuals. The research activities in this project will explore strategies for
promoting healthy gait in individuals with neuromuscular impairment. New tools,
metrics, and algorithms will be developed to provide guidance for long-term
rehabilitative care. Research activities will be leveraged to engage students
from underrepresented groups to become the next generation of community-minded
researchers. The new knowledge gained from this project will lead to a greater
understanding of neuromuscular control and motor learning with the goal of
delivering patient-specific rehabilitation programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a scientific investigation of motor learning that will pioneer
innovative models to prescribe optimal patient-specific rehabilitation for
people with gait disorders while increasing STEM engagement in students from
underrepresented groups. Here, novel split-belt gait protocols are used to
modify and influence the adoption of healthy gait dynamics. A laboratory-
centered simulation tool will be constructed that will incorporate patient
physiology and gait metrics, musculoskeletal simulations, and clinically related
cost functions to model the storage of new gait patterns. Then data mining
techniques will be employed to sift through experimental and simulated gait data
to generate a clinical tool to prescribe customized gait rehabilitations.
Finally, the hands-on aspects of the musculoskeletal simulations and modeling
techniques will be exploited to create interactive activities to increase STEM
knowledge and interest in STEM careers for students from underrepresented
groups. Together, these integrated activities will yield new insight about how
to assess, monitor, and influence motor learning to drive the larger goal of
improving and optimizing individual movement and health while also inspiring the
next generation of STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.