* 2143426
* CAREER: Exploring Nonlinear Electrodynamics from Topology and Correlation in Layered Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Qiong Ma, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 264,231.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: How a
material responds to electric and magnetic fields determines its functionality
and its usefulness in electronic and optical devices. Nonlinear processes allow
for interesting phenomena with widespread applications. For example, an optical
limiting material can be transparent at low light intensity but opaque at high
(and potentially hazardous) intensity. This allows a user to see under normal
conditions while protecting them from injury. Nonlinear electromagnetic
materials can address growing demands for devices with new functionality and
higher efficiency. This CAREER project aims to explore new forms of nonlinear
electromagnetism that arise from the quantum properties of electrons in novel
two-dimensional quantum materials. The low dimensionality gives rise to new
quantum confinement effects that can enable highly efficient and tunable
electronic devices for information and energy technologies. The PI will explore
the physics of atomically-thin layered quantum materials by fabricating
ultrathin electronic devices from layered 2D materials and studying their
nonlinear electromagnetic response at low temperatures. The project intimately
integrates research activities, student mentoring, educational plans, and
outreach initiatives centered around quantum materials, physics, and technology.
The principal investigator is particularly dedicated to addressing gender
inequality in physics by promoting female researchers and cultivating a young
and vigorous force reserve through initiative programs. This project is jointly
funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and the Condensed Matter
Physics (CMP) programs of the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Nonlinear electromagnetic
responses are the phenomena where materials respond nonlinearly to external
electromagnetic fields. Recent advances uncovered deep connections between
nonlinear electromagnetic responses and topological and Berry curvature
properties of quantum matter, leading to an emerging field of topological
nonlinear electromagnetism. In this nascent field many questions need to be
addressed. For instance, what are the signature nonlinear responses of new
topological states and how large can they be? What is the role of impurities and
scattering in those processes? What is the role of Coulomb interactions? Can we
use those responses to probe and manipulate emergent phases? This CAREER project
aims to answer those questions by exploring the physics in atomically-thin
layered quantum materials with controllable Fermi energy, band structures,
symmetry, topology and electron interactions through electrostatic gating, van
der Waals stacking and layer twisting. The investigator develops innovative
fabrication methods to create ultrathin electronic devices from those materials
and investigates their nonlinear electromagnetic properties in a home-built
multi-functional magneto-transport/optics cryo-system with broadband
electromagnetic excitation. Combining highly-tunable nonlinear materials with
broadband excitation will permit exploration of previously inaccessible regimes
in topological and correlated materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.