* 2143869
* CAREER: Characterization of Epigenetic Factors and Their Regulatory Roles in Modulating Mitotic Fidelity
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Amity Manning, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2026
* USD 440,643.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell division is an essential
process required for cellular proliferation and organismal growth. Dramatic
defects in cell division can result in non-viable daughter cells and compromise
organismal growth. More subtle defects during cell division promote changes in
the genome that contribute to cellular evolution. The cellâ€™s genetic material is
organized into discrete structures known as chromosomes. When a cell divides the
chromosomes are sorted equally into the two new daughter cells by a molecular
machine called the mitotic spindle. The interactions between the spindle and
chromosomes are governed, in part, by modifications made to the protein
molecules that organize the genetic material. However, the distinct
modifications that are critical for accurate chromosome sorting, and the
regulatory processes that control when these modifications are placed or
removed, are not completely understood. This project will investigate the key
modifications that are necessary for the formation of connections between
chromosomes and the cell division machinery. The investigator will use cell and
molecular approaches to modify individual regulators and corresponding
modifications. Using high resolution microscopy, this research will
experimentally test the relevance of each modification in the cell division
process, leading to a better understanding of both the regulation of chromosomes
and, more generally, the fundamental process of cell division. The Broader
Impacts of this work include the intrinsic merit of the research itself as all
eukaryotic cells likely utilize the processes to be studied. Additional
activities include efforts to increase the diversity in STEM, involvement of
high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students in the research
itself. Efforts to improve scientific literacy are proposed. American Rescue
Plan funding provides support for this investigator at a critical stage in her
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitotic chromosome segregation is an essential
process required for cellular proliferation and organismal growth. During
mitosis, chromosomes are segregated into two daughter cells by a microtubule
based structure known as the mitotic spindle. Microtubules attach to chromosomes
via the kinetochore, a proteinaceous structure built upon the centromere. The
centromere is defined epigenetically by the deposition of CENPA, a Histone H3
variant. Together with post-translational modifications of histone tails in
centromeric chromatin, CENPA recruits the core proteins necessary for
kinetochore formation. Flanking the centromere are regions of constitutive
heterochromatin, termed the pericentromere. While epigenetic modulation of
centromeric and pericentromeric heterochromatin has been implicated in the
regulation of chromosome segregation, the molecular and mechanistic basis by
which epigenetic and molecular constituents of pericentromeric heterochromatin
impact kinetochore structure and function remain unclear. This project will
utilize molecular, cellular, and imaging approaches to mechanistically define
the role of epigenetic modulation of pericentromeric heterochromatin on the
regulation of mitotic error correction and chromosome segregation. By
identifying key epigenetic modulators of mitotic fidelity and defining the
underlying mechanism by which mitosis is compromised when the corresponding
epigenetic modifications are disrupted, this project will advance both our
understanding of the biological significance of the pericentromeric
heterochromatin and more broadly our understanding of the fundamental process of
cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.