* 2143229
* CAREER: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Underlying Circuit-Host Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Xiaojun Tian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2027
* USD 261,641.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic gene circuits are
engineered circuits that allow researchers to program and design cells for a
variety of biotechnology applications, including the synthesis of therapeutics,
sustainable agriculture and production of renewable resources. Although many
synthetic genetic circuits have been successfully used, they have a high rate of
failure due in part to negative impacts on host cells. The long-term goals of
this project are to better understand how synthetic circuit design impacts host
cells and to use this knowledge to design circuits that are less harmful. A
diverse group of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students will
participate in the research project through active learning and hands-on
training. American Rescue Plan funding of this project will support this
researcher at a critical stage in his career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic
gene circuits over the last two decades have shown remarkable functional
versatility in engineering host organisms and cellular capabilities for desired
functions. However, most synthetic gene circuits are highly dependent on
multiple undesired factors through complicated circuit-host interactions, such
as metabolic burden, cell growth feedback, and resource competition. Another
critical reason is that the fundamental molecular mechanism the host cells could
adopt to entertain and constrain exogenous synthetic gene circuits is still
unclear. Moreover, the lack of quantitative tools to accurately predict the
behavior of gene circuits and control their interactions with the host cell is
impeding progress in the field. This research program aims to dissect the
fundamental mechanisms of circuit-host interactions to understand the molecular
and cellular organization of the host system and engineer
predictable/controllable gene circuits. A library of gene circuits will be built
to gain in-depth mechanistic understandings of how circuit-host interactions are
established. An ensemble of mathematical models at different levels will be
formulated to characterize the host-circuit mutual interactions at single-cell,
population, or ecological levels. The proposed research will advance the
quantitative understanding of the crosstalk between gene circuits and bacterial
physiology, develop a quantitative characterizing of complex circuit-host
interactions on the host cell function and behavior of engineered gene circuits,
and facilitate gene circuit design to meet design specifications through
practical strategies that target the circuit-host
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.