* 2143170
* CAREER: Rare Sugar Activation and Incorporation into Bacterial Glycan Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Tania Lupoli, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2027
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Tania Lupoli from New York University will investigate
the synthesis and recognition of sugars unique to bacterial cell surfaces.
Almost all bacteria contain polymers composed of sugars, called polysaccharides,
that extend from their cell surfaces. Many bacterial surface polysaccharides
contain rare sugars, which are bacteria-specific monosaccharides that are absent
in mammals, including humans. While scientists recognize that rare sugars are
important for mediating interactions between bacteria and their environments,
there is still incomplete understanding of how rare sugar-containing polymers
are assembled and how these enable survival in hosts during infection. The
proposed experiments aim to develop chemical approaches to study enzymes that
recognize rare sugars, with the goal of providing chemical tools to analyze
bacterial interactions with their environments. This work will enable graduate
students to obtain training in synthetic chemistry, biochemistry and
microbiology. This project will also be integrated into educational outreach
programs on infectious disease, bacterial survival and antibiotic design to
inspire future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to
develop routes to nucleotide rare sugars, and to quantitatively characterize
their interactions with glycosyltransferase enzymes that assemble bacterial
surface polysaccharides. Rare bacterial sugars are over-represented in
6-deoxysugars, which lack the canonical hydroxyl group found on C6 of the hexose
ring, and are typically L- as opposed to D-isomers. This proposal seeks to
develop reagents to decipher the molecular consequences of installing sugars
with uncommon stereochemistry that lack a 6-hydroxyl group into the cell surface
of bacteria, with a focus on Gram-negative bacteria. Robust synthetic and
chemoenzymatic routes to activated rare sugar substrates will be developed. The
mechanism and catalytic sites of rare sugar-utilizing glycosyltransferases will
be determined using detailed kinetic and mutagenesis studies. This work is
expected to help establish molecular rules for recognition of 6-deoxysugars by
bacterial glycosyltransferases that are currently
uncharacterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.