* 2143354
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Data-driven Coupled-Cluster for Biomimetic CO2 Capture
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Konstantinos Vogiatzis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 01/31/2027
* USD 649,995.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WIth support from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry,
Konstantinos Vogiatzis of the University of Tennessee-Knoxville is developing
data-driven computational methodologies for the biomimetic capture of carbon
dioxide. Carbon dioxide (CO2) overload in the atmosphere generates a significant
greenhouse gas (GHG) layer, a major contributor to climate change in the United
States and around the globe. Climate change presents a growing challenge to
human health and safety, quality of life, and economic growth. Direct air
capture (DAC) refers to technologies that capture CO2 directly from the air. One
approach to DAC agent design relies upon chemical compositions that lead to
favorable CO2 binding. Computational studies can examine different chemical
environments and suggest new CO2-philic groups. Dr. Vogiatzis and his research
group will develop new hybrid quantum chemical/machine learning models for the
exploration of novel DAC approaches that are based on how enzymes can
selectively capture CO2. Dr. Vogiatzis will also develop a new course offered at
the upper undergraduate or early graduate level that aims to bridge data science
with chemistry and provide important skills to undergraduate and graduate
students. This course aims to reach students from underserved groups and provide
a stimulating view of chemistry while training students in more expansive use of
data science in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
project is to develop computational methodologies that capitalize on recent
progress in data science for expanding the applicability of accurate quantum
chemistry methods. Dr. Vogiatzisâ€™ approach is based on the recycling of
molecular wave functions obtained at low computational cost to help train
machine-learning models which will provide fast and reliable energies and
geometries of complex molecular systems without loss of accuracy. Coupled-
cluster singles-and-doubles with perturbative triples (CCSD(T)) is a wave
function method that balances accuracy with efficiency. Dr. Vogiatzis and his
research group will develop transferable machine learning models that learn
highly accurate CCSD(T) wave functions by utilizing data from low-cost methods
such as Hartree-Fock (HF) and second-order perturbation theory. This data-driven
coupled-cluster (DDCC) scheme is based on electron correlation, a property that
has a local, short-range character across all molecular species, independent of
their size. DDCC models can effectively encode the local nature of electron
correlation and, after thorough testing and benchmarking, can be used for the
examination of CO2-oligopeptide systems for biomimetic CO2 capture. Furthermore,
the advances made here in combining quantum chemical methods with machine-
learning are expected to be applicable to a significant variety of other
chemical challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.