* 2143120
* CAREER: System Support for Scalable, Fast, and Power-Efficient Genome Sequencing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Fan Chen, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2026
* USD 205,008.00

Genome sequencing is the key to enhancing public health, optimizing personality
medicine, and facilitating viral surveillance. However, the current genome
sequencing pipeline lacks full-stack system support and consumes tens or even
hundreds of CPU hours, causing delays in treatment, patient deterioration, or
even mortality. This project integrates four synergistic research tasks to
enable scalable, fast, and power-efficient genome sequencing: (1) This project
will create a benchmark suite to identify the performance/power bottlenecks in
the pipeline; (2) This project presents a scalable algorithm for the most time-
consuming Seed-and-Extension operations in the genome sequencing pipeline; (3)
This project will design an ultra-low power processing-in-memory architecture
for accelerating intensive operators in the genome sequencing pipeline; (4) This
project will develop an automated compilation framework to deploy the genome
sequencing pipeline to a CPU/accelerator heterogeneous system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this proposal will lower the barrier to
entry for genome sequencing development, equipping the next generation of users,
developers, entrepreneurs, and scientists to use genome sequencing, without help
from software and hardware experts. The research will inspire future computer
systems and computational biology research for specialized genome sequencing
pipeline acceleration. This proposal integrates research and education including
graduate and undergraduate curriculum development and research mentoring, a high
school intern program to enable early learners to use genome sequencing and
develop an interest in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.