* 2143852
* CAREER: Developing Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation as a Precision Brain Circuit Tool for Stroke Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Alexander Opitz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2027
* USD 551,870.00

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a non-invasive brain stimulation
method with many applications in research and therapy. TMS uses magnetic fields
to deliver pulses that create temporary electric fields in the brain. The
magnetic pulses are delivered over the scalp and the created electric fields can
stimulate nerve cells in the brain regions where the pulse is delivered. Stroke
is a medical condition where a lack of blood supply of a specific brain region
results in nerve cell death that can affect the brain connections that control
movement. Stroke is one of the main causes of disability that impacts the
quality of life of millions of people. Many studies have investigated the use of
TMS to assess the human motor system and to develop therapies for stroke. TMS is
ideal for this because it allows for the measurement of the connection and
transfer of brain signals between the motor cortex in the brain and the muscles.
Also, TMS is a promising therapeutic tool to improve recovery and re-learning of
motor control after stroke. However, despite the possible advantages of TMS-
based brain stimulation therapies, the treatment outcomes vary considerably and
not all patients benefit. In this project, the investigators will develop
improved methods to measure and analyze brain signals to better adjust the TMS
procedure to each individual patient’s brain motor system for better and more
precise assessments and therapies for stroke survivors. The investigator will
develop new educational materials, 3-D printed models, and hold workshops to
teach these methods to a wide range of individuals including local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop individualized TMS
applications for assessing the motor system in adult stroke patients and future
rehabilitation efforts. This will be based on (i) individual anatomical
characterization using structural MRI and (ii) individual functional
characterization employing electroencephalography (EEG), combined with (iii)
advanced computational modeling. Ongoing oscillatory brain states, highlighting
local brain excitability, will be tracked in real-time by EEG and be used to
apply TMS in a closed-loop fashion. The PI will leverage these technological
developments to advance TMS technology to assess motor circuitry and advance the
field’s understanding of brain pathologies in stroke, thus enabling future
clinical trials for stroke rehabilitation. This project will result in next-
generation technology that will allow principled TMS studies of brain circuits
in stroke with high spatial and temporal resolution. This will be based on
advances in image and signal processing initially established for healthy
individuals and translation towards individuals with stroke. Through initial
experimental testing, it will be ensured that technological advances will result
in improved practical applications. Outcomes of this research will result in new
approaches for closed-loop TMS in individuals with stroke. Success in these
efforts will allow the design and execution of more precise brain stimulation
protocols for the assessment of motor circuits and TMS stroke rehabilitation
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.