* 2143899
* CAREER: Understanding the mechanisms that mediate the effects of local ecology  on geographic mosaics of host-parasite interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Sarah Knutie, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2027
* USD 597,427.00

Environmental temperatures can influence host-parasite relationships by
affecting the effectiveness of host defenses and parasite survival.
Experimentally elevated temperatures can favor the host’s immune response but
can be at the upper thermal limits for which parasites survive and exploit the
host. Temperatures can alternatively induce heat stress for hosts, reducing
their capacity to resist parasites. This paradox suggests that the effect of
temperature deviations on host-parasite interactions might be related to local
adaptation to climate, which could explain geographical variation in the hosts’
immune response. The goal of this research is to use coordinated, experimental
approaches to determine how environmental factors affect interactions between
nest parasites and their box-nesting host, eastern bluebirds (Sialia sialis)
across the eastern US. First, the research will examine the relationship among
local environmental factors, nest parasite factors, and host nesting success
with publicly available environmental data, as well as host and parasite data
collected through a recently established, citizen science project: “Nest
Parasite Community Science Project”. Next, the research will use coordinated
experiments to determine how temperature affects host immune development and
parasite survival across the bluebird’s range. The research will build lasting
connections with K-12 teachers at underserved magnet schools and the public from
the Nest Parasite Community Science Project through learning and being involved
in the entire process of a scientific study. Not only can a relationship with
nature promote mental health, but community-based science projects can help
educate the public on environmental issues so that they make informed decisions
in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research examines host-parasite
geographic mosaics by using coordinated, experimental approaches to determine
how environmental factors affect host-parasite interactions across an
environmental gradient. The central hypothesis is that variation in temperature
is an important driver of host-parasite mosaics, and the outcome of which is
mediated by the differential effects of temperature on parasite fitness and
early-life host immunological resistance across the host range. The research
will test this hypothesis by spatially and temporally modeling local
environmental factors, presence and abundance of nest parasite taxa, and host
nesting success across the host’s range. The research will also determine
whether experimental changes in temperature during the different stages of
development influences outcomes of early-life immunity against parasites.
Specifically, temperature (hotter, colder, no change) will be manipulated at
different host developmental stages, before and while host and parasites are
interacting, and changes in immune mechanisms and nest parasite factors will be
characterized. Coordinated efforts across multiple scales are critically needed
to causally determine the underlying mechanisms that create and maintain host-
parasite geographic mosaics across an environmental gradient. To be in multiple
places at the same time requires collaborations with research scientists or
community-based scientists across a multitude of locations. By creatively
linking the general public, professors, and K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students, the proposed research promises to provide novel insights into the
emerging field of eco-evo dynamics through transforming our understanding of the
causal environmental factors and mechanisms that facilitate host-parasite
geographic mosaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.