* 2143826
* CAREER: New Chemical Tools for Probing the Biological Significance of Hydrogen Sulfide and Hydrogen Selenide
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* John Lukesh, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2026
* USD 625,000.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support of the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Division of Chemistry, John Lukesh of Wake Forest University is
developing new chemical tools to investigate the biological significance of
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and hydrogen selenide (H2Se). Given that both gases were
historically dismissed as toxic pollutants with little relevance to human
biology, a comprehensive understanding of their biological functions, cellular
targets, and production and metabolism remains elusive. The overall goal of this
proposal is to answer these specific questions through molecular design and the
development of new molecular scaffolds that effectively detect or deliver H2S
and H2Se under biologically relevant conditions. Students engaged in these
efforts will be exposed to a wide-variety of topics and techniques at the ever-
widening interface of chemistry and biology as they unlock a new frontier to the
redox signaling community. This program also integrates a multi-tiered approach
aimed at connecting with the local community of Winston-Salem, NC. These efforts
include the development of fun and interactive chemistry lectures for local
middle school students and the active recruitment of underrepresented minority
college students to research positions at Wake Forest University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate new investigations into the prevalence and
physiological significance of H2S and H2Se, this project aims to engineer new
chemical tools to assist in the delivery or detection of both gases under
biologically relevant conditions. Specifically, fundamentally new chemistry will
be employed to selectively release H2S from sulfur-containing motifs via an
analyte-triggered cyclization reaction. This unique mechanistic pathway will be
used to unlock a family of donors that have the potential to advance the field
of sulfide signaling research through their ability to target specific tissues
and organelles; selectively respond to stimuli upregulated in disease; and self-
report their real time delivery of H2S through concurrent fluorophore assembly.
This project also represents a pioneering effort to generate new donors and
reaction-based probes specific to H2Se. Given the scarcity of such compounds,
this new chemistry has the potential to accelerate molecular signaling research,
and to spark an emerging area of science aimed at exploring the chemical biology
and innate physiological functions of H2Se, including its propensity to promote
oxidative post-translational modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.