* 2143984
* CAREER: Knowledge Infrastructure in the Red List of Threatened Species
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Beckett Sterner, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2027
* USD 184,492.00

This CAREER award is to support research at the intersection of history of
science and social studies of science. The PI proposes to engage in an
historical and conceptual study of a conservation database, the Red List of
Threatened Species (RLTS), which is maintained by the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature (ICUN). The RLTS is widely hailed as one of the great
success stories in connecting science to action, and the IUCN has become one of
the largest and most influential international organizations synthesizing
scientific knowledge to inform conservation policy and decision making. RLTS is
conceptualized in the project as knowledge infrastructure, which is understood
as a robust networks of people, artifacts, and institutions that generate,
share, and maintain specific knowledge about the human and natural worlds. This
research project will develop the first historically-situated analysis of the
RLTSâ€™s general assumptions, virtues, and limitations as an exemplary case of
knowledge infrastructure supporting cooperative global research among thousands
of participants. Project results will generalize to inform the design of other
knowledge infrastructures that aim to produce authoritative scientific knowledge
using decentralized sources of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
analysis of the RLTS methodology will be the first to characterize the full arc
of its history starting in the post-World War I era based on research using
historical archives and published documents. The project will contribute novel
datasets of article text, novel methodologies for scientometric analysis, and
novel metadata describing journal articles, which will be distributed as open
data and software. The project will analyze how the RLTS methodology reflects
compromises accrued over time, how its uniform application is regulated, and
where global standardization inhibits customization for increased local value.
The project will also constitute the first study of RLTS contributor
demographics, including information about geographic location and employment
type of participants where available from public
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.