* 2143146
* CAREER: Gas-regulated Mechanochemical Activation for Bio-inspired Responses in Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Melissa Gordon, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2027
* USD 301,193.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, biological systems can
constructively respond to mechanical force, such as the healing of skin after a
cut. Taking this as inspiration, this project aims to develop force-responsive
synthetic polymeric materials that can remodel after force is applied. The goal
is to externally regulate the extent of force-triggered activation and
remodeling using carbon dioxide as an external stimulus. To do this, the
material will include two components. One component is designed to respond to
carbon dioxide by swelling and the other includes force-sensitive groups called
mechanophores, which will remodel the material in response to the extent of
swelling. Using this approach, the project describes systematic studies
examining the structure-property relationships that underlie mechanophore
activation and their time scales in polymer networks. This project will help
advance research towards developing materials offering enhanced safety, longer
lifespan, and reduced environmental impact. The project will also include
educational and outreach activities including mentored research opportunities
for undergraduates from diverse backgrounds attending a primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI), the development of a hands-on module based on this project
for a technical elective in polymers, and the implementation of a career module
to expose students to career paths in the field. Further, this project supports
hosting two visiting graduate students who have interest in a career at a PUI
for the summer to begin building the skills needed to develop an undergraduate-
driven research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of biological systems to respond
constructively to mechanical force inspires the design of mechano-responsive
polymer networks that similarly elicit constructive responses. However,
strategies to develop synthetic materials capable of force-triggered remodeling
remain limited. This effort will take a stepwise approach towards regulating
mechanochemical activation using an external stimulus in double network (DN)
hydrogels. Using a DN structure, external control will be afforded by a carbon
dioxide (CO2)-responsive primary network, which regulates the extent of
mechanochemical scission in the secondary network via swelling. CO2-regulated,
force-triggered activation of the mechanophore will be coupled to a subsequent
crosslinking polymerization to strengthen and remodel the material in response
to deformation. This system will be used to determine the structure-property
relationships that govern mechanophore activation and kinetics, which may enable
new strategies to study mechanochemistry in basic and applied
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and outreach components of the
project include: 1) enhancing undergraduate education and training; 2) enriching
graduate professional development; and 3) building research infrastructure and
enhancing educator development. The first area includes providing mentored
research opportunities for undergraduates of diverse backgrounds attending a
PUI, development of a hands-on module and career module targeted towards
undergraduates enrolled in a technical elective focused on polymers, and hosting
a workshop to aid undergraduates in submitting competitive applications to a
fellowship program. The second area includes hosting two visiting graduate
students who have interest in pursuing a career at a PUI for the summer to gain
first-hand experience of conducting research at a PUI and to begin building the
skills needed to develop an undergraduate-driven research program. The third
area focuses on developing and disseminating materials to prospective and new
faculty at PUIs to help them perform and fund their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.