* 2143063
* CAREER: Integrating Theory &amp; Data to Uncover the Evolutionary Advantages of Recombination
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Amy Dapper, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2027
* USD 647,360.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our
understanding of the evolution of the rates at which genes are shuffled among
pairs of chromosomes (recombination). Reproduction in plants and animals
requires recombination. Recombination rates differ between species and
populations, and can even vary among and within the chromosomes of an
individual. The rate of recombination influences the fate of mutations and the
process of adaptation, but the causes and consequences of recombination rate
variation are poorly understood. This project will advance evolutionary theory
about the conditions which favor different recombination rates. The work will
also increase student understanding of the interface of theory and the real
world and increase mathematical literacy. This will be accomplished through the
implementation of a combined undergraduate-graduate course in mathematical
modeling at Mississippi State University and the development of mathematical
modeling modules for high school biology classrooms in partnership with the
Mississippi School for Mathematics and Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will develop a theoretical framework that allows clear testing of
existing hypotheses by generating predictions that are applicable to datasets
that describe intra- and interpopulation variation in recombination rate. This
novel approach is founded on a growing body of evidence that the genetic
architecture of recombination is complex. This model will treat recombination
rate as a continuously variable trait reflecting that complexity. This bridges a
gap between theory and the growing body of real-world genomic data. The
development and implementation of computational tools needed to simulate the
evolution of recombination rate as a quantitative trait in response to direct
and indirect selection will be a major step in understanding genome
evolution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.