* 2143865
* CAREER: New imaging of mid-ocean ridge systems at the Galápagos triple junction
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Zachary Eilon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 180,786.00

Seismic imaging of mid-ocean ridge systems at the Galápagos triple
junction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key element of plate tectonics is a ~50,000-km-
long volcanic mountain chain circling the globe, where plates continuously
separate and magma upwells from the Earth’s interior to cool. This has been
understood for more than seventy years, but details of the deep structure of
these systems remain unresolved. The problem is that most of these mountain
chains lie under miles of water in the middle of the oceans (“mid-ocean ridges”;
MORs). Seismological measurements are the main tool for peering tens of
kilometres into the planet. This project involves a multi-year placement of
ocean-bottom seismometers (OBSs) across and along two of these MORs, at a
“triple-junction” location where three of these ridges meet. Seismic signals
recorded by these instruments will be used to build 3-dimensional models of the
solid Earth deep beneath the MORs. This project includes outreach and training
activities. The project will involve high school students and will educate the
public by producing films during the expeditions. It will provide research and
education opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students through
scientific expeditions and classwork. The program will involve early career
investigators and generate an open-source manual for planning scientific
expeditions at sea. The data will enhance understanding of geohazards and
imaging of the entire planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ~50,000-km-long global
mid-ocean ridge (MOR) system, the factory where 65% of the tectonic plates are
generated, is arguably the defining feature of our planet’s surface. Yet,
fundamental aspects of oceanic extension remain poorly understood, including the
mechanisms driving upwelling at mid-ocean ridges and the origin of fabrics and
discontinuities in mature ocean plates. This project involves a multi-year
broadband ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) deployment across the Galápagos triple
junction, involving two diachronous, overlapping ~40 station arrays spanning
&gt;400km along strike and perpendicular to the Pacific-Cocos and Cocos-Nazca
spreading centers. Surface and body wave tomographic imaging of these MORs,
including measurements of seismic attenuation, scattered phases, and seismic
anisotropy will provide unprecedented spatial and methodological coverage of
lithospheric and asthenospheric structure. This work will: 1) Test predicted
signatures of dynamic upwelling; 2) Image MOR melt, dehydration, and shear
structures that may persist in mature lithosphere; 3) Explore the 3-D
organization of mantle flow beneath the ridges; 4) Exploit contrasts in
spreading rate and ridge migration over underlying mantle to gauge the
importance of these parameters on ridge dynamics; 5) Investigate MOR maturation
beneath a propagating spreading center. Broader impacts target each stage of the
pipeline into research: Outreach will educate and engage the broader public and
enhance recruitment of high schoolers into the geoscience major. Training will
provide research and education opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students through cruises and classwork. Building a Network of Leaders will
establish a skilled cohort of early career investigators, and generate an open-
source manual for planning OBS deployments. This experiment will also contribute
to the international PacificArray initiative, and provide new data for global
and deep mantle tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.