* 2143706
* CAREER: End-to-end Constrained Optimization Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Ferdinando Fioretto, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 02/28/2027
* USD 200,002.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constrained optimization is used
daily in our society with applications ranging from supply chains and logistics
to electricity grids, organ exchanges, marketing campaigns, and manufacturing.
Although these problems are often computationally challenging even for medium-
sized instances, they constitute fundamental building blocks for the
optimization of many industrial processes with profound effects on our society
and economy. Yet the complexity of many constrained optimization problems often
prevents them from being effectively adopted in contexts where many instances
must be solved over a long-term horizon or when solutions must be produced under
stringent time constraints. This project proposes a new paradigm that tightly
integrates fundamental optimization techniques with machine learning algorithms
to solve constraint optimization problems in real-time. This research holds the
promise to create a new and transformative generation of optimization tools that
solve hard constraint optimization problems under stringent time constraints
leading to significant economic and societal benefits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific standpoint, this project will develop a
new integration of optimization and machine learning tools that deliver high-
quality solutions to large-scale hard constraint optimization problems at
unprecedented computational speeds. The proposed end-to-end Constraint
Optimization Learning (e2e-COL) contributes to new scientific knowledge along
three main directions: (1) It accommodates the presence of domain knowledge or
complex problem constraints by combining fundamental methodologies from
optimization into the training cycle of deep neural networks. (2) It addresses
the need of generating large datasets to train high-quality models by devising
efficient data generation procedures, linking methodologies from optimization
with the model learning ability, and developing semi-supervised models requiring
small amounts of labeled data. (3) Finally, to scale to large problem instances,
this proposal enables e2e-COL to learn decompositions and approximations of the
problem structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.