* 2143792
* CAREER: Neural Transcript Summarization and Induction of Document Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Fei Liu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2022
* USD 93,381.00

The exploding reach and power of audio and video, combined with accurate
captioning, is broadening access to large collections of transcripts. Automatic
transcript summarization enables the production of textual summaries from
transcripts of audio and video recordings. It holds promise for numerous
industries that have large collections of transcripts, ranging from telehealth
and telemedicine, financial services, video conferencing, to podcast and
livestream service providers. Whether one needs to share the minutes of a
meeting or quickly take notes of a livestream recording, using a transcript
summarization tool is a viable way to outsource the otherwise labor-intensive
task of turning voice recordings into textual summaries. Though practitioners
are eager to summarize transcripts of various sorts, they cannot deal with the
complexities of spoken language. Without robust summarization technology, users
can become overwhelmed by the amount of information available and fail to
effectively pinpoint topics of importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this CAREER project is to provide a unified methodological
framework for automatic transcript summarization through investigation of
fundamental problems in summarization to improve the efficiency of content
selection and production of transcript summaries. The proposed effort will
harness the power of deep neural networks and linguistic structure prediction to
induce document structure on transcripts and enable the production of
comprehensive summaries. Specific objectives of the research plan are to (a)
uncover the structure of informal, verbose transcripts of spontaneous speech,
(b) produce comprehensive summaries to allow users to navigate the transcripts
with ease, and (c) establish an evaluation protocol that combines intrinsic and
extrinsic measures to assess the quality of transcript summaries. The project
seeks to address fundamental challenges in transcript summarization to provide
robust, universally accessible summarization solutions to field practitioners.
The research plan will be fully integrated into a synergistic education plan to
engage diverse student learners in exploration of summarization
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.