* 2143760
* CAREER: Molecular Resolution of Long-range Allostery in CRISPR-Cas9
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* George Lisi, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2026
* USD 532,594.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPR-Cas9 represents a
transformative biomolecular tool with potential to impact laboratory science,
bioengineering, and precision medicine. The large, multidomain Cas9 protein at
the heart of this technology is governed by an intricate signaling mechanism
that guides the targeted cleavage of DNA. However, many of the underlying
details of the Cas9 mechanism are poorly understood at the molecular level,
hampering the development of intuitive chemical tools that leverage its cutting-
edge functional potential. The project will study Cas9 at the atomic level to
establish how this protein transmits chemical information throughout its complex
structure to affect biological function, which has been proposed as a major
driving force for this system. Such insight will lead to the development of
CRISPR-Cas9 proteins with enhanced spatial and temporal specificity. This
project will create interactive learning experiences to teach protein structure-
function relationships to graduate, undergraduate, and predominantly
underrepresented Providence High School students. American Rescue Plan funding
is used to support this early career investigator at a critical stage in his
career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate solution nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular simulations, in vitro and in
vivo biochemistry to further our understanding of molecular crosstalk in Cas9
that is proposed to drive an intricate allosteric mechanism. Efforts to
establish this mechanism are attractive for developing enhanced Cas9 variants,
since allosteric regulation provides superior spatial and temporal control over
protein function, both of which currently hamper Cas9 applications. The project
will dissect allosteric pathways through the analysis of differential motions
probed by NMR spin relaxation and computational network analysis to map the
specific amino acids and interactions responsible for transmitting structural or
dynamic changes that facilitate DNA cleavage. The contribution of intrinsic
protein dynamics to allostery has been increasingly studied to rationalize the
role of amino acid “pathways” that facilitate communication through multidomain
protein structures. Specifically, the project will elucidate the pathway(s) of
allosteric signaling coupling distant Cas9 domains, determine how allosteric
networks rewire upon ligand binding, characterize the effects of activity or
specificity-altering mutations on allosteric signaling, and establish
biophysical comparisons between mesophilic and thermophilic Cas9 species.
Further avenues toward residue-level deconvolution of the MIF and Cas9
allosteric networks are proposed and required to refine and engineer spatial or
temporal control into these systems more intuitively. This project is funded by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.