* 2143851
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Navigating a Two-Front Challenge for the Power Grid: Extreme Weather and the Race to Decarbonization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jordan Kern, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2027
* USD 413,671.00

Extreme weather events (heat waves and cold snaps, droughts, wildfires, violent
storms, and flooding) cost the U.S. electric power sector between $25 and $70
billion per year in the form of damaged equipment, service outages, and price
shocks in electricity markets. At the same time, in order to prevent the worst
effects of climate change, the electric power sector must decarbonize quickly by
increasing reliance on wind and solar, thus introducing a new source of weather
risk for the grid. Failure to navigate the power grid’s growing and increasingly
complex exposure to weather risk and extreme events could significantly slow
society’s efforts to decarbonize by making it more expensive to do so. For
electric power utilities, extreme weather events manifest as large, unexpected
increases in costs. Either these must pass to customers, or they make it more
difficult for utilities to meet debt service obligations, leading to credit
downgrades and higher interest rates on borrowed sums, thereby increasing
infrastructure costs at a time when the grid requires trillions of dollars of
investment to meet decarbonization goals. This research will broadly explore
these dynamics across different sections of the U.S. grid, developing new
insights that address two major science questions of critical importance to
society: 1) How will extreme weather, manifesting as price and reliability
shocks in electricity markets, affect the cost of decarbonization? and 2) How
will increased adoption of low carbon technologies alter the exposure of the
grid to extreme weather? In addition, the PI will advance cross-disciplinary
graduate and undergraduate education with the development of a new course:
“Weather Risk and the Grid”. In conjunction with the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Science, the PI will engage in adult and K-12 educational activities
through the museum’s Science Café evening speaker
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will weave together new and existing
knowledge about natural hazards, power systems, electricity markets and utility
finance in order to explore interdependencies and feedbacks between the U.S.
power sector’s efforts to manage extreme weather and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. The investigator will establish an improved paradigm for modeling
weather risk in power systems that accounts for heterogeneity in natural
resources, climate, infrastructure, and human institutions. A unifying thread
throughout, and a major research objective, is the development and application
of open source systems analysis frameworks capable of representing the complex
dynamics of the grid at sufficient scale and resolution to model the effects of
extreme weather. This framework will be developed and applied across a
“portfolio” of four research projects, each of which addresses a different set
of weather risks and challenges facing grid stakeholders. A corresponding, major
goal of the educational and graduate training program is to expand the
relatively narrow role STEM students play in the electric power sector.
Participation in the proposed research and education program will equip a new
cohort of scientists and engineers with a unique combination of expertise and
relevant technical skills in earth systems engineering, power systems analysis,
and finance and economics, allowing them to contribute interdisciplinary
understanding and solutions to the grid’s “two front” challenge of managing
weather risk while quickly decarbonizing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.