* 2143488
* CAREER: SiC High-Frequency High-Voltage Power Converters with Partial-Discharge Mitigation and Electromagnetic Noise Containment
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Dong Dong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

The fast penetration of electric vehicles (EV), energy storage devices,
distributed renewable energy resources put many challenges on the state-of-art
ac power grid. Medium-voltage (MV) to high-voltage (HV) dc power network is
considered as a promising solution to enable high-efficient, high-reliable, and
low-carbon-emission energy transmission and delivery. High-density power
electronic systems which can provide MV/HV output are very critical to enabling
such MV/HV dc network. However, the existing system still suffers the bulky
volume, heavy weight, and low reliability. This NSF CAREER project aims to
address several fundamental challenges and bring transformative solutions and
technologies to improve the power-density of MV and HV power converters with
over an order of magnitude. This will be achieved by use of MV and HV wide-band-
gap power semiconductor devices and multiple miniaturized system integration
solution and tools. The intellectual merits of the project include many new
scientific knowledge of driving and protecting HV wide-band-gap power
semiconductor switching unit, comprehensive design tools of HV insulation system
for high-frequency power electronics, physics and numerical-based models for
predicting partial-discharge (PD) behaviors. The broader impacts of the project
include help drive the fast adoption of MV and HV high-frequency high-density
power conversion by bridging the industry knowledge gaps for emerging
applications and drive the energy eco-system toward zero-carbon emissions and
promote the US dominance in wide-band-gap power semiconductor industry and gain
the market leadership. &lt;br/&gt;To enable the order-of-magnitude power density
improvement of MV/HV power converters, this proposal identifies three critical
areas and scientific gaps as the starting point for the PI’s long-term career:
1) Characterization, modeling, and investigation of a comprehensive real-time
dynamic voltage balancing approach for stacking SiC semiconductors to enable a
MV/HV high-speed “super-switch” as the basic building block for MV/HV
converters. 2) Investigation of solid dielectric system and electric-field
(E-field) shaping design methodologies for internal/external PD-free high-
density power electronics integration; 3) Investigation of MV conductive EMI
noise containment and EMI filter design. In the program, comprehensive real-time
digital dynamic voltage balancing solutions for MV SiC MOSFETs in series will be
explored. Characterization and design tools of HV converter integration
considering E-field stress Management and PD mitigation will be developed. In
the end, HV planar EMI filter with HV feed-through connector for high-frequency
converter with integrated EM shielding solution will be developed. The proposed
program will collaborate with the researchers with the expertise on power device
physics, solid and gaseous dielectric materials and HV insulation, and EMI to
create fundamental cross-domain knowledge, design tools, innovative solutions,
and education materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.