* 2143473
* Scholars' Award: Human Motives - Egoism, hedonism, and the science of affect
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Peter Carruthers, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 177,884.00

Motivational hedonism is the view that all human actions are undertaken in
pursuit of pleasure or avoidance of displeasure. (Pleasure and displeasure are
here understood broadly to cover all positive and negative affective states,
including not just sensory pleasures and pains, but emotions of joy, happiness,
pride, and enjoyment, as well as those of guilt, fear, sadness, and boredom.) It
has a long and distinguished history, but has undergone a resurgence recently
with the current explosion of work in affective science and neuroscience. Many
in the field think that people make decisions by anticipating the positive and
negative emotions they are likely to experience in the future, and by choosing
to maximize the balance of positive over negative feelings. The upshot is a form
of egoism: all decisions are ultimately taken to benefit oneself, to create good
and avoid bad feelings in oneself. Even someone donating a kidney to a stranger
is really just acting to feel good for having done so. This result is morally
and socially destructive. The present project aims to show that the scientific
findings have been misinterpreted, thereby securing a place for genuine
altruism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop an extended
argument against motivational hedonism, but one that is grounded in affective
science. The view that pleasure and displeasure (more technically described as
positive and negative valence) are the common currency of all decision making
will not be challenged, but endorsed. However, the project will examine
different accounts of what valence isâ€”for example, whether it is a felt property
attaching to our experiences that we seek to maximize (hedonism), or rather
whether it is a representation of the value we assign to the experienced objects
and events themselves (which would secure altruism). The project will proceed in
part by integrating and explaining a wide range of results from affective
science and neuroscience, and in part through careful analysis of the nature of
representation in cognitive science generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.