* 2143943
* CAREER: Unsteady inertial dynamics of suspensions: transport, assembly and propulsion
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Bhargav Rallabandi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/28/2027
* USD 427,236.00

Controlling the movement of microscopic particles suspended in a liquid is
important in a variety of technical applications, including the manipulation of
cells in medical and analytical devices, the assembly of particles into
structures and specialized materials, and the development of self-propelled
particles. This CAREER award will support development of new simulation methods
to predict and control particle motion that is driven by rapid oscillations of
the suspension. The project will simulate individual particles, pairs of
particles and, ultimately, assemblies of particles, taking into account the way
interactions among the particles influence their motion. An array of educational
activities aimed at K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, will be integrated into the project.
Demonstrations of principles encountered in the research will be disseminated to
the public through the Ameal Moore Nature Center, and high-school students will
participate through hands-on projects that are integrated into training modules
for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to develop
a fundamental understanding of transport, assembly and propulsion in time-
periodically driven particulate suspensions. This will be achieved using
asymptotic theory, particle-dynamics simulations, and laboratory experiments.
The investigators will first develop a nonlinear theoretical framework for
particulate suspension dynamics under oscillatory flow, by invoking the
separation between fast and slow timescales, and accounting for visco-inertial
hydrodynamic interactions. Laboratory experiments will study how vibrated
suspensions assemble into planar and three-dimensional structures under
confinement. The assembly dynamics and the resulting structures will be
interpreted using particle simulations. Finally, the researchers will use
theoretical and computational techniques to investigate the role of inertia in
self-propulsion, where oscillatory flow is excited by undulations of the body of
the swimmer. Thus, the project will identify and quantify the mechanisms
controlling the flow of passive and active particulate suspensions under
oscillatory excitation. The fundamental scientific advances of the project and
its potential applications are expected to inspire new control strategies for
particle assembly and prompt further research on inertial particulate
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.