* 2143109
* CAREER: Modeling Group Human-Robot Interactions: Towards A Unified Data-Driven Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Marynel Vazquez, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2027
* USD 616,000.00

The long-term research goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
grant is to advance Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) so that robots can effectively
take part in social encounters with multiple users. While social robotics
research has traditionally focused on one-on-one interactions, real-world
applications typically require that robots interact in multi-party settings.
Examples include robots that are deployed as information providers (in public
kiosks or in museums), robots that work with group of people or with
individuals, and robots that assist children or elderly people (in homes or
elderly care centers). Such real-world contexts led to the emergence of group
Human-Robot Interaction as a new area of study. This project is for a data-
driven perspective for robot-group interactions that will allow robotic systems
to reason about individuals and groups. Additionally, this project includes
activities in pursuit of the researcherâ€™s long-term goals of making Computer
Science a more diverse and inclusive field, and increasing engagement in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics via Artificial Intelligence
technologies. For example, project activities include a partnership with the
Yale Peabody Museum to help educate high-school and college students from
primarily low-income communities, engage them in research, and engage the
general public with Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. These synergistic
activities complement the research by providing novel opportunities to study
group human-robot interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To unify many problems in
computationally understanding group HRI, this project comprises a three-pronged
approach that addresses: 1) data representation via graph abstractions, 2)
learning via Graph Neural Networks, and 3) data collection in a scalable manner
via self-supervision. The project will demonstrate this approach in a tangible
manner by improving how robots initiate and sustain interactions. First, the
team will study the problem of forecasting user engagement with a public robot
as an example of reasoning about individuals in consideration of social
relationships. Second, it will study the problem of identifying interaction
breakdowns in HRI as an example of reasoning holistically about groups. Taken
together, this project will demonstrate how the approach can be integrated with
robot decision making, validate experimental protocols for data collection and
algorithm evaluation in public settings, and advance our understanding of HRI at
a fundamental level so that robots can better take part in group social
encounters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.