* 2143993
* CAREER: Designing teacher professional development to leverage the brilliance of learners of color
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sherice Clarke, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 06/30/2027
* USD 299,474.00

Students of color must have access to robust and meaningful opportunities to
learn science in classrooms that center their assets and humanity. This CAREER
award aims to cultivate such spaces through designing and studying teacher
professional learning focused on pedagogical practices that engage students of
color meaningfully in science learning. These practices leverage students’
assets to foster growth in science and scientific habits of mind. This project
will support pre-service and practicing teachers in developing tools for
practice and reflection that focus on equity and highlighting the assets of
students of color in secondary science. The project will also support graduate
students in science education research as well as sharing findings with partner
school districts as part of the educational integration plan. This CAREER award
is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This project is also supported by the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program
supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and workforce
development through research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
a 5-year research-practice partnership, collaborating with a school district
that serves a 75% minoritized student body. The researcher will design and
iterate on a secondary science teacher professional development that is focused
on fostering Equity Schemas, which are schemata of interpretation that center
students’ assets and pedagogical moves that advance equity through meaningful
participation in science. Using design-based research this project will examine
fundamental questions about teacher learning and development around equity in
science, and how it contributes to shifts in equity-oriented schemas and
practices in the teaching of science. The project will investigate how teacher
schemas and practices raise the rigor of science teaching and help to promote
interest, engagement and learning of science for students of color.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.