* 2143061
* CAREER: A Unified Compiler for Sparse Array Operations and Relational Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Fredrik Berg Kjoelstad, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2027
* USD 220,305.00

Society is increasingly dependent on scalable data analytics to solve societal
and industrial problems. However the data being analyzed and the computers being
used are both becoming so diverse and irregular that it is much harder to
deliver efficient software. To drive innovation in both data analytics and
hardware development, computer systems are needed that take advantage of the
structure and sparsity of the data and the capabilities of new hardware.
However, taking advantage of these properties and capabilities with current
approaches makes the software a lot more complicated. The project's novelties
are the development of a software system that automatically specializes itself
to combine diverse and irregular data sources and to target diverse hardware.
The project's impacts are a 10x-100x performance improvement across a large
class of irregular data analytics computations, including sparse tensor algebra,
sparse array operations, and relational algebra. Even greater performance
improvements will be possible by taking advantage of emerging specialized
hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores new programming language
constructs and a new unified compiler system for sparse tensor algebra, sparse
array operations (e.g., sparse NumPy), and relational algebra. The unified
compiler combines three separate languages that describe respectively the
application logic (e.g., a relational query followed by sparse array
operations), the data representations (e.g., relational tries and sparse arrays
stored in compressed form), and the organization of the computation (e.g., to
target a GPU equipped with specialized tensor processing hardware). To achieve
these goals, the project will develop a unified compiler theory for sparse array
operations and relational algebra, develop new data representations for
relations, and develop techniques to compile these applications to specialized
accelerators. Success of this project will lead to new flexible data analytics
systems that port across both data structures and hardware and that are orders
of magnitude faster than current general approaches without loss of
generality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.