* 2143478
* CAREER: Investigation of the Cellular and Physiological Effects of Chloroplast/Mitochondrial Iron Export in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jeeyon Jeong, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2027
* USD 344,805.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is a mineral nutrient
required for virtually all forms of life, including plants. However, iron is
toxic when present in excess or improperly distributed within the cell or the
organism. To cope with such paradox, organisms have evolved delicate strategies
to tightly control iron. Uncovering the processes of iron regulation will
generate knowledge fundamental to biology. Meanwhile, iron deficiency is a
serious public health issue that affects nearly half of the global population.
Staple crops, which are not rich sources of iron, are the main dietary source of
iron worldwide. Therefore, to sustainably solve iron malnutrition, it is
essential to understand the molecular mechanisms of iron regulation in plants
and apply the knowledge for biofortification, the process of enhancing
nutritional value of crops via selective breeding or genetic engineering. This
project focuses on investigating iron regulation in plant mitochondria and
chloroplasts, which are specialized intracellular compartments central to plant
metabolism and require high levels of iron for their function. The expected
outcomes of this project will provide knowledge significant for its scientific
merit and critical insights that can be applied to improve agriculture and human
health. Furthermore, the proposed educational activities to enhance authentic
research experience for undergraduate students and the community-based learning
non-major biology course for K-12 outreach will foster the growth of next
generation scientists and science
communicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria and chloroplasts are the site
of vital metabolic processes that require iron. These organelles are also
involved in sensing iron and integrating signals to coordinate metabolic and
physiological responses to changes in iron levels. Meanwhile, iron must be
tightly controlled in the mitochondria and chloroplasts, as they are prone to
damage caused by the highly reactive nature of dysregulated iron under aerobic
conditions. This project investigates iron regulation in plant mitochondria and
chloroplasts, and its impact at the cellular and physiological levels, by
examining Arabidopsis mutants defective in exporting iron from the mitochondria
and chloroplasts. Specifically, abnormal membrane invaginations detected in
iron-deficient mutants defective in mitochondrial and chloroplast iron export
will be analyzed to test the hypothesis that these structures contribute to
intercellular iron transport using cell biology and advanced imaging techniques.
Membrane trafficking has not been previously studied in the context of
mitochondrial and chloroplast iron and will advance our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of plant iron homeostasis. The potential functional
interactions between the chloroplast/mitochondrial iron exporter and proteins
that sequester iron in chloroplasts and mitochondria will also be investigated
using molecular genetics, biochemistry, and proteomic approaches. Such analyses
will provide critical knowledge on inter-organellar iron homeostasis in
mitochondria and chloroplasts. Overall, this project incorporates multi-
disciplinary approaches and will contribute towards a more comprehensive
understanding of plant iron homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.