* 2143722
* CAREER: Hitchin morphisms, relative Langlands duality, and automorphic L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Tsao-Hsien Chen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2027
* USD 40,796.00

This project sits naturally at the intersection of representation theory and
geometry. Representation theory is a branch of mathematics devoted to the study
of symmetries that occur throughout mathematics and science. For example, the
study of symmetries in three-dimensional space or more generally the study of
continuous symmetries of mathematical objects and structures, known as
representation theory of Lie groups, or the study of symmetries of solutions of
polynomial equations, known as Galois theory. Methods from geometry have been
very successful in solving problems in representation theory. One of the main
goals of the project is to study questions in representation theory using
geometric methods. In this project the PI will develop and use geometric tools
to attack several longstanding problems on: Higgs bundles and representations of
the fundamental group, representations of Lie groups and symmetric varieties,
and the Langlands program. The education component of the project will create a
vertically integrated learning environment for representation theory, number
theory, and algebraic geometry at the University of Minnesota, from which
students and researchers at all levels will benefit. The plans include supports
for outreach activities, development of courses and learning seminars, and
summer programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the PI will conduct
research on the following projects: (1) Hitchin morphisms for higher dimensional
varieties, (2) Real groups, symmetric varieties, and the relative Langlands
duality, and (3) Fourier transforms, automorphic L-functions, and the Braverman-
Kazhdan program. In project (1), the PI will develop the theory of Hitchin
morphisms for higher dimensional varieties. This project is closely related to
deep questions in invariant theory, algebraic geometry, and representations of
the fundamental group. In project (2), the PI will explore connections between
the geometry of real reductive groups and the algebraic geometry of symmetric
varieties and apply them to the study of geometric Satake equivalence and the
geometric Langlands correspondence for real groups and the relative Langlands
duality conjectures. In project (3), the PI will systematically study the
Braverman-Kazhdan program on meromorphic continuation and functional equations
of automorphic L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.