* 2143035
* CAREER: Microbial Activity and Chemoautotrophy in the Deep Sea: Who, How, and How Much?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Anne Dekas, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2027
* USD 527,849.00

The deep sea, defined as deeper than 200 m, is the largest and least explored
habitat on the surface of our planet. It covers nearly two-thirds of the Earth's
surface, contains approximately 75% of marine water by volume, and is home to
about 55% of all marine microorganisms. Deep-sea microorganisms can play
important roles in shaping global chemistry and climate, for example producing
and consuming greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide).
However, the microbiology of deep-sea waters is understudied relative to that of
the surface ocean. Recent data suggests a much more diverse and active microbial
community at depth than previously thought, but much remains to be known. For
instance, recent estimates suggest that approximately 60% of the microbial
species in the deep sea are novel. This project investigates the metabolic
activity of deep-sea microorganisms, focusing on chemoautotrophy and the carbon
cycle. Chemoautotrophy is a microbial metabolism in which inorganic carbon
(e.g., carbon dioxide) is converted to sugar and biomass using chemical energy.
This project uses several state-of-the-art sampling and analyses techniques to
determine which species conduct chemoautotrophy (who?), what types of chemical
energy support it (how?), and at what rate it occurs (how much?) throughout the
deep sea. Answering these questions provides insight into deep-sea microbial
ecology and quantitative data on the sources and sinks of carbon in deep waters.
Results will advance our understanding of the ability of our oceans to sequester
carbon over long timescales. This work benefits society through the implications
of its findings for our ability to predict and mitigate climate change, as well
as its educational mission, which includes training diverse high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in interdisciplinary, climate-relevant
science through one-on-one mentorship, hands-on coursework, and the initiation
of an annual regional symposium featuring student research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates uncultured microorganisms'
genetic potential and activity in the mesopelagic and bathypelagic oceanographic
layers (200 to 4000 m water depth) to characterize deep-sea microbiology and
address a discrepancy in the marine carbon cycle, namely, that respiration rates
consistently exceed estimates of vertical inputs of carbon to the dark ocean.
Chemoautotrophy may explain at least part of this discrepancy, but known types
of chemoautotrophy (e.g., coupled to ammonia and nitrite oxidation) are
insufficient to bridge the gap, suggesting novel chemoautotrophs and diverse
coupled catabolisms. The overarching hypotheses are that (1) deep-sea
microorganisms are more active than currently appreciated, (2) the organic
carbon required to support this activity is provided, at least in part, by
higher rates of endogenous inorganic carbon fixation, and (3) carbon fixation is
performed by more phylogenetically and metabolically diverse
chemoautotrophs/mixotrophs than currently known. This study uses high-pressure
sampling containers during two deep-sea oceanographic expeditions, metagenomics,
metatranscriptomics, and stable-isotope experiments coupled to single-cell
isotope analyses via nanoSIMS to (1) quantify microbial anabolic activity in
general and chemoautotrophy, mixotrophy, and heterotrophy specifically at bulk
and single-cell levels, (2) characterize the diversity and distribution of genes
and transcripts involved in chemoautotrophy and heterotrophy, (3) identify novel
chemoautotrophs and mixotrophs and quantify their contribution to carbon
cycling, and (4) investigate the ability of a major chemoautotrophic deep-sea
lineage, the Marine Group I Thaumarchaeota, to utilize organic matter. The
results have the potential to reveal novel functions in uncultured microbes and
change our understanding of marine carbon cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.