* 2143979
* CAREER: Progression from soot to nanocrystalline carbon in elevated temperature flames
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Joaquin Camacho, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/28/2027
* USD 508,122.00

Soot formation remains a crucial factor in combustion performance, public health
and the environment. There is a rising need to characterize soot formation in
extremely hot flames due to prominence of kerosene-fueled rockets, oxy-fuel
combustion systems and other emerging combustion processes. The scientific
objective is to shed light on soot formation in flames hotter than traditionally
studied. A complementary experimental and computational modeling approach will
be used to isolate fundamental phenomena unique to this soot formation regime.
Imminent space cargo and tourism enterprises require soot models for rocket
thruster design and particulate emissions predictions. Nanocrystalline carbon
forms during rocket flight powered by kerosene and other hydrocarbon
propellants. A more thorough consideration of performance and unknown
environmental impacts (i.e. public health, climate, etc.) is facilitated by
studying soot formation at elevated temperature. High temperature oxyfuel
combustion, preheated air systems and enriched air processing are also examples
of emerging combustion technologies operating hotter than conventional
combustion. In terms of societal impact, the urgent need for more inclusive
participation in graduate school and academic careers will be enhanced through
collaboration with the McNair program and Bridges Community College program.
Virtual teaching modules for thermofluids theory and applications will also be
developed to increase participation of local high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantification of competing soot formation
processes remains a challenge. Fuel-rich flame chemistry models leading to gas-
phase soot precursors vary widely for conventional combustion temperatures and
no studies for elevated temperature flames exist. The same can be said for the
underlying aerosol dynamics and evolution in soot nanostructure. The central
hypothesis is that quantification of reversible soot precursor reactions,
reduction in collision efficiency, extreme particle graphitization and, perhaps,
ionization processes are required to accurately capture soot behavior at
elevated temperatures. At the conclusion of the proposed activities the PI will
have: (i) systematically measured individual PAH profiles and soot particle size
distributions in well-characterized laminar and turbulent laboratory flames;
(ii) characterized evolution in carbon nanostructure and morphology for
particles formed in elevated temperature flames; (iii) assessed the role of
ionization processes on soot formation in this regime; (iv) incorporated new
experimental observations into new models for higher temperature soot formation;
(v) demonstrated unique higher-temperature processes governing the transition
from soot to newly discovered nanocrystalline carbon structure. The proposed
project is significant because self-consistent development of soot formation
theory will be facilitated by the comprehensive experimental and modeling
approach for the benefit of conventional and higher-temperature
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.