* 2143058
* CAREER: Algorithms Foundations of Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Ling Ren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2027
* USD 218,864.00

As cryptocurrencies gain popularity, their underlying technology, commonly
referred to as distributed ledgers or blockchains, shows great potential for
many other applications. However, the research community's understanding of
blockchains is still limited from an algorithm foundation viewpoint. This
project develops a more accessible, precise, rigorous, and practical algorithmic
foundation for blockchains. The project's novelty is to take a principled
approach to identify and study blockchains' key innovations. The project's
broader significance and importance are establishing the precise security of
blockchains, unifying blockchains into the existing foundation of distributed
algorithms, and bridging blockchain research across related fields. This project
also includes an educational component, in which K-12 and undergraduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups in computing, are
involved with the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an
algorithmic foundation for blockchains deeply rooted in decades of research on
fault-tolerant consensus. By contrasting blockchains with classic consensus
protocols, the project focuses on the key innovations of blockchains, such as
the support for dynamic participation, the use of peer-to-peer networks, and
resilience to message loss. The project develops algorithmic foundations to
reason about these properties and designs new protocols to achieve them without
incurring the drawbacks of current blockchains. Based on these insights, the
project also revisits the foundation of fault-tolerant distributed systems and
investigates what assumptions and requirements are suitable for these systems in
the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.