* 2143668
* CAREER: Singular and Global Solutions to Nonlinear Elliptic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Connor Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2027
* USD 183,588.00

Physical laws and curvature conditions are written in the language of partial
differential equations (PDE). Solutions to these equations are often singular
(non-smooth), which limits the reliability of numerical approximations of
solutions and presents significant challenges in their mathematical analysis. In
this project, the PI will investigate the qualitative behavior of solutions to
nonlinear elliptic PDE that play a central role in physics and geometry, with
particular emphasis on the construction of singular and global examples. The
project includes an educational component that involves researchers at many
career stages through (a) the supervision of postdoctoral researchers and Ph.D.
students; (b) the organization of a quarterly weekend conference to train
students in scientific communication; (c) the organization of a winter workshop
aimed at graduate and advanced undergraduate students, with week-long short
courses by experts on research topics related to this project; and (d) the
writing of a book based on advanced topics courses given by the PI, with
significant input from the students who attended these
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, the main goals of the
project are to (1) construct new examples of nonlinear entire solutions to
variants of the minimal surface equation, and prove related Bernstein-type
theorems; (2) investigate singular structures that appear in solutions to fully
nonlinear elliptic equations such as the Monge-Ampere and quadratic Hessian
equations, motivated by applications to complex geometry, optimal transport, and
meteorology; and (3) construct new examples of singular minimizers of classical
variational integrals in low dimensions, and discover structure conditions that
prevent the formation of singularities. The equations under investigation share
features (degenerate ellipticity and the existence of singular solutions) that
limit the usefulness of standard techniques. To address these challenges, the PI
will pursue new approaches that unite several areas of mathematics, and build
sophisticated technical tools to carry out these
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.