* 2143123
* CAREER: A Role for Mechanics in Regulating Cellular Crosstalk within Intervertebral Joints of the Spine
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Devina Walter, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2027
* USD 568,096.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will support research on novel methods of
mechanically regulated cellular communication in the spinal column. The research
will focus on the intervertebral disc joint, a cushion-like structure between
vertebrae, which provides mobility to the spinal column. This cushion also
relies on diffusion of nutrients through the cartilage endplate. Diseases of the
intervertebral disc joint in the spinal column are complex in nature. It is
difficult to isolate the specific pathology to one cell type or tissue. However,
treatments targeting the intervertebral disc joint of the spine have commonly
focused on a single tissue. They do not target neighboring tissue structures
such as the cartilage endplate, although lesions there are directly associated
with joint disease. Recent studies provide evidence that the cartilage endplate
is communicating with its surroundings. This suggests an active role for
cartilage endplate in the tissue communication of the intervertebral disc joint.
This research award will build a foundation of new experimental knowledge on the
active role of the cartilage endplate. Specifically, the biomechanical processes
regulating cellular communication between tissues of the disc joint. The broader
impacts of this research support a longer-term goal to identify better treatment
for chronic joint diseases such as back pain. The work will also address a
critical need to educate ethnically diverse and socio-economically disadvantaged
women students in STEM. The research will be directly integrated with the
educational and outreach program. At the university and high school level, it
will facilitate an understanding of musculoskeletal tissues via tissue
engineering applications. More broadly in human health, a program called
“Skeleton School” will teach pre-school students how exercise influences our
skeletal tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is use
novel cell-based human models to determine the effects of 1) specific mechanical
microenvironmental conditions experienced within the disc joint (e.g.,
stiffness, compression or tension) on healthy and diseased human cartilage cell
phenotype and secretion of extracellular vesicles; and 2) the effects of
mechanically regulated cartilage endplate-derived extracellular vesicles on the
composition and mechanical properties of extracellular matrix produced by human
intervertebral disc cells in order to evaluate cartilage endplate-intervertebral
disc crosstalk. In addition, the role of key mechano-sensors (TRPV ion
channels/integrins) involved in mechanotransduction and the mechanical and
protein profiles of human cartilage-endplate derived extracellular vesicles
generated will be validated. These experiments aim to target the complex
mechano-biological interplay of “all tissue structures” within the disc joint
focusing on a novel role for the cartilage endplate in joint physiology. This
project will allow the PI to explore novel areas of mechanobiology centered on
joint crosstalk and intercellular communication via mechanically regulated
extracellular vesicles while establishing a long-term career in musculoskeletal
mechanobiology and pathophysiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.