* 2143004
* CAREER: Seasonal migration as an ecological barrier to gene flow between hybridizing species
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Kira Delmore, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/28/2027
* USD 411,789.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the role of
migration in maintaining and generating biodiversity using state-of-the-art
tracking and genomic technology. Individuals from nearly every animal group
migrate and billions of individuals, migrate thousands of kilometers each year.
Considerable variation in migration route has been documented but what is less
well understood is the underlying genetic basis for that variation and the
consequences for maintaining species boundaries or even promoting
diversification of new species. This research will make use of a global network
of radio towers to collect data on migration routes in the Swainson’s thrush, a
migratory bird with eastern- and western-migrating subspecies. Individuals of
this species, like many others, migrate from breeding grounds in the
northwestern North America via central America and south into Chile each year.
This project will evaluate the underlying genetics of migration route and the
consequences of routes intermediate between the classical eastern and western
routes for survival and the maintenance of the subspecies. Many of the radio
towers are hosted by schools. Thus, research themes and infrastructure from this
project will also be used as inspiration for teaching resources for elementary,
secondary, and undergraduate students across the Americas. Education modules
focused on migration and evolution will be designed for teachers, provided in
English and Spanish, and offered to students internationally across the
migration routes of the thrush. These modules will integrate ‘nature of science’
pedagogy and highlight the role of under-represented groups in STEM research
while featuring international coordination as key to the protection of migrating
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration’s importance for speciation was
proposed nearly three decades ago but has received far less attention. Many
migrants breed next to one another but use different migratory routes. These
routes are largely genetically determined and often involve navigation around
large geographic barriers. Accordingly, hybrids in these systems are predicted
to take intermediate routes that bring them over these barriers, reducing their
fitness and gene flow between species. This project will test migration’s role
in speciation. Specifically, state of the art infrastructure for tracking birds
and genomic resources developed to genotype hundreds of individuals at low
coverage will be used to (1) compare survival rates of parental and hybrid
thrushes, (2) identify genetic variants underlying migratory traits, and (3)
test if selection against hybrids is acting on these variants. No direct test of
migration’s role in speciation has been conducted to date, leaving critical gaps
in our understanding of speciation, given that differences in migration are
taxonomically widespread and could help explain the predominance of young
species pairs in the temperate region. Migration could also be a compelling
example of an extrinsic postzygotic isolating barrier, given that reductions in
hybrid fitness derive from mismatches between their intermediate behavior and
parental environments. Extrinsic isolation is thought to be important in
speciation, but its extent in nature is unknown, especially in vertebrates. This
work will reach fields beyond speciation as well, including the genetics of
complex behavior and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.