* 2143552
* CAREER: Using Positive Emotion Regulation to Design Everyday Technologies that Promote Well-being
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* JungKyoon Yoon, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2027
* USD 39,153.00

The project advances human-centered design research by integrating positive
emotion regulation (PER) theory into the design of future technologies. Our
daily use of smartphones, appliances, and social media can engender pleasurable
moments, but they do not inherently lead to improved well-being. People adapt to
the joys of using technologies, then find them mundane. Some positive emotions
can cause deconstructive behaviors, such as over-engagement on social media. The
project investigates designing technologies to support positive emotion
regulation in young adults, a population whose mental health can be impacted by
limited emotion regulation skills and challenges to accessing traditional health
interventions. Practical design methods and tools for the development of such
technologies are being generated by incorporating perspectives of design
professionals through a series of co-creative workshops and seminars. A toolkit
and methods reflecting insights into emotion regulation is being developed and
disseminated to help designers create innovative and evidence-based emotion-
managing technologies. The project promotes STEM education for underserved
students through novel community-engagement programs that encourage students to
think critically about how everyday technologies shape human emotion and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores how positive emotions can be
effectively regulated through technology and how technology-mediated positive
emotions can contribute to well-being. While traditional research assumes a
direct impact of technology on user emotions (e.g., manipulation of an
artifact’s appearance), this project builds on findings that the impact of
technology on emotion regulation is indirect, because it is mediated by users’
activities (e.g., visualizing positive things one did/will do with the
technology). Through co-creative, research-through-design methods, the project
investigates positive emotion regulation by: (1) analyzing the roles of everyday
technology in reinforcing and prolonging positive emotional experiences; (2)
developing interactive digital and tangible artifact prototypes (e.g.,
interactive installations, IoT devices, and apps); (3) evaluating prototypes’
effects on well-being; and (4) translating resulting insights into design
methods and tools that support the development of PER technologies to promote
well-being. The project discovers new understandings of the relationships
between technologies, activities, positive emotions, and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.