* 2143933
* CAS: CAREER: Bridging Photoacids and Photobases with Schiff base Platforms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kana Takematsu, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2027
* USD 458,614.00

In this CAREER project, jointly funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Kana Takematsu of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Bowdoin College is developing new
classes of molecules that are designed to undergo the exchange of protons in
response to light. The light-initiated movement of protons has myriad chemical
implications, including in the harnessing of solar energy. The goal of this
research is to study how the chemical characteristics of these molecules and
their environment affect their ability to exchange protons effectively,
information that will be used to design photo-acids and photo-bases for targeted
applications. The project will be conducted by a team of undergraduate students
from diverse backgrounds, supporting an inclusive research culture that fosters
science identity and belonging in students. Laboratory modules will be created
and embedded into courses to introduce students to the field of photochemistry,
and students will have the opportunity to become part of the broader scientific
community through collaborative research projects and meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photo-acids and photo-bases allow temporal and spatial
control of proton donation and abstraction via light. Designing photo-acids and
photo-bases for desired applications requires a fundamental understanding of the
driving forces and solvent parameters that promote excited state proton transfer
(ESPT). The proposed project utilizes the chemical modularity of Schiff base
chemistry to build photo-acids and photo-bases for detailed mechanistic studies
of ESPT and excited state intramolecular proton transfer. Inherent in this
design is a carbon-nitrogen double bond capable of photo-isomerization that can
potentially trigger a structural rearrangement coupled to ESPT. In this project,
Aim 1 will test whether the Schiff base template provides a suitable scaffold
for naphthol photo-acid derivatives. Aim 2 will test whether the Schiff base
template provides a suitable scaffold for quinoline photo-base derivatives. And
Aim 3 builds on these platforms to test whether carbon-nitrogen double bond
photo-isomerization can be coupled to ESPT through addition of pyridine-based
proton acceptors and phenol-based proton donors to the
scaffold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.