* 2143718
* CAREER: Examining bacterial filamentation as a mechanism for cell-to-cell spreading in an animal host
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Robert Luallen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/28/2027
* USD 406,960.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial pathogens pose a
continuing threat to health and agriculture, and a deeper understanding of how
bacteria spread in a live animal can inform future therapies. Small transparent
nematodes offer an opportunity to directly visualize bacterial infection and
dissemination in the context of a live animal, allowing for the discovery of
novel mechanisms that may be too difficult to visualize in more complex animals
like mammals. This proposal uses wild-isolated, microscopic nematodes and their
associated microbiota to uncover novel host-microbe interactions. It focuses on
dissecting the mechanisms governing a new paradigm for intracellular bacterial
spreading between host cells, which was directly observed in a bacteria-infected
wild nematode. The results from this project will serve as a technical roadmap
for determining whether this paradigm for cell-cell spreading and the genetic
pathway that controls it are conserved among other bacteria, which could provide
novel strategies for treating bacterial infections and controlling environmental
bacteria. Early-stage undergraduates will conduct discovery-based research for
this proposal and then create research-based STEM curriculum to teach at local
high schools. This will create a cycle of research awareness among these
undergraduates to help eliminate persistent psychological barriers about the
accessibility of STEM research, especially among first-generation college
students and those from low income areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on a new intracellular bacterial pathogen, Bordetella atropi, that was
observed in vivo to use a novel mechanism for cell-to-cell spreading in its host
nematode Oscheius tipulae. After intestinal cell invasion, B. atropi converts
from a coccobacillus to a filamentous morphology in order to invade multiple
neighboring epithelial cells. Filamentation by B. atropi requires the glucolipid
pathway, a conserved glucose-sensing pathway used by bacteria to detect a
nutrient-rich environment. This proposal will investigate the hypothesis that B.
atropi uses nutrient sensing to detect host cell invasion, inhibit septation,
and trigger filamentation for spreading to neighboring intestinal cells. The
specific aims are to (1) dissect the role of the glucolipid pathway in
controlling filamentation through gene expression analysis, metabolite analysis,
and cell biology; (2) understand the infection process of B. atropi by
determining the fate of the lateral host membranes and identify host factors
that promote filamentation, and (3) create a lab-based workshop that uses wild
nematode sampling to discover other bacteria that filament in rich conditions
and new intracellular bacterial pathogens of nematodes. This final education aim
will have early-stage undergraduates conduct the research and then teach their
discoveries at local high schools, making STEM-based research more accessible to
young students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.