* 2143723
* CAREER: Acousto-Bioelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Albert Kim, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2022
* USD 408,250.00

This CAREER project is a part of a global effort to conquer cancer, the second
leading cause of death. Despite the enormous investments in research and
development, there have been scant clinical successes as a viable cancer
therapy. Recent advancements in cancer therapy have resulted in the emergence of
implanted medical devices (IMDs) into feasible medicines, owing to their
capacity to localize treatments, albeit limited in numbers. However, currently
available IMDs-mediated cancer treatments are often confined to a single, non-
replenishable administration per therapy. These limitations, along with a number
of risks such as painful surgery, infection risk in the catheter, and device
failure, have generally hampered the usage of IMDs in cancer treatment. More
importantly, cancer cannot be effectively managed with a single therapeutic
approach due to its complex, diverse, and heterogeneous nature. As such, this
CAREER project investigates a versatile engineering solution in the form of an
acoustically driven implantable microsystem that provides a tailored combination
of multimodal cancer therapeutics: oxygen, chemotherapy drugs, and light.
Combined, this project aims to establish the field of ‘Acousto-Bioelectronics’
that spurs new theory and understanding for the next generation of IMDs.
Furthermore, the project integrates the research with educational venues by
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, with a particular emphasis on the
underrepresented minorities and female students, developing interdisciplinary
curricula, and creating pedagogical resources ranging from fundamental theory to
hands-on activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While IMDs are transforming modern
healthcare, they are unable to cure cancer at the moment due to their short
lifetime. This is compounded by the fact that many cancers can relapse or spread
metastatically. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to leverage
cross-cutting innovations from the domain of engineering and healthcare fields
to create an ultrasonically-powered implantable microsystem that enables a
tailored combination of multimodal cancer therapies. This study (1) elucidates
the untapped potential of Platonic solid structures for a highly efficient
omnidirectional ultrasonic powering scheme for IMDs, utilizing a unique
3D-printable barium titanate ultrasonic receiver. (2) Providing adequate power
via ultrasound, the microsystem enables the in-situ generation of oxygen,
cisplatin, and light through controlled electrochemical and photochemical
processes. It is hence called Oxygen Enhanced Chemo-Photodynamic Therapy. (3)
The microsystem can potentially realize clinically-proven superadditive
anticancer effect – stronger than any single therapy or theoretical combination.
The microsystem-mediated multimodal cancer therapy would be validated through a
comprehensive evaluation by employing clinically relevant models (in vitro and
in vivo cancer models). The outcome of this project justifies the development of
the IMD-mediated multimodal cancer therapy that will potentially help patients
suffering from aggressive and fatal cancer types with limited treatment
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.