* 2143897
* Novel bZIP Transcription Factors and Redox Biology in the Oomycete Phytophthora Infestans
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2025
* USD 989,996.00

Organisms must be able to protect their cells from damage caused by reactive
oxygen species (ROS), which are chemicals that may arise as a byproduct of
normal metabolism or stressful growth conditions such as starvation. High
concentrations of ROS can damage biomolecules within cells, while lower levels
may serve as signals for regulating the cell's machinery. The principal goal of
this project is to study a novel mechanism that Phytophthora infestans may use
to perceive and respond to ROS. P. infestans is a notorious plant pathogen and a
member of the oomycetes, an economically important but under-studied group of
microbes. Oomycetes produce a novel protein regulator of gene expression that
contains the amino acid cysteine in its DNA-binding domain. ROS are hypothesized
to alter the chemical form of the cysteine, altering the protein's effect on
gene expression. Understanding this process may lead to new strategies for
protecting crops from disease caused by oomycetes, as well as novel switches for
engineering gene expression and increasing yields in industrial microbes or
plants. The project will also contribute to the mentorship and training of
students in STEM fields by integrating research with education and outreach in
communities with high minority demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior studies
of bZIP transcription factors from model plants and animals identified residues
in their DNA binding domains that contact the double helix, including a so-
called "invariant asparagine." However, in about half of the bZIPs of
Phytophthora infestans and other oomycetes this asparagine is replaced by
cysteine. Knockdowns of the novel cysteine-containing bZIPs resulted in poor
tolerance of oxidative stress, leading to the proposition that the cysteine is a
redox switch affecting cellular defense networks. This will be tested by a
multidisciplinary approach integrating protein biochemistry, bioinformatics,
cell biology, metabolite analysis, and molecular genetics. Experiments will
define the promoter motifs targeted by the bZIPs, dimerization partners of the
bZIPs, and how DNA binding and dimerization are affected by cysteine oxidation.
Cellular markers of the redox state will place bZIP behavior in context with
what transpires during growth and development. Overall, the research will reveal
how regulatory mechanisms have evolved during the eukaryotic radiation and help
define pathways affecting growth and development in
oomycetes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.