* 2143021
* CAREER: Transforming Distribution System Situational Awareness via Continuous-Time Adaptive Data Fusion
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Yuzhang Lin, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the path to the clean energy
future of the nation, the electric power industry is witnessing a massive shift
from centralized fossil fuel generation to distributed renewable energy
generation. Power distribution systems are responsible for connecting customers
to the main grid and balancing the instantaneous generation-load mismatch at
each customer. As power flows in the distribution systems become highly volatile
and bidirectional, it is of crucial importance to gain situational awareness in
real time such that grid operators can assess and enhance the renewable energy
hosting capacity, and customers can reliably, resiliently, and efficiently
buy/sell electricity to meet their needs. As a variety of data sources are being
populated in distribution systems, the fundamental question remains how to
extract and integrate the information to construct a complete picture of
distribution system operation. Existing methods have not fully considered the
complicated measurement environment pertaining to power distribution systems,
and cannot produce accurate and reliable results when the measurements have
diverse sampling rates, sampling times, accuracy classes, and with limited
communication support. This project will develop transformative concepts and
methodologies to comprehensively address the outstanding challenges in tracking
the operating states of distribution systems. The outcomes of the project will
fully bring out the potential of various sensor assets for distribution system
situational awareness, which will serve as the foundation of intelligent
decision making processes for accommodating the volatile but pervasive
distributed renewable energy generation across the grid. The project will
feature a Seeable Electrical Energy Distribution (SEED) program to integrate
research with education. It will develop a simulation and visualization platform
for a close-to-real synthetic distribution system “operating” in real time 24/7,
providing educational experience to the wide public that has not been possible
without entering control rooms of a utility company. The platform will also
serve as a public data portal for researchers around the nation, facilitating
data availability and research reproducibility across the whole technical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State estimation is a key technology for
enabling the situational awareness of distribution systems and massive
integration of distributed renewable energy generation. The existing
distribution system state estimation methods largely inherit mature concepts
from state estimation of high-voltage transmission systems, and do not fully
consider or address the unique complicated measurement environment in
distribution systems, including the unknown continuous-time state transition
model, asynchronous and multi-rate measurements, unknown and time-varying
measurement error statistics, and limited sampling rates and communication
bandwidth. This project will propose a revolutionary distribution system state
estimation paradigm that will transform the situational awareness of
distribution systems for accommodating massive and pervasive renewable energy
integration and demand response. We will develop new concepts and methodologies
that result in a holistic solution allowing 1) learning-based continuous-time
system dynamics modeling, 2) seamless fusion of asynchronous and multi-rate
measurements arriving at any continuous time instants, 3) adaptive near-optimal
estimation under unknown and time-varying measurement error statistics, and 4)
proactive scheduling of sensor sampling times to maximize observability and
minimize communication congestion using clustering. With the continuous-time
data fusion feature, the proposed paradigm will replace the conventional
discrete-time step-by-step estimation paradigm and reshape the field of
distribution system state estimation. In a unique Seeable Electrical Energy
Distribution (SEED) program, generative adversarial network will be exploited to
synthesize distributed renewable energy and load data, which cannot be
distinguished from real-world data yet do not have proprietary issues and can be
freely distributed and reused by the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.