* 2143041
* CAREER: Towards room-temperature quantum simulators enabled by halide perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Wei Bao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2027
* USD 291,039.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Quantum effects are any phenomena that typically happen at
small scales and cannot be explained by classical mechanics. There are many
important research problems involving quantum effects that classical computers
cannot fully solve. For example, the rational design of complex materials can
require understanding the collective behavior of many atomic components and
their quantum interactions. A quantum simulator is a device that can actively
consider the complex interactions (quantum effects) to model these real-world
complex systems in a programmable fashion. However, traditionally, these quantum
simulators have to work at ultralow temperatures, making them expensive to
prepare and operate. This CAREER project aims to transform the field of quantum
simulators through a combined research and education program focused on novel
optical materials and their integration approaches for realizing quantum
simulators at room temperature. Specifically, the PI will synthesize novel new
optical materials, integrate them with photonic structures, demonstrate
functional room-temperature quantum simulators, and use them to study the rich
exotic materials properties that are previously challenging to fully understand.
An integrated education program will also expand quantum science and technology
accessibility in Nebraska by working with teachers via workshops and labs to
provide them with a scientific frontier perspective. Additionally, this program
will engage undergraduate and high school students in workshops and internships,
with a particular focus on first-generation college students and students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. These efforts aim to increasing the
diversity and competitiveness of the future scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to reveal quantum phenomena previously observed only at low-
temperature at room temperature (RT) with excitonic halide perovskites materials
in the optical cavities and build a competitive quantum optics education program
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Strong coupling between excitons and
photons in high-quality optical cavities produces a new hybrid half-matter,
half-light quasiparticle called exciton-polariton that exhibits ultrasmall
effective mass inherited from the photon and significant nonlinearity inherited
from the exciton. These qualities allow exciton-polaritons to undergo a
transition to Bose-Einstein condensation at RT, potentially enabling a broad
range of applications, such as optical analog quantum simulators and low
threshold polariton lasers. The project will significantly expand our
understanding of how excitons interact at RT and form stable polariton quantum
liquid in these new perovskite material systems. It also provides a fantastic
photonic platform for exploring the macroscopic quantum phenomenon at RT without
requiring complicated and expensive ultracold atoms, cryostats, or molecular
beam epitaxy growth vacuum chambers. Lastly, the tunable mode splitting in
perovskite microcavities behaves as an effective magnetic field on photon spin,
enabling studies on synthetic non-Abelian gauge fields and topological physics
at RT. This research, which will utilize nanofabrication, materials synthesis,
and optical spectroscopy methods to study halide perovskite materials, promises
to transform the field of RT polaritonics and quantum simulators. It will also
undergird an integrated education program focusing on quantum photonics. A
graduate course, various outreach pathways, and a K-12 teacher workshop, all
featuring research frontiers in quantum photonics, will be developed with the
ultimate goal of building a diverse, globally competitive workforce pipeline on
quantum science, a critical knowledge frontier for the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.