* 2143636
* CAREER: Uncovering natural metabolite influences on anti-bacteriophage defenses
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Joseph Gerdt, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 12/31/2026
* USD 501,291.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria can get “sick” too; they
can be infected by bacteriophage viruses (or “phages”). The world needs to care
about the health of bacteria because many bacteria help humans (food production,
medicine production, probiotics), and some bacteria hurt humans (infect humans,
destroy food, contaminate industrial processes). Therefore, viruses that infect
beneficial bacteria can be problematic, but viruses that infect harmful bacteria
actually can help humans. The proposed research program will uncover conditions
that help bacteria evade infections by phages. The findings will reveal
approaches to protect beneficial bacteria and to leverage viruses to kill
harmful bacteria. The research team will be composed of undergraduate students
and graduate students from diverse backgrounds, as well as individuals with
intellectual and developmental disabilities. This team with diverse backgrounds
and abilities will collaborate in genuine scientific discovery. The success of
this unique team will be evaluated, and the lessons learned will be distributed
to the broader scientific community to help others assemble similar STEM
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria have evolved myriad immune systems to
protect themselves from viruses (bacteriophages). However, it is unclear how
these immune defenses are influenced by local environments. For example,
bacteria frequently are found in polymicrobial communities. While there,
bacteria are bombarded by a metabolites secreted by their neighbors. These
metabolites are likely to influence the efficacy of the antiviral immune systems
of the bacteria. Therefore, it is unclear how significant anti-phage defenses
are at providing immunity within complex microbiomes. The proposed work will
advance knowledge to fill this gap. Specifically, the research team will 1)
identify the specific pure metabolites that modulate each of five different
antiviral defenses, 2) elucidate the mechanisms by which the metabolites elicit
their effects, and 3) determine the prevalence of these metabolite/immunity
interactions in host-associated and environmental niches. By characterizing
metabolites that modulate antiviral defenses, this research will define specific
biochemical environments in which anti-phage defenses provide altered immunity.
The community can then leverage metagenomic data to determine the likelihood of
the anti-phage defenses to co-occur with these metabolites that modulate them.
Furthermore, many antiviral immune systems are incompletely understood. By
uncovering the mechanisms of action of the first chemical modulators of these
defenses, this project will reveal new details about how these defenses confer
immunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.