* 2143132
* I-Corps:  Blood analyzer to detect Bovine Respiratory Disease by using blood cell counts and morphology
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2022
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable automated white blood cell (WBC) analysis system for
cattle. By scanning bovine blood smears, the proposed technology analyzes the
health status of cattle in feedlots, which allows veterinarians and producers to
make more informed decisions to reduce the death rate and antibiotic use. The
technology primarily is aimed at detecting Bovine Respiratory Disease (BRD),
commonly known as the “shipping fever,” which is the most common and costly
disease affecting beef cattle worldwide. Current disease detection methods can
identify sick cattle, but only after they’ve shown symptoms, which is sometimes
too late to recover fully. The proposed technology may offer quick and accurate
cattle health assessment through blood analysis to achieve early detection of
disease in cattle for selective treatment even before symptoms appear. This
proposed diagnostic may decrease the administration of antibiotics in feedlots
and significantly reduce labor hours for daily inspection, ultimately leading to
reduced costs due to cattle death and illness. It also may provide a healthier
product for consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a blood analyzer using an AI recognition model and software tool
on bovine blood smear images. The proposed technology is aimed at detecting
Bovine Respiratory Disease (BRD). Currently, there are antibiotics, vaccines,
and other medication to treat BRD, however, knowing when to use these treatments
can improve the treatment effectiveness and cost efficiency. Other disease
detection instruments employ biomarkers based on the symptoms related to Bovine
Respiratory Disease while the proposed technology analyzes the immune system
strength directly from the blood cell levels. By automatically measuring the
differential white blood cell counts from blood smear microscopic images using
AI, the system calculates the ratio of white blood cells as a marker for
diagnosing sick cattle with high confidence. Blood cell statistics such as
Eosinophil Lymphocyte Ratio (ELR) are good indicators of immune system strength
and may be employed to predict BRD infection. This solution may detect
compromise in the immune system before any visual symptoms develop and allow
more time for treatment in order to use antibiotics in a controlled manner with
small dosage while keeping the cattle healthy before BRD produces permanent
damage. The plan is to develop benchtop systems as well as mobile systems on
smartphones to satisfy various needs and to meet the speed required. The
principles and biometrics may be translated to other animals and human
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.