* 2143836
* CAREER: Resonant Dielectric Optical Metasurfaces for Single-Cell Extracellular Vesicles (EV) Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Justus Ndukaife, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2027
* USD 508,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once thought of as a means for
cells to expel wastes, in recent years, extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by
virtually all cells in humans have been shown to contain biological information
molecules such as proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), through which cells
can communicate with neighboring or distant cells. This EV-mediated cell-to-cell
communication has been implicated in the spread and progression of diseases such
as cancer to other parts of the body. Current gold standard methods for EV
isolation and analysis involve measurement of EVs contributed from multiple
cells and cannot distinguish the differences in the quantity and phenotypes of
EV secretion between cells. Addressing this gap in knowledge is key to enhancing
our understanding of EVs and better enabling their applications in therapeutics
and diagnostics. This CAREER proposal investigates novel optical nanostructures
inspired by early theoretical works in quantum mechanics, which when illuminated
with light will generate forces to selectively capture EVs as they are released
by a single cell without damage, and analyze the single-cell secreted EVs to
enable correlating the function of the EVs directly to their cells of origin.
The PI along with graduate and undergraduate students will carry out strong
outreach and education activities including the construction and placement of an
optical tweezer system interfaced with an iPad at the Adventure Science Center
museum in Nashville, Tennessee to educate k-12 students and visitors on how
light can be used to hold and move small objects on a cellular scale. The PI and
graduate students will also develop international education activities that will
expose undergraduate students and researchers in West Africa to the computer-
aided design of optical nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project will investigate the physics of photonic Bound States in the Continuum
for the generation of electromagnetic fields and optical force at the nanoscale.
Bound States in the Continuum (BIC) was initially introduced as a mathematical
curiosity in quantum mechanics and has recently emerged as a new way to engineer
radiative losses for robust control of light at the nanoscale for a variety of
applications in lasers, sensors, and chip-scale optical communications. This
project brings BIC-inspired metasurfaces to the domain of single-cell omics
towards the in-situ proteomics analysis of single-cell secreted EVs without any
cross-contamination from other cells. The intellectual significance of the
planned activities includes: (a) an understanding of the role of the geometry of
the BIC metasurface elements in minimizing the in-plane and out-of-plane
radiative losses to achieve superior electromagnetic field enhancements that is
robust to fabrication imperfections; (b) demonstration of nanoscale optical
trapping of nanosized EVs using BICs in dielectric metasurfaces for the first
time; (c) an understanding of quasi-BIC induced optical force for trapping,
three-dimensional transport, release and controlled uptake of EVs by a recipient
cell, a capability not possible with any approach reported to date; (d) the in-
situ proteomic analysis to profile single-cell secreted EV molecular cargos; and
(e) an understanding of whether argonaute proteins are selected cargos in
single-cell secreted EVs. The unique capabilities provided by the proposed BIC
dielectric metasurface system will allow the PI and the team to associate the
properties of EVs directly to their cell sources up to the resolution of single
cells, a capability that has so far remained elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.