* 2143997
* CAREER: Characterization of the Strain Rate-Dependent Mechanical Behavior of the Cell-Cell Adhesion Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Ruiguo Yang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2027
* USD 536,907.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
characterize the mechanical behavior of single cell-cell adhesions. Cell-cell
adhesions integrate cells into tissues. They relay signals between the
extracellular environment and cells. They also experience strains of different
magnitudes and rates. Currently, there is a lack of understanding about the
strain rate-dependent behavior of the cell-cell adhesion. This is particularly
true of the response mechanisms at play across the spectrum of strain rates.
This knowledge is critical in understanding various pathological conditions and
developmental defects where cell-cell adhesions play a significant role. This
research project will quantify the stress-strain relationship of a single cell
pair. Different tensile strain rates will be used to examine the process that
governs the responses of the cell-cell adhesions. The results will elucidate the
coordinated response from the cytoskeleton network and cell-cell adhesions. The
complementary outreach program will translate laboratory innovations into
learning opportunities for young kids. This will be accomplished through
interactive educational platforms for K-12 students. This CAREER award will also
provide research opportunities for undergraduate students via a laboratory
mentoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
uncover the mechanisms governing the mechanical response of single cell-cell
adhesion junctions when they are subjected to mechanical strains of different
strain rates. It is generally accepted that stress accumulation in the
cytoskeleton network is strain rate-dependent. Thus, it is critical to
understand how stress relaxation by the cytoskeleton under different strain
rates coordinates with the enhancement of cell-cell adhesion to prevent fracture
of multicellular structures. The central hypothesis being tested is that under
tensile loading cytoskeleton reorganization and cell-cell adhesion
enhancement/rupture are loading rate-dependent and driven by mechanosensing
molecules at the cell-cell adhesion. Two research objectives, focusing on the
cytoskeleton and the cell-cell adhesion, respectively, include: 1) examine the
rate-dependent stress relaxation and tensioning of the cell adhesion-
cytoskeleton network, and 2) examine the rate-dependent enhancement of cell-cell
junctions that reduces rupture potential under tensile loads. Through the two
objectives, one of the fundamental questions in mechanobiology will be answered:
what fundamental mechanical variables do cell-cell adhesions sense and respond
to, force/stress or deformation/strain, or the rate change of these variables?
The success in completion of the objectives will build a solid foundation for
pioneering the study of the strain rate-dependent mechanical behavior of cell-
cell adhesions, leveraging the unique capability of a single cell-cell adhesion
interrogation platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.