* 2143647
* CAREER: Peptide stereocomplexes as dynamic junctions in polymeric biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Rachel Letteri, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2027
* USD 317,416.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing materials that mimic the mechanical,
chemical, and biological properties of natural tissue is important for advancing
national health infrastructure. Such materials support the growth and delivery
of therapeutic cells for repair of damaged tissue and enable researchers to
study disease progression for identification and evaluation of new treatment
approaches. Research in chemistry, materials science, biology, and engineering
has produced a range of tunable tissue-mimicking materials and associated
fabrication methods. While these biomaterials capture various aspects of native
tissue, there remain compelling opportunities to improve both the production
processes and materials properties to comprehensively capture the complex,
highly functional features of native tissue in an accessible, scalable manner.
This project will employ advanced synthetic and characterization techniques to
develop new ways to prepare and tune the properties of water-swollen, tissue-
mimetic materials composed of synthetic polymers and protein fragments called
peptides. To inspire and guide a diverse cohort of students towards rewarding
careers at the forefront of biomaterials research and education, this project
involves the design, implementation, and dissemination of structured early-stage
undergraduate research and educational experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance the
ability of biomaterials to recapitulate the complex, highly functional
characteristics of native tissue, it is important to develop ways to tune
materials properties in an accessible, scalable manner. The goal of this project
is to invoke stereochemistry-driven interactions to advance the manufacturing,
control, and function of next-generation biomaterials. Stereochemistry-driven
complexation, or ‘stereocomplexation’ of macromolecules produces marked changes
in stability and thermomechanical properties of materials, yet there is limited
understanding about the molecular features driving stereocomplexation and how
complex strength impacts the properties of stereocomplexed materials. Since
peptide synthesis enables routine generation of peptides with exquisite control
of sequence and stereochemistry, peptides with complementary stereochemistry
provide an ideal materials platform for answering these questions. The
objectives of this project are to (1) determine how peptide molecular features
(e.g., length, charge, and hydrophobicity) impact stereocomplexation; and (2)
connect molecular-scale features of peptide stereocomplexes to the bulk
properties (e.g., stiffness, viscoelasticity, and stability) of polymeric
hydrogels cross-linked with peptide stereocomplexes. Establishing design rules
for peptide stereocomplexation and determining the roles of these dynamic
complexes in modulating biomaterials properties represent critical steps to
advancing stereochemistry as a design parameter to control materials properties.
Complementing and enriching the research objectives, educational objectives
include structuring the early stages of undergraduate research to recruit and
provide engaging experiences that empower a diverse group of biomaterials
researchers. A research-based course series bridging multiple institutions will
guide students in building core competencies and networks to propel their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.