* 2143961
* SBIR Phase I: Catechol Linker Oligosaccharide Combinations for Antimicrobial Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Randell Clevenger, MOLECULAR SURFACE TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 255,862.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 1 project is a decrease in the devastating effects of deep implant-related
infections. The technology could result in advances to the clinical health and
welfare of the American public by improving clinical outcomes and decreasing
morbidity and mortality. The technology addressed by this project may protect
surgical implants, such as joint replacements and spinal fusion systems from
bacterial colonization and developing infections. This technology could
significantly reduce the greater than $3 billion cost to the US healthcare
system from implant related infections. This antimicrobial technology could be
used beyond medical applications for such things as food packaging to decrease
foodborne diseases and more than double shelf-life of certain food products.
Additionally, the linker technology developed through this project may be used
to create super slick or self-cleaning surfaces with applications in the
aerospace and marine industries resulting in increased fuel efficiency and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a homogeneous,
covalently bound, linker molecule attached to medical implant material (titanium
alloy) upon which a quaternary ammonium-modified oligosaccharide will be
subsequently attached. Oligosaccharides are known to be biocompatible and
quaternized oligosaccharides are highly potent antimicrobials. A treated medical
implant could possess a powerfully antimicrobial surface so that, during
surgery, any bacteria that encounter the surface will be killed. In this way, it
is hoped that the avascular surface of the implant will not serve as a site for
biofilm formation and growth and thus, reduce the incidence of perioperative
infections. The key to any successful surface modification is the quality of the
chemical attachment of linkers and active molecules to that surface. Polyphenols
and catechols such as dopamine are ideal candidates for investigation as these
molecules are generally known for their facility in forming thin films onto a
wide variety of surfaces. Using dopamine as a model system, catechol analogs
will be electrochemically attached, and the resulting thin films analyzed for
attachment, thickness, ease of further modification, and morphology. Atomic
Force Microscopy (AFM), UV/Visible spectroscopy, soak/stress protocols and
microbiology will be used to gauge the success or failure of a thin film plus
oligosaccharide combination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.