* 2143016
* CAREER: Mechanisms of G4 DNA Induced Genome Instability
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Tovah Day, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2027
* USD 399,479.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most DNA exists in the shape of a
double helix however, some DNA sequences can adopt alternative shapes such as a
G quadruplex (G4), which resembles a tangle in the helix. Because of its unusual
shape, G4 DNA plays important roles in normal cellular processes such as marking
genes for expression. However, the process of untangling a G4 structure for
access is difficult and can cause DNA to break. Broken DNA often becomes mutated
and sometimes ends up outside of the nucleus in the wrong cellular compartment;
both outcomes can be detrimental for cells. This project will investigate poorly
understood mechanisms that protect G4 DNA from breakage, mutation, and aberrant
localization. The research will provide training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students. In addition, the project will serve as a platform to
engage and retain under-represented minority students and to foster development
of critical science communication skills in a course taught collaboratively with
journalism faculty. American Rescue Plan funding of this project provides
support for this investigator at a critical stage in her
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;G4 DNA is a non-canonical DNA structure that forms
readily in repetitive, guanine-rich sequences. While G4 DNA has physiological
roles in transcription and DNA replication, it also triggers genome instability.
Despite a well-documented association between G4 DNA and mutations of multiple
kinds, the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Even less is known
regarding the aberrant accumulation of G4 DNA in the cytoplasm, a unique form of
genome instability. This project will test the hypothesis that specific
chromatin states and endogenous DNA repair processes promote instability,
including mutations and mislocalization, of G4 DNA. The project will use PRIME
genome editing to install hypomorphic mutations in human cells as well as
immunofluorescence and Cleavage Under Targets and Tagmentation (CUT&amp;Tag) to
globally profile G4 DNA. Additionally, the project will use a novel cell-based
reporter along with coupling of chromatin immunoprecipitation to Next Generation
Sequencing to characterize mutations at G4 DNA. This work will advance
understanding of how chromatin states might amplify genome instability at non-
canonical DNA structures. Further, these studies will investigate the mechanisms
that lead to cytosolic G4 DNA, which could constitute a new signaling paradigm
driven by free DNA fragments outside the nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.