* 2143379
* CAREER: The Impact of Extracellular Polymeric Substances on Particle Transport in Aquatic Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Matthew Rau, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2022
* USD 458,293.00

Predicting and managing the transport of particles in aquatic environments are
critical components of strategies to treat drinking and wastewater, to monitor
sediment movement, to predict pollutant transport, and to understand effects of
the global ocean carbon cycle on climate change. The transport of particles is
often affected by the presence of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) in
aquatic environments. EPS are biopolymers that are secreted in high quantities
from algae and bacteria and are known to promote aggregation of particles and
influence the physical properties of the aggregates. This CAREER project
comprises several experiments to quantify the influence of EPS on particle
aggregates. The results of the research will improve predictions of particle
transport through aquatic environments by explaining how EPS influence the
formation of particle-to-particle bonds during aggregation, by demonstrating the
roles EPS play in defining aggregate physical properties, and by tracking how
these properties ultimately govern aggregate breakup and settling in turbulent
fluid flows. Integrated educational activities will advance career-strengthening
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as promote
environmental science and engineering to underrepresented high school student
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments conducted under this CAREER award will
measure the chemical makeup, surface energy, and interaction energy of EPS from
aquatic algae and bacteria to determine how EPS form aggregates that incorporate
naturally occurring particulate matter, sediment particles, and microplastic
pollutants. A theoretical framework will be formulated to predict the
deformability of EPS aggregates based on cohesion properties, experimental data
for aggregate deformation in hydrodynamic shear, and fundamental principles for
colloidal gels and viscoelastic droplets. Finally, three-dimensional flow
experiments will link aggregate cohesion and deformability to breakup and
settling characteristics of EPS in turbulence. The results generated in this
research will fill several knowledge gaps for aggregation and disruption of EPS
aggregates and transform the way aquatic EPS aggregates are modeled. The results
will help understand aggregation processes that are crucial to quantifying the
ocean carbon cycle and refining environmental protocols for anthropogenic
pollutants. The project will provide collaborative career-development
opportunities for diverse undergraduate and graduate students and an integrated
Research Experience for a Teacher opportunity that focuses on environmental
research in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.