* 2143815
* CAREER: Dynamics and thermodynamics of ultra-strong glassformers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Daniel Sussman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2027
* USD 262,540.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports an integrated program of theoretical research, computational
study, and educational activity on a novel type of disordered solids, ``ultra-
strong glasses''. What makes a material a solid? Crystalline materials have
their atoms and molecules organized into neatly repeating patterns -- breaking
up these repeating patterns costs energy, and the result is a material that
resists deformation, that is, one that is solid. Glassy materials -- which can
be made from silica as in ordinary window glass but also many other polymeric,
molecular, or colloidal liquids -- are quite different: unlike orderly crystals
their components are disordered, and their viscosity can vary enormously when
their temperature is varied very slightly. These materials start out looking and
behaving like a liquid but quickly become more and more sluggish as the
temperature is decreased until, eventually, their motion is so imperceptible and
the time for the molecules to flow around each other is so long that the whole
system acts like a solid rather than a liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost all
disordered materials follow two characteristic patterns for the precise way that
their dynamics slow down, leading to a categorization of glasses as either
"fragile" or "strong." Very recently there has been evidence of a third type of
glass, an “ultra-strong” glass, whose dynamics and material properties would be
much less sensitive to changing temperature than strong or fragile glasses. This
unusual type of glass has, so far, been observed in two seemingly disconnected
systems: computational models of dense epithelial tissue (tissue that covers all
body surfaces and line body cavities) and of low-density vitrimers (a type of
plastic material). At present there is no theoretical understanding of why these
very different materials systems share similar glassy dynamics, or why either of
them have properties so different from usual glassy materials in the first
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand this new class of materials -- which
will itself help enable strategies for the design of new engineered materials
with the unusual properties that the computational models suggest – the PI will
embark on a systematic combination of extensive computational modeling together
with an effort to build a theoretical description of ultra-strong glasses. At
its core, this research seeks to address two primary questions: 1.) What is the
fundamental nature of an ultra-strong glass? 2.) What features of a physical
system lead to it?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports educational
and outreach activities that are closely integrated with the research project.
The computational work involves large-scale numerical simulations, and the PI
will develop Graphical User Interfaces that allow these research tools to be
easily used in classes that are part of both the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum. The PI and his research group will engage in community outreach
activities, including mentorship activities at local schools and public science
talks aimed at promoting awareness of the role STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) research plays in materials that appear in the
everyday world around us. The PI, as part of his commitment to broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in the physical sciences, will continue
his work interacting with and mentoring students at a Minority Serving
Institution, engaging those students in active research, and encouraging them to
see themselves as future STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research on a novel class of disordered solids, ultra-strong glassformers.
Ultra-strong behavior has recently been observed in two seemingly unrelated
computational models: the PI's study of a coarse-grained model of dense
biological tissue, and another group's study of low-density vitrimers. A primary
research goal is to understand the origin of this anomalous type of disordered
dynamics. The project will systematically explore numerical simulations of a
family of related models at low temperature, using numerical analyses to test
whether existing theories of glassy dynamics can make accurate predictions when
confronted with data from these unusual systems. In this way, the underlying
assumptions and validity of the approximations of many theories for glassy
behavior can be probed; the focus of these tests will be on predicted
connections between local structure, thermodynamics, and mechanics on the one
hand and system dynamics on the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important
quantity for characterizing a given glassy system (both intellectually, and in
determining the functionality and processing of glasses as materials) is the
fragility index. Until recently the fragility index characterized all glassy
systems as either strong or fragile, corresponding to exponential or super-
exponential scaling of the alpha relaxation time with inverse temperature. These
categorizes also harmonize with recent theoretical work on mean-field models
which describe the behavior of structural glasses in the infinite-dimensional
limit, but this categorization is challenged by anomalous behavior of ultra-
strong glasses and their remarkable, sub-exponential dependence of their alpha
relaxation time with inverse temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no
current understanding of what microscopic aspects of the models studied lead to
this anomalous behavior, and thus it is unclear if ultra-strong glassforming
ability can be found or engineered in a much broader class of physical systems.
To address this need, the research will use large-scale simulations, extensive
numerical analysis, and theoretical tools from the study of disordered solids to
uncover the origin of ultra-strong behavior in the generalized class of vertex
and Voronoi models of dense cellular matter. A fundamental set of model
components that lead to this type of anomalous glassy behavior will be proposed,
allowing for new ultra-strong glassformers to be identified and
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.