* 2143126
* CAREER: A New Science for Biomimetic Microparticles in Drug Delivery Systems: Integrating Protein Polymer Science into Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Minkyu Kim, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2027
* USD 234,241.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Millions of patients are treated with intravenous drug
injections every year. To ensure efficacy without using drug injections with
unnecessarily large amounts that can lead to adverse side effects, nano-/micro-
particles has been developed. These particles deliver the drugs from intravenous
solutions to a targeted disease location for effective administration with small
drug amounts. Yet, the efficacy of the treatment is greatly reduced by
biological organ filters, such as kidney or liver, that remove these delivery
particles from the bloodstream. To overcome filtering, higher drug doses are
still required to ensure efficacy, which again increases adverse side effects.
The current particles do not possess mechanical properties to avoid filtering in
the bloodstream. However, natural biological particles, such as red blood cells,
are known to exhibit the proper mechanical properties to pass through organ
filters. Based on this observation, this CAREER project proposes the
breakthrough development of drug delivery microparticles based on protein
polymers that will mimic the mechanical behavior of materials constituents of
natural biological particles. This project combines the fields of materials
science and engineering, synthetic biology, and multiscale mechanics to build
the foundation of a new science for effective biomimetic microparticles in drug
delivery systems. This project also implements the inclusive educational
ecosystem and curricular transformations, and offers transdisciplinary research
experiences to prepare and train a diverse cohort of students that will form the
future U.S. workforce in the integration of materials science and engineering
and protein polymer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;In current non-biological particle-based drug delivery
modalities, up to 90% of the particles are removed by the bodyâ€™s filtering
organs; thus, reducing the efficacy of intravenous treatments of diseases. In
contrast, natural biological particles, such as erythrocytes, are immune to
organ filtering. Non-biological and biological particles differ in their
mechanical behavior, a key property to avoid filtering. The objective of this
CAREER project is to design, synthesize and characterize protein-based
materials, composed of crosslinked protein copolymers, with tailored mechanical
properties that mimic those of constitutive materials of natural biological
particles. The research approach combines the revolutionary tools of synthetic
biology (the ability of harnessing the power of genetic engineering to fabricate
artificially engineered protein copolymers), of materials science and
engineering (MSE) and of molecular to macroscale mechanics. With these tools,
this research will (1) establish the scientific principles that determine the
topology of synthetic protein copolymers with exceptional mechanical properties,
(2) investigate the effects of protein copolymer topology on the formation,
structure, and bulk mechanical properties of protein-based materials and (3)
examine the morphology and in-fluid transport properties of protein-based
erythrocyte-mimetic microparticles. This project fills a knowledge gap in
biopolymer-network materials regarding multiscale relationships between
structures of constitutive mechanical protein copolymers and mechanical response
under externally applied forces with an emphasis on reversible stretchability
and fatigue resistance. To train the next generation of biopolymer materials
scientists and engineers, this project will revolutionize the teaching of
biopolymer science in MSE by including design and processing principles of
nonconventional materials from biopolymers and synthetic biology in a MSE
curriculum and by implementing inclusive student research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.