* 2143655
* CAREER: Breaking ground with underwater sound; unraveling elusive predator-prey interactions in marine benthic communities using novel technological approaches
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Matthew Ajemian, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2027
* USD 552,568.00

Shellfish (mollusks, crustaceans, etc.) are facing unprecedented pressures under
global climate change, which is threatening the variety of ecosystem services
these animals provide to coastal communities. While much research has been
dedicated to understanding how changing ocean conditions can influence shellfish
development, far less has explored the potential impacts from increasing
populations of large, shell-crushing predators (i.e., rays, turtles, etc.) that
are experiencing poleward expansions of their ranges. This knowledge gap is
likely due to the challenges of working with these mobile species, which require
novel technology to track their dynamic distribution and thus foraging effects
on shellfish communities. This project will build fundamental knowledge on
marine habitats susceptible to predation from large mobile predators in order to
ensure a sustainable future for shellfish species. Further, the work will
provide guidance to costly shellfish restoration programs that are otherwise
“flying blind” with respect to predation risk. The project will have local,
regional, and global educational dimensions. Firstly, this project will
strengthen FAU’s graduate programs by supporting a graduate student and
providing a platform for the PI to develop a new graduate course, which will be
offered and evaluated twice throughout the award period. Additionally, numerous
undergraduate summer interns and middle-high school students will be recruited
to interact with the PI via immersive, hands-on field excursions. Lastly, the
fascination of the general public and students with these charismatic animals
and the project’s tangible technological components will facilitate developing
an interactive “Audio Waves” exhibit at a local outreach center, which will be
evaluated several times during the project and slated for permanent display.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our scientific understanding of the ecological role of
large mobile durophages (i.e., shell-crushing predators) is limited due to
challenges presented by the elusive nature of these species. These shortcomings
hinder our scientific understanding of their role in benthic community dynamics.
Filling such knowledge gaps requires novel approaches that can detect and
classify predator-prey interactions in situ. Using multiple large predator
models (rays, sea turtles, fish, and crabs), the project will: 1) capture and
characterize predator feeding (shell-crushing) sounds and shell fragmentation
patterns, 2) understand in situ detection constraints of the predation signal
within the context of natural underwater noise using simulations, and 3)
quantify the distribution of predator foraging impacts across two model
seascapes in Bermuda and Florida via integration of habitat- and individual-
based (animal tags) passive acoustics. Detection and classification (by both
predator and prey) will be completed using novel application of machine-learning
techniques, which will be used to automate predation event extraction from
extensive data archives. Recording equipment will be strategically distributed
across seascapes to permit a multi-scale understanding of durophagy and testing
of theoretical models of predation (e.g., optimal/central place foraging). Long-
term monitoring will also provide an opportunity to assess the role of
environmental/oceanographic variables in driving these interactions.
Consequently, this work will fill a large knowledge gap in the dynamics of
marine food webs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.