* 2143934
* CAREER: The Domestic and International Politics of Global Police
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sabrina Karim, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 406,736.00

Whether in the form of protest violence, gender-based violence, torture,
extrajudicial killing, or daily abuse, excessive and/or illegitimate police
violence presents a challenge in every country of the world. The negative
impacts of excessive and/or illegitimate police violence on societies are
numerous and consequential: it exacerbates health outcomes, diminishes the
quality of governance, and increases the probability of civil conflict.
Moreover, donor countries and organizations, including the United States and
United Nations, provide billions of dollars to police assistance abroad, thereby
potentially affecting recipient country police forces’ ability to use force.
Yet, despite the global nature of the problem, most of the work on police
violence has largely focused on case studies in the US, UK, and Latin American
countries. These single cases do not permit the development of an overarching
theory for understanding the domestic and international political conditions
under which the police in different countries engage in excessive and/or
illegitimate violence. There is also a dearth of cross-national data on global
police violence, police institutions, police assistance, and police personnel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research and teaching agenda will achieve the
following objectives: 1) develop an original political framework and theory on
global police violence; 2) gather essential cross-national data on police
violence, police autonomy, and international police assistance; 3) collect the
largest, original survey data of police personnel around the world; and 4)
implement a multi-faceted educational program that will train undergraduate
students and masters students in evidence-based strategies for mitigating police
violence. This project provides two unique innovations from the current research
on police violence. First, it uses a political science framework to understand
the complex dynamics of policing and police violence and uses multiple, original
data sources to test these theories. Treating the police as political actors
uncovers the ways in which institutional and interest-based explanations affect
the likelihood of police engaging in different forms of violence. The extensive
cross-national, time series data collection of police violence, police
institutions, and police assistance enables comparative analysis about the
conditions under which different forms of violence is more likely. Moreover, the
survey data of police personnel, collected through the already-established
Gender and Security Sector Lab, allows the PI to explore how individual
interests and beliefs, and unit cohesion affect the propensity of individual
officers and groups of officers to abuse their authority. Importantly, the
project allows for the synthesis of evidence-based research with education
through the development of an undergraduate “Politics of Policing” course and a
master’s-level Civilian-Police (Civ-Pol) Certificate program for domestic and
international police leadership and bureaucrats who oversee policing decisions.
By integrating evidence-based research and research methods into these courses,
the project trains the next generation of undergraduates to become public
citizens by helping them develop original research, critical thought, and
community-based solutions to police violence locally and it puts evidence-based
research into the hands of those making decisions about policing
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.