* 2143164
* CAREER: Tracking deep-time environmental change through statistical analyses of the sedimentary geochemical record
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Erik Sperling, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2027
* USD 273,205.00

The field of historical geobiology investigates how environments have changed on
Earth over time and how life on Earth has responded to these changes. This
history is archived in the geochemical record, and this grant utilizes an open
international research consortium, the Sedimentary Geochemistry and
Paleoenvironments Project (SGP), to both build and analyze this record.
Specifically, SGP aims to assemble a large database of sedimentary geochemical
records (e.g., hundreds of thousands of samples) using a unique ‘crowd sourcing’
approach. In addition to compiling published data, this grant will conduct new
sedimentary geochemistry studies of under-studied time intervals; these projects
will involve 16 undergraduate students from diverse institutions and
backgrounds. The database will then be analyzed to understand how primary
productivity and oxygen levels in the ocean have changed through geological
time. Activities in the grant will contribute to development of the SGP website,
which is currently the portal to the largest publicly available database of
sedimentary geochemical measurements. This open access data product is
particularly useful for industries working in sedimentary rocks such as
hydrocarbon and mineral exploration (base metal deposits, critical metals) as
well as groundwater research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will use SGP
data products to address two key questions in Earth history. First, how has
organic carbon burial and food supply to the benthos changed through time (as
proxied by shale total organic carbon (TOC) contents)? Second, how has the
ocean’s redox landscape changed through Earth history (as proxied by redox-
sensitive trace metal abundances in anoxic/euxinic black shales)? This proposal
will test previous hypotheses generated from literal data analysis and smaller
datasets by utilizing the large SGP database and sophisticated analytical
methods, including re-weighted bootstrapping techniques to address spatio-
temporal sampling heterogeneity and machine learning techniques to de-convolve
the influence of multiple geological biases on a geochemical
proxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.