* 2143711
* CAREER: Mechanistic studies of cilium proteins in cell signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Xuecai Ge, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2026
* USD 582,347.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most cells in our body have a
primary cilium (a single hair-like projection on their cell surface) that allows
them to interact with each other via chemical signals. This ancient and
mysterious organelle acts like a radio antenna, allowing cells to receive
different information, depending on which kinds of receptors their antenna
contains. Gene mutations affecting ciliary signaling have been implicated in a
host of diseases that result in the malformation and dysfunction of multiple
organs. This project focuses on primary cilia in the developing brain. During
brain formation, the progenitor cells that give rise to nerve cells (neurons)
coordinate with each other to make sure that specific type of neurons are
produced in the correct location at the right time. Surprisingly little is known
about which receptors in their primary cilia allow effective communication. This
project will document the full catalog of receptors situated in the primary
cilia of neural progenitor cells using novel techniques that selectively label
cilium proteins with a special tag named biotin, and then identify these marked
proteins using mass spectrometry. It will also decipher the mechanisms by which
some of these proteins influence developmental decisions. Pilot studies have
already identified proteins previously shown to control brain development that
are unexpectedly operating in the cilium. Overall, the results of this project
will provide novel insights into how neural cell progenitors coordinate to build
the brain. They advance our understanding of how brain development works and
will also help us to better understand brain developmental disorders. In
addition, this project will engage local K-12 students and high school teachers
in laboratory research, aiming to inspire a sustained interest in the biological
sciences among local youth, as well as implementing an integrated educational
program to promote participation and retention of students from underrepresented
minorities in biological research. These activities will substantially improve
education in life science in the socioeconomically disadvantaged California
Central Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural progenitors in the developing brain
(also known as Radial Glia, RG) produce all of the brainâ€™s neurons in a time-
and space-specific manner. Different neuronal types are generated at distinct
developmental stages and in discrete brain regions. This process is highly
coordinated via cell signaling sensed by the RG primary cilia. Defects in cilium
function lead to ciliopathies, a wide-ranging spectrum of disorders that usually
involve brain structural defects. Yet a systematic understanding of RG cilium
signaling pathways is lacking. This project will identify new signaling proteins
in RG cilia by leveraging a new proximity labeling tool (TurboID) and a novel
transgenic mouse model in which TurboID is selectively expressed in the cilium
of RG cells. Quantitative proteomic studies with rigorous controls will reveal
bona fide cilium proteins operating in discrete brain regions and across
different developmental stages. Pilot studies with cilium-targeted TurboID have
surprisingly revealed cilium localization of a protein previously reported to
regulate neurogenesis through undetermined mechanisms. Preliminary data show
that this protein operates in the cilium to regulate Hedgehog signaling, the
best-described pathway in the cilium. Investigating the interaction between this
new cilium protein and Hedgehog signaling will reveal new regulatory mechanisms
in embryonic neurogenesis, and demonstrate how cilium proteomics can help solve
standing long-questions in brain development. By systemically unveiling the
signaling pathways used by RG cilia with spatiotemporal resolution, this project
will also chart new directions for future neurodevelopmental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.