* 2143410
* CAREER: Quorum enhanced sustainable treatment of nitrogen (QuEST-N)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Jeseth Delgado Vela, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2027
* USD 462,585.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental engineers have used
microorganisms over a century to treat wastewater and protect public health.
Biological wastewater treatment (WWT) also plays a critical role in ecosystem
and environmental protection including the use of nitrifying and denitrifying
bacteria to remove and convert excess nitrogen from wastewater to harmless
nitrogen (N2) gas. Advances in environmental metagenomics are providing more
detailed and in-depth information about microbial communities in WWT systems.
Yet, environmental engineers and wastewater practitioners lack strategies and
tools to leverage this new information to control the structure, composition,
functional diversity, and metabolic pathways of nitrifying and denitrifying
bacterial communities in WWT systems. The overarching goal of this CAREER
proposal is to harness various forms of microbial communication signals,
commonly referred to as quorum sensing (QS) molecules, to advance the design and
operations of more efficient and sustainable biofilm reactors for nitrogen
removal. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development and
implementation of next generation biological nitrogen removal (BNR) processes in
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and water resource recovery facilities
(WRRFs). Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education
and training including the mentoring of a post-doctoral fellow, a graduate
student, and three undergraduate students at Howard
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in environmental microbiology,
microbial ecology, and environmental biotechnology are providing unprecedented
opportunities to design and build next generation biofilm reactors for the
simultaneous removal of excess nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) from
wastewater. Biofilm reactors are enabling WWTPs and WRRFs to harness slow
growing microorganisms that are advantageous to BNR processes including
anaerobic ammonium oxidizers (anammox) and denitrifying anaerobic methane
oxidizers (DAMO). However, the design and operation of next generation biofilm
reactors for BNR will require the control of the biofilm microbial ecology to
achieve more efficient and cost-effective nitrogen removal from wastewater. The
overarching goal of this CAREER project is to explore the use of quorum sensing
(QS) to control and manipulate the microbial ecology of bacterial biofilms used
in BNR reactors. QS involves the generation and release of signaling molecules
known as autoinducers that enable bacterial communities to coordinate their
behavior including the formation of biofilms. The guiding hypotheses of this
research are that the presence of autoinducers changes the activity of nitrogen
cycling bacteria and QS can be used to alter which organisms colonize a biofilm.
The specific objectives of the proposed research are to: (1) Test the effect of
autoinducers in cultures enriched for nitrogen cycling bacteria; (2) Evaluate
the effect of autoinducers in nitrogen cycling bacteria in more complex biofilm
communities; (3) Develop a biofilm model that incorporates QS; and (4) Evaluate
a control strategy that uses autoinducer molecules in a membrane aerated biofilm
reactor. The successful completion of this project has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of fundamental knowledge to advance
the development and deployment of the new process of quorum enhanced sustainable
treatment of nitrogen (QuEST-N) within WWTPs and WRRFs. To achieve the
educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the Principal
Investigator will leverage her ongoing collaboration with the Water Environment
Federation (WEF) to 1) add a research training component to the InFLOW
(Increasing Opportunities in Water) program at Howard University and 2) expand
the program to other minority serving institutions (MSI) to advance diversity in
STEM education and broaden participation in the water industry
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.