* 2143464
* CAREER: The developmental response of a parasitic chytrid fungus to amphibian mucus
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Lillian Fritz-Laylin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chytrid fungus
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis engages in a parasitic interaction with frogs
that is decimating hundreds of amphibian species around the world. B.
dendrobatidis grows in amphibian skin that is coated in mucus. The goal of this
project is to determine how B. dendrobatidis responds to exposure to molecules
found in amphibian mucus. Establishing the molecular mechanism by which mucus
induces changes in B. dendrobatidis may be used to develop remediation
strategies to reverse the decline in amphibians caused by B. dendrobatidis
infection. A hands-on laboratory course will be developed resulting in an
authentic research experience for ~24 students per year for the duration of the
project. These students will gain practical experience in designing, executing,
and interpreting the results of their own experiments, preparing them to
participate in the STEM workforce. The development, evaluation, and
dissemination of a modular laboratory course framework will allow additional
University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty, as well as extra-mural faculty, to
develop new courses and/or quickly revise existing courses to improve scientific
reasoning in undergraduate students. Finally, the adaptation of these materials
into a workshop for middle school girls will broaden participation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. dendrobatidis is one of &gt;1000 species of
chytrid fungus, many of which form ecologically important symbioses with plants,
animals, and microbes. Like all chytrids, the lifecyle of B. dendrobatidis
comprises two stages: a dispersal form called a zoospore that swims through
aquatic environments, and a growth form called a sporangium that grows and
produces new zoospores. The transition between the dispersal and growth form is
an essential developmental process called encystation. This project will test
the central hypothesis that B. dendrobatidis zoospores sense their host by the
presence of mucin, the bulk component of mucus, and respond by inducing a
cellular response that results in encystation. To test this hypothesis, the
project will combine quantitative microscopy, developmental assays, and chemical
genetics in the following objectives: OBJECTIVE 1: Identify developmental and
cellular alterations of B. dendrobatidis induced by mucin exposure. OBJECTIVE 2:
Identify signaling pathways controlling mucin-induced encystation. OBJECTIVE 3:
Develop, evaluate, and disseminate a modular lab course framework that teaches
students to evaluate the quality of scientific information. This framework will
be used to develop a course in which groups of students will identify
environmental cues that could induce encystation in other symbiotic and free-
living chytrid species. The successful completion of these objectives will fill
a gap in the understanding of the developmental pathways and host interactions
that mediate B. dendrobatidis infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.