* 2143982
* CAREER: Fundamentals and synthesis of new compositions and shapes/microstructures of 3D and 2D carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides (MAX phases and MXenes)
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Christina Birkel, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2027
* USD 299,770.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in
part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new, and better, materials can
lead to advances in new and innovative technologies, for example centered around
batteries, sensors, and magnets. This materials discovery together with
understanding their characteristics, such as their structure and properties, and
how these factors can be influenced during their preparation are therefore of
utmost importance for our economy and society securing the country’s prosperity.
With this CAREER award, Professor Christina Birkel at Arizona State University
will investigate materials that contain different metals and either carbon or
nitrogen (or both), called carbides or nitrides (carbonitrides), respectively.
These materials offer a huge playground for the discovery of new types of
materials with useful properties since the researchers (i) mix and match
different elements, and (ii) produce them in different shapes. The creation of
(hollow) spheres, films, or wires paves the way to even more areas where these
materials can be utilized. One can, for example, envision to integrate the wires
into fabrics and produce wearable electronics that monitor sweat levels or
produce energy on-the-go. Furthermore, the team can break these layered solids
down into atomically thin sheets, which is less than one-billionth of a meter
(less than a nanometer). Reaching this type of size regime, special physical
phenomena occur that are not accessible in the larger structures. All of these
new types of materials are an ideal platform to connect to and educate the
public, local high-school and campus communities (through seminars and student
involvements), and to increase the impact and visibility of Materials Science
and Chemistry within Arizona, the US and worldwide (through winter schools and
social media). Prof. Birkel will develop an inclusive program to strengthen
education, mentoring and recruitment efforts through being role models and
creating future role models in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
math).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this
CAREER award, Professor Christina Birkel at Arizona State University will
synthesize new members as well as new shapes and microstructures of the three-
and two-dimensional layered compounds that belong to the families of MAX phases
and MXenes. The main target materials are: (i) (Carbo)nitrides, because they are
scarce and therefore much less explored than the respective carbides yet hold
promise for improved mechanical stability (solid solution strengthening) and
higher conductivities (additional electron of the nitrogen) and (ii) Cr-, Mn-
and Mo-containing phases, because of intriguing magnetic (Cr, Mn) and catalytic
behavior (Mo) whose investigations are still in their infancy. This proposal has
a strong and distinguishing focus on wet chemical-assisted techniques which (i)
benefit from intimate mixing of the precursors on the atomic/molecular scale and
with that typically reduced reaction times and temperatures (this leads to MAX
phase particles instead of the typical bulky structures and can also stabilize
metastable phases), and (ii) allow for advanced processing of the liquid/gel
precursor mixture into additional shapes, e.g. wires and hollow microspheres,
that would not be possible with powders used in solid-state reactions. To
evaluate their stability/degradation and functional properties, the materials
will be subject to mechanical testing (nanoindentation) and calorimetry as well
as electronic/magnetic transport and catalytic measurements. The outcome of this
proposal will be the synthesis of entirely new types of structural and
functional materials and will lay the groundwork for various application-based
areas, such as construction (self-healing materials, refractory materials),
energy technologies (magnetocalorics, catalysts, sensors), consumer electronics
(coatings) and electronic textiles (“smart”/functional fabrics). These materials
are an ideal platform to connect to and educate the public, local high-school
and campus communities (through seminars and student involvements), and to
increase the impact and visibility of Materials Science and Chemistry within
Arizona, the US and worldwide (through winter schools and social media). The
team develops an inclusive program to strengthen education, mentoring and
recruitment efforts through being role models and creating future role models in
STEM with the goal to break down barriers and demonstrate that there is space in
science for everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.