* 2143162
* CAREER: Beyond alignment: novel mechanisms for controlling block copolymer phase behavior using magnetic fields
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Michelle Calabrese, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2027
* USD 275,877.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers (BCPs) are a class of materials
composed of two or more chemically-linked distinct blocks of molecular chains.
Such materials are used in drug delivery, adhesives, batteries and electronics.
BCPs are attractive for developing these types of advanced materials because
they can spontaneously form nanometer-sized structures with well-defined
features via a process known as self-assembly. However, to more broadly harness
the unique properties of BCPs, their self-assembly and ordering on large
lengthscales must be well-controlled. This research aims to uncover new
mechanisms underlying creation of new BCP structures using low-intensity
magnetic fields, and subsequently harness these findings to develop new BCP
materials with tunable properties. In the broader context, this project will
provide fundamental knowledge on new methods for assembling and processing BCPs
into ordered materials using minimal energy from external fields, potentially
providing a more sustainable route for developing advanced materials than
traditional processing methods. More broadly, to improve enthusiasm, engagement,
and subsequent matriculation in materials-related fields, the project will also
employ digital tools, inclusive teaching and lab practices, research-based
course content, and lab tours with hands-on demos for students at the high
school through graduate levels, with a particular focus on engaging women and
students from communities of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While block copolymers (BCPs) are attractive for
developing advanced materials, practical methods for processing BCPs into
materials with long-range order are limited, as techniques like magnetic or
electric field alignment are typically unfeasible due to the large required
field strengths and limited field-responsive chemistries. This project will
determine the mechanisms underlying newly-discovered magnetic field-induced
phase formation in weakly diamagnetic BCP solutions that cannot be explained by
traditional mechanisms of domain alignment, and employ these findings to develop
new BCP materials with ordering over large lengthscales. The central hypothesis
posits that low intensity magnetic fields promote phase transitions primarily by
altering the structure and mobility of both polymer and solvent. The underlying
molecular-scale mechanisms will be investigated via a suite of spectroscopic
tools; magneto-rheology and small angle scattering will then determine how these
molecular mechanisms manifest at longer lengthscales. Finally, processing
parameters such as temperature, field strength, and magnetization geometry will
be examined to develop guidelines for precisely controlling the resulting phase
and associated mechanical properties. This understanding will then be used to
develop guidelines for selecting solvents, BCP architectures, and block
chemistries that enhance field-responsiveness, opening an entirely new approach
for developing well-ordered BCP materials with finely-tuned
properties.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.