* 2143788
* CAREER: Dynamics of Holographic Acoustic Lenses for Nonlinear Ultrasound Focusing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Shima Shahab, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 01/31/2027
* USD 617,668.00

Focused ultrasound (FU) is a transformative technology with the potential to
treat many medical disorders noninvasively. Like using a convex lens to focus
light beams on a single point, in FU, acoustic lenses are used to concentrate
acoustic energy onto the desired target deep in the body. FU can be used to heat
up, destroy, or change the target tissue, and has been projected as an effective
tool for non-invasive brain tumor ablation, transient blood-brain barrier
disruption, and neuromodulation, potentially leading to novel treatments of
brain tumors, epilepsy, and Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. However, in
these applications, the inhomogeneous medium with non-flat geometry strongly
attenuates, reflects, and distorts ultrasound waves, which could lead to
inefficient and inaccurate delivery of acoustic energy. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) project will enhance the state-of-the-art
wave focusing capabilities by introducing a new generation of acoustic lenses
capable of generating specified high-intensity FU fields. The lens design is
based on characterizing the shape and acoustic properties of the target,
imposing the desired acoustic field by a backward propagation model, calculating
the unique thickness map of the lens design, and finally using a forward
propagation model for reconstructing the target acoustic field. This research
has the potential to lead the progress of science in emerging therapeutic
applications of FU, enabling patient-specific medicine, where lenses are
customized and 3D printed for each specific patient. Along with the research
activities, the educational plan includes summer camps that will serve, mentor,
and empower underrepresented students from historically black colleges and
universities on the topic of ultrasound haptics using acoustic lenses. The
student interns will acquire unique skills, build professional networks, and
gain cross-cultural experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research introduces
the concept of computer-generated holographic techniques to nonlinear acoustics.
The experiments and modeling approaches aim to extend the capabilities of the
acoustic holographic lenses to generate high-intensity scalable acoustic fields
from a single element transducer. At higher excitation amplitudes, the nonlinear
effects are exhibited by the generation of harmonics, distortion of the acoustic
waveform, and possibly the formation of shock fronts. Such phenomena influence
the pressure distribution and the diffraction pattern of the sound field.
Therefore, new mix-domain algorithms that incorporate nonlinearities, for the
forward and backward wave propagation, will be introduced to achieve efficient
and precise patterning of high-intensity fields. The outcome of the research
includes a mathematical framework for nonlinear wavefront shaping that advances
the knowledge of inverse problems of nonlinear
acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.