* 2143217
* CAREER: Functional Analysis of Crest EffectorS in Craniofacial Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Crystal Rogers, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2026
* USD 657,466.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-standing question in the
fields of developmental and evolutionary biology is to understand how animals
develop different outer appearances using similar genetic programs. The goal of
this project is to enhance our knowledge of how embryonic neural crest stem
cells form the tissues that make the face in closely related organisms, and how
these stem cells give rise distinct outer appearances. To achieve this goal, Dr.
Rogers at UC Davis will work with undergraduate students recruited from
primarily undergraduate and Hispanic-serving institutions to dissect the
programs that regulate the formation of neural crest cells in three bird
species. The dual research and educational project called Functional Analysis of
Crest EffectorS (FACES), will identify how changing the expression of these
proteins at early embryonic stages drives differences in beak structure in
quail, chicken, and peafowl embryos. Dr. Rogers has a strong background in
studying neural crest cells and early development across various species, and is
one of the few investigators in the world performing cross-species analyses to
define the molecular control of cell specification and cell migration in avians.
This faculty Early Career Development Award (CAREER) will fund a research and
educational program that provides professional growth, hands-on research
opportunities and long-term mentoring for undergraduate students, and will
increase our fundamental understanding of how complex tissues are formed during
vertebrate embryonic development. By asking the question, “what regulates the
cells that make the face?” we can unravel the mechanisms driving formation of
faces in different species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the information we
know about neural crest development has been identified independently in a
handful of model organisms, and the findings have been incorporated into a
neural crest gene regulatory network model to resolve protein-gene interactions.
However, we lack confirmation of the functional conservation of proteins across
species, thereby making comprehensive understanding of neural crest evolution
and development challenging. Although the expression of the factors that
regulate neural crest development are conserved, we do not know if they function
at the same developmental time, regulate the same targets, or if changes in
these factors drive phenotypic variation across species. This CAREER will
directly address this barrier to knowledge by defining the roles of three SOXE
(SRY-related HMG box Group E) transcription factors, and their putative targets,
type I and II cadherin molecules, in the formation of neural crest cells and
their craniofacial derivatives. Quail, chick, and peafowl embryos will be used
to compare expression timing, protein function, and outcome of protein
perturbations on craniofacial (beak) formation. The objectives are to 1)
identify the roles of SOXE factors during neural crest (NC) specification and
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in chick versus quail embryos, 2)
determine the cadherin code that controls NC cell fate and EMT in chick vs
quail, and 3) quantify the effects of SOXE and cadherin perturbations on
craniofacial beak structure. Collectively, this work will shed light on the
molecular, cellular, and organismal-level mechanisms that drive neural crest
cell formation and will significantly increase our understanding of how
organisms use the same factors to drive differential
morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.