* 2143160
* CAREER: Engineered multispecific antibodies to interrogate and manipulate immune checkpoint protein trafficking
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Jamie Spangler, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2027
* USD 435,699.00

Cancers can suppress the immune response by binding specific proteins on the
surface of T-cells. This binding turns off the tumor-killing function of the
T-cells. Antibodies designed to block that binding are known as checkpoint
inhibitors. Checkpoint inhibitors allow the normal immune response so T-cells
can attack the cancerous cells. Unfortunately, checkpoint inhibitor treatment is
only approved for about a dozen cancer types and is effective in a minority of
cases. Designing and testing antibodies that block immune checkpoint pathways
through a unique mechanism is the focus of this project. Enhancing our
understanding of the dynamics of the immune response will aid in the design of
more effective cancer therapeutics. The research program is interwoven with an
education and outreach program. Baltimore high school students will engage in
interactive research experiences, and a workshop will engage local students and
their families in protein engineering. Collaboration with Baltimore teachers
will integrate engineering into the K-12 curriculum and inspire students to
pursue careers at the interface of engineering, immunology, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clinical antibody drugs competitively inhibit
interactions between surface-bound immune checkpoint proteins and their
activating ligands. This project will instead target the molecular trafficking
behavior of the checkpoint proteins before they reach the cell surface. Engaging
multiple epitopes on a single transmembrane protein can induce clustering and
down-regulation, eliminating immune checkpoint proteins from the cell surface.
This mobilizes the immune response. The research objective of this project is to
discover and design multi-specific down-regulating antibodies (MSDR Abs)
targeting immune checkpoint proteins, use them to explore molecular trafficking,
and evaluate their effects on the immune system. MSDR Abs will enable molecular
characterization of immune checkpoint pathways and help elucidate the mechanisms
underlying resistance to current therapeutics. The proposed work will also lay
the foundation for development of custom-designed proteins that enact a
distinctive trafficking-based mechanism and have great potential as cancer
therapies. Moreover, the modular platform developed herein can be readily
extended to other biological systems for a range of research and medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.