* 2143702
* CAREER: Multiscale modeling of perivascular flow in the brain
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Jessica Shang, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 364,753.00

Cognitive diseases such as Alzheimer's are linked to the buildup of metabolic
waste in the brain. In healthy brains, cerebrospinal fluid transports the waste
through perivascular spaces that surround the arteries. Perivascular flow is
affected by changes in arterial properties and blood flow distribution in the
brain, which may explain the correlation between vascular decline and cognitive
degeneration. This project is focused on modeling the fluid networks of blood
and cerebrospinal fluid throughout the brain to provide insight into the
relationship between arterial and perivascular activity. Understanding the
mechanics of fluid flow in the brain will advance capabilities to correlate age-
related ailments with neurodegeneration, predict patient outcomes, and drive
treatment and prevention strategies. Pharmaceutical, surgical, or lifestyle
interventions may alter the mechanical properties of vessels and brain tissue to
promote waste clearance. The project will contribute to science education by
including high school students from the Rochester City School District in
undergraduate-level research coursework emphasizing hands-on lab experience, in
collaboration with the University of Rochester David T. Kearns Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments strongly correlate blood and perivascular
flows, but a causal mechanism has not yet been established in either experiment
or simulation. This project will develop a multiscale model that explicitly
relates arterial function to perivascular flow throughout the brain with wave
propagation models coupling the arterial and perivascular networks to obtain a
system-wide understanding of pressure and flow in the brain’s perivascular
spaces. This model will be able to calculate flow distributions anywhere in the
brain, beyond regions that are experimentally accessible, and at a broader scale
than previous computational studies. Mechanical parameters in the model such as
stiffness or diameter will be manipulated to mimic vascular conditions that
result from chronic hypertension (high blood pressure), or transient spikes in
neural activity (increased blood flow) that occur over short and long time
scales. Both conditions will be validated with experimental data generated by
collaborators at the University of Rochester Medical Center. The propagation of
these effects will give insight into the relative impacts of vascular effects on
perivascular flow, and the modeling framework can be expanded to study a range
of vascular conditions beyond those in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.