* 2143152
* CAREER: Development of a Novel Approach for the Identification of Toxic Byproducts and their Precursors in Oxidative Drinking Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Carsten Prasse, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2027
* USD 440,135.00

Chemical oxidants such as chlorine, chloramine, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide are
widely used in water treatment as disinfectants to deactivate pathogens and as
reactants to abate organic contaminants in drinking water sources. These
chemical oxidants can also react with organic contaminants and dissolved organic
matter (DOM) to generate byproducts which can adversely impact human health due
to their potential toxicity. Currently, hundreds of byproducts have been
detected in treated drinking water. However, only a limited number of these
byproducts have been evaluated for toxicity as the current protocols used to
assess their toxicity rely on a slow and inefficient chemical-by-chemical
evaluation approach. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to develop a
novel approach to identify toxic byproducts and their precursors in drinking
water treated with chemical oxidants. This novel approach, reactivity-directed
analysis (RDA), builds upon techniques and protocols pioneered in drug
development and chemical risk assessment to identify all byproducts with simar
mechanisms of toxicity in a sample of drinking water treated with chemical
oxidants. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to understand, control, and mitigate
the formation of toxic byproducts and their precursors in drinking water treated
with chemical oxidants. Further benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of a graduate student at
Johns Hopkins University.

Chemical oxidants used in water treatment react with organic contaminants and
dissolved organic matter (DOM) in drinking water sources to generate a large
variety of byproducts. However, a comprehensive assessment of the toxicity of
drinking water byproducts has remained elusive. This CAREER project will address
this critical knowledge gap. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator
(PI) proposes to develop and apply a novel approach to detect toxic byproducts,
called reactivity-directed analysis (RDA). This innovative approach leverages
assays and protocols pioneered in drug development and chemical risk assessment
to identify toxic organic electrophiles (the largest class of known toxicants)
in treated drinking water and elucidate their precursors. The specific
objectives of the proposed research are to: 1) Develop a novel microbead-based
RDA assay for the detection of organic electrophiles in complex aqueous
matrices, 2) Investigate the formation and reaction mechanisms of organic
electrophiles produced from the reaction of phenolic DOM model compounds with
chemical oxidants, and 3) Investigate the formation of organic electrophiles
produced from the reactions of DOM isolates, treated wastewater, and surface
water with chemical oxidants. The successful completion of this project has the
potential for transformative impact through the generation of fundamental
knowledge to advance the development and implementation of a new framework for
identifying toxic byproducts and their precursors that could be used to minimize
and mitigate their formations in drinking water treatment systems. To implement
the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will leverage
his ongoing collaboration with The Food Project (TFP) to develop and implement
an afterschool program (EnviroSense) that will expose middle and high-school
students to the design and applications of water quality sensors. In addition,
the PI plans to develop two new courses including an undergraduate lab course on
water quality sensors and a graduate course on water quality assessment and
monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.