* 2143019
* CAREER: Investigating the Role of an RNA Interference Pathway in Safeguarding the Tetrahymena Thermophila Somatic Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Suzanne Lee, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2027
* USD 590,849.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protection of our genomes from
mutation and DNA damage is critical for sustaining life and preventing disease.
While there are a variety of ways by which cells ensure genome integrity, recent
studies have revealed new players in genome protection that consist of RNA
molecules and RNA-associated proteins. Yet much remains to be understood about
how these biomolecules function. Therefore, the goal of this project is to
deepen our understanding of how RNA and RNA-associated proteins ensure the
integrity of genomes through investigation of an RNA-based process in a single-
celled organism that has long served as the basis of foundational discoveries in
biology: Tetrahymena thermophila. The scientific insights afforded by this
project are expected to have important implications for how diverse organisms,
including humans, use RNA-based processes to protect their genomes and how
disruptions to these processes may underlie disease. In addition, this project
will provide opportunities to expand access to authentic research experiences
and STEM professional development for undergraduate students at four primarily
undergraduate institutions in the Northwest â€“ Western Washington University,
Heritage University, Pacific University, and Carroll College. As these
institutions serve a number of students who identify as members of
underrepresented groups in STEM, the education aspects of this project are
anticipated to promote the retention and success of diverse students in science,
thereby strengthening our future scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological processes as diverse as cell division
and differentiation, defense against viruses and transposons, and organismal
development depend on RNA interference (RNAi) pathways. While RNAi is best
understood as a mechanism that represses gene expression and ensures proper
chromatin structure around centromeres, recent studies in diverse eukaryotes
have uncovered new roles for RNAi factors in preventing or repairing DNA damage.
The details of these new roles and how evolutionarily conserved they are remain
to be fully elucidated. This project will investigate the mechanisms and genomic
locations for a newly uncovered role for RNAi in maintaining genome integrity in
the ciliated model eukaryote Tetrahymena thermophila. This work will leverage
established reverse genetic, fluorescence microscopy, and biochemical approaches
developed or adapted for use in Tetrahymena. These studies have the potential to
reveal both species-specific and broadly conserved mechanisms for RNAi-governed
genome integrity, advancing our understanding of emerging roles for RNA in
genome protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.