* 2143529
* CAREER: Fostering Prosocial Behavior and Well-Being in Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* David Jurgens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 115,418.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social media platforms are a common part of
daily life that connect people and aid in sharing information. While society has
learned how these platforms can negatively impact individuals, little is known
comparatively about how our interactions on the platforms benefit us and how to
encourage positive behaviors of people on these platforms. Being able to measure
the potential benefits of social media can help understand its cumulative
effects on people and help identify both ways individuals can change their own
behavior and inform the design of social media platforms themselves. This
project aims to develop computational tools to identify and measure a variety of
ways in which positive behaviors such as compassion or empathy occur online.
This research will study the effects of experiencing positive and negative
behaviors in social media on people’s psychological well-being to create a
holistic picture of social media’s impact. Furthermore, the project will
identify strategies for how to phrase positive reinforcement and develop tools
to support individuals in behaving positively, both of which should encourage
future positive behavior in social media. The project team will also release
educational material, courses, and videos for the public and students at
multiple levels, as well as provide practical and informative public-facing
tools that educate people about the impact of social media on well-being at a
personal level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies prosocial behavior in
social media and quantifies the impact of interactions, content, and
interventions there on specific dimensions of psychological well-being. To
accomplish this goal, the project will develop datasets, models, and
technologies to identify and encourage positive behaviors. The computational
techniques will combine insights from natural language processing and
computational social science to recognize subtle social signals in language,
which will enable moving from just understanding the meaning of a text to
understanding the text’s effects on the audience. The project will address three
core technical challenges: (1) recognizing prosocial behavior in online spaces
in ways that are sensitive to the norms of the community; (2) quantifying the
impact of social media interactions and content on dimensions of psychological
well-being and developing computational methods for analyzing this impact at
scale; and (3) creating proactive technologies that promote prosocial behavior
via behavioral nudges and tools to help people write more
prosocially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.