* 2143172
* CAREER: Dynamically Reconfigurable Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics with Solid-State Quantum Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Elizabeth Goldschmidt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Harnessing the quantum nature of light for more secure communication, faster
computation, and more powerful sensing is on the horizon today following
significant advances in quantum photonics in recent decades. A major outstanding
challenge lies in designing interfaces between optical and matter-based quantum
systems that can preserve fragile quantum states. Such interfaces are necessary
for a wide variety of tasks, including generating light suitable for carrying
quantum information, storing and retrieving photonic qubits, and mediating
entangling operations between photons. Achieving these goals generally requires
enhancing the strength of the light-atom interaction, which is naturally too
weak for efficient quantum devices. A common method to enhance this interaction
is to couple the atoms to an optical resonator or cavity, typically a precisely
fabricated structure designed for a single application. The research proposed
here aims to develop a dynamically reconfigurable platform for coupling atoms to
an optical cavity by using highly coherent, cryogenically-cooled rare-earth atom
dopants in a solid-state host that can be spectrally and spatially tailored to
form the cavity mirrors and the coupled atomic ensemble. This flexible platform
can be used for a variety of important applications, such as efficient and long-
lived quantum memory for light, and can be incorporated into integrated optical
devices. In addition, a new undergraduate research fellowship that targets
students interested in quantum science and engineering from underrepresented
backgrounds will be developed, with a focus on ensuring supportive mentorship
that extends beyond the summer research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The objective of the proposed work
is to develop a dynamically reconfigurable cavity quantum electrodynamics system
based on a spatially and spectrally tailored ensemble of highly coherent,
cryogenically-cooled, rare-earth atom dopants in a solid-state host, which forms
both the cavity mirrors and the coupled atoms. Rare-earth atoms in solids at
cryogenic temperatures exhibit highly coherent atom-like behavior and an energy
level structure that makes them suited to precise tailoring of their spatial and
spectral profile via spectral hole-burning. A one-dimensional array of
alternating spectral profiles acts as a highly reflective optical mirror.
Furthermore, the presence of multiple metastable energy levels enables dynamic,
optically controlled switching of the mirror between reflective and transmissive
states via electromagnetically induced transparency. Additional spectral and
spatial tailoring can enable more complex structures including optical cavities
that can be coupled to each other and to ensembles of atoms. Thus a fully
reconfigurable cavity quantum electrodynamics system is formed without any
fabricated structures, with the additional feature of dynamically switchable
cavity mirrors. This scheme will enable dramatic improvement in the efficiency
of rare-earth ensemble-based optical quantum memory to store photonic qubits.
Rare-earth atoms are already one of the most promising platforms for quantum
memory and coupling a rare-earth ensemble to an optical cavity addresses
outstanding challenges related to making compact devices with long storage times
without sacrificing storage efficiency. And doing so in a way that is
reconfigurable without the need to fabricate a cavity makes this a flexible
platform for a wide variety of useful quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.