* 2143925
* CAREER: Exploring Novel Chemical Space: Modular Synthesis of Biologically Relevant Strained Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Tian Qin, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 05/31/2027
* USD 690,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Tian Qin of University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center is aiming
to develop new methods to access strained small molecules for potential
application in investigational drugs. Such endeavors could empower practitioners
of drug discovery to explore an expanded chemical space, accelerating the
discovery of drug molecules with palatable drug-like properties. By way of
example, bicyclo[1.1.1]pentane (BCP), a strained hydrocarbon molecule, is
identified as a three-dimensional surrogate for aromatics, which are commonly
found in drug candidates but often contribute to unfavorable properties. To this
end, BCP provides an attractive alternative to aromatics. However, the broader
application and functionalization of this moiety is limited by a lack of readily
accessible synthetic approaches. Dr. Qin's laboratory is developing a novel
synthetic strategy to bridge this gap. This project lies at the interface of
organic synthesis, theoretical chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and
medicinal chemistry. It is thus well-suited for the education of aspiring
scientists at all levels with diverse backgrounds. Broad participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education will be
encouraged at the collegiate and K-12 levels, taking advantage of recent
advances in modeling and visualization technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the Qin research team of UT Southwestern Medical Center is
developing synthetic methods for pharmaceutically relevant strained bicyclic
molecules. The bicyclo[1.1.1]pentane (BCP) motif has increasingly garnered
interest in the medicinal chemistry community, due to its ability to improve the
physicochemical properties of prospective drug candidates, as a bioisosteric
replacement of aromatic rings. Although several methodologies have been reported
to prepare multi-substituted BCPs, access to bridge-substituted BCPs has been
limited. The proposed research leverages a series of novel BCPs reagents to
facilitate the synthesis and probe new reactivities of this strained ring
system. Three specific aims are under concurrent investigation in this project
to provide (i) access to complex multi-substituted caged bicyclic molecules, (2)
systematic optimization of synthetic approaches to BCPs, and (3) knowledge of
the properties of multi-substituted BCPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.