* 2143870
* CAREER: Developing Techniques for Atom-Based Gravitational Wave Detection and Dark Matter Searches with a Multiplexed Optical Lattice Clock
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Shimon Kolkowitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 03/31/2027
* USD 311,409.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Optical atomic clocks are now the most precise and accurate
tabletop measurement devices ever constructed by humankind, offering sensitivity
to new and exotic physics. The PI has recently developed a new kind of atomic
clock apparatus and has used it to demonstrate a comparison between two optical
clocks at a precision below one part in 10^19. To give a sense of scale, this
corresponds to resolving a difference in the rate the two clocks tick at that
would result in them disagreeing with each other by only 1 second after 300
billion years. The PI and a graduate student will use this new apparatus to
develop and test ways to use optical atomic clocks to search for dark matter and
to detect gravitational waves. This project therefore has the potential to
result in new tools for studying the universe through gravitational wave
astronomy, and new ways to search for answers to one of the biggest mysteries in
physics, the nature of dark matter. The PI will integrate these research topics
into new demos and hands-on activities designed to introduce K-12 students to
modern physics concepts. Students will engage with these activities at live
shows and interactive events as part of the University of Wisconsin “Wonders of
Physics” outreach program, with an emphasis on reaching rural communities and
Native American reservations in Wisconsin. This project will thereby strengthen
public support for modern physics research and help students develop intuition
for atomic technologies and their applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to explore and develop
emerging applications of optical atomic clocks. The PI has recently demonstrated
a first-of-its-kind “multiplexed" optical lattice clock apparatus that enables
differential clock comparisons between two or more spatially resolved ensembles
of strontium atoms within the same vacuum chamber. These differential
measurements eliminate the detrimental effects of clock laser noise and common
mode environmental fluctuations, pushing the limits of achievable clock
stability and atom-atom coherence. Record differential clock stabilities and
fractional frequency precision have now been demonstrated in this apparatus,
with a clear path to further gains in performance. The PI and collaborators will
use this multiplexed optical lattice clock to develop and demonstrate novel
measurement sequences and data analysis techniques for future gravitational wave
detection with space-based optical lattice clocks, including the blind injection
of simulated gravitational wave signals at realistic strengths. The PI and
collaborators will also use the multiplexed optical lattice clock to search for
foggy dark matter in previously unexplored regions of parameter space, and to
develop new techniques to search for other forms of dark matter. The PI will
work with collaborators to develop interactive and engaging demos and inquiry-
based activities to introduce K-12 students to modern physics concepts,
including the basic principles of atomic clocks and their applications, and will
assess their effectiveness using surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.