* 2143140
* CAREER: Superresolution Neurochemical Probe based on Stochastic Neurotransmitter Localization
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Brian Kim, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Understanding the functional components of the brain that underlie perception,
cognition, and action is crucial for developing next-generation neural
prostheses and brain-machine interfaces. This relies on our ability to
reconstruct accurate images of brain activity from millions of neurons. However,
traditional electrophysiological techniques using the current paradigm of the
“single-neuron per electrode” approach lack the scalability to read signals from
millions of neurons. Therefore, it is critical to investigate new means of
interacting with neurons. To address this unmet need, the objective of this
CAREER project is to discover a new neural interfacing modality using brain
neurochemicals that can accurately capture the brain’s activity at a large
scale. The project will also lead an exciting role in closing the knowledge and
interest gaps in science and engineering via a multidimensional approach,
including a new high-school research program, undergraduate research experience,
and teach-in events at local public schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main idea
of this project is to exploit the stochastic nature of neurotransmitter
diffusion to investigate a superresolution neurochemical imaging technique. The
excitation of neurons results in action potentials that propagate through the
neuronal body and axons toward synapses. At the synapses, these action
potentials instigate the secretion of neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitter
molecules released from a single vesicle diffuse and subsequently reach multiple
adjacent electrodes to be measured. Based on the diffusion characteristics, the
precise origin of neurotransmitter secretion can be localized. This localization
technique is similar to triangulation in principle, but it considers the
diffusion path to make precise localization of neural activities. This method
has unique advantages over triangulation by being able to distinguish both x-y
location and also z position based on the diffusion characteristic. Also,
because the diffusion of molecules is a slower process compared to voltage
propagation, the point source can be pinpointed with high accuracy. Using this
approach, a few electrodes can produce neurochemical imaging with a high spatial
resolution. This new approach will transform neural interfaces by enabling
simultaneous measurements from millions of neurons without requiring an
equivalent density of electrodes. The superresolution neurochemical probe will
help unravel the complex role of dopamine’s spatial distribution in cognitive
processes by directly mapping the neurochemical activities in the brain with
high spatiotemporal resolution. This project will result in not only the most
advanced neurochemical probe available to date but also the superresolution
algorithm that can enhance the spatial resolution into
nanometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.