* 2143384
* CAREER: studying superconductivity and ferromagnetism in 2D material heterostructures with flat energy band
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Jia Li, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2027
* USD 350,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) materials are
materials made from single layers of atoms. Different 2D materials can be
assembled into a designer structure to realize new properties and novel
phenomena such as superconductivity and magnetism. This project utilizes a
special design of 2D structure to study how electronic interaction can influence
the stability of these novel phenomena, such as superconductivity and magnetism,
in the quantum regime. Studying these phenomena on the nanometer scale is
central to the advancement of quantum science, which promises to reshape the
nature of technological innovation and has profound influence on national
security and global economic balance. By training graduate and undergraduate
students in device fabrication on a nanometer scale and exposing them to cutting
edge research in studying quantum phenomena, this research and outreach program
inspires and educates future scientists and engineers who can take on the
leadership role and pioneer innovations in the field of quantum computational
technology. The outreach effort includes collaboration with the Sci-Toon team to
produce cartoon videos to expose the general public to the research activities.
This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Graphene moiré
systems provides a fascinating material platform to study quantum phenomena,
such as superconductivity and ferromagnetism, and investigate their interplay in
a 2D confinement. This project utilizes specially designed 2D material
heterostructure, which is usually referred to as the double-layer structure, to
perform Coulomb screening and thermodynamic measurements on various moiré
systems. A main objective is to understand the role of Coulomb correlation in
stabilizing the superconducting and ferromagnetic phases. The role of Coulomb
interaction offers important constraints to understand the pairing mechanism and
order parameter symmetry of the superconducting phase, which has become an
outstanding open question. This project also explores a new flavor of moiré
physics using the proximity effect, which are shown to transform the ground
state order of 2D moiré systems. By controlling the strength of Coulomb
interaction through screening, the proposed effort directly studies the
influence of the proximity effect and aims to establish a new method to engineer
physical properties of 2D material structures. This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.