* 2143787
* CAREER: In Silico Single-Molecule Force Spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Rafael Bernardi, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2027
* USD 484,008.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). Other funding was provided by the Molecular Biophysics Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the stone age, humans know that
mechanical forces can be used to bend and break materials. Young children
intuitively shape playdough, unaware that they are controlling shear-forces when
deciding to tear or pinch the material, where the direction of applied force
defines their effects. However, the outcomes of applied mechanical forces become
much less intuitive if we zoom into biomolecules. In fact, chemistry at shear
forces is quite intriguing, with relatively soft bonds becoming very strong
depending on how force is applied to them. Such intriguing behavior is crucial
for the inner workings of all cells, where proteins are often under the
influence of mechanical forces. Frequently, the directionality and amplitude of
these forces can regulate biological activities. In this project, the
researchers are not only investigating the intriguing behavior of proteins that
are mechanoactive, that is, that react differently depending on the forces
applied on them, but also developing computational tools that make it possible
to study them with atomic detail. Particularly, mechanoactive proteins that are
found in the surface of both good and bad bacteria will be investigated to
elucidate how they become extremally resilient to shear forces and allow
infections to take place within our bodies. Additionally, new immersive
technologies will be developed to observe these proteins under shear-force load,
powering the “Immersive Biophysics on the Road” program, where tools and
knowledge developed in this project will be taken to areas in Alabama that are
historically underrepresented in STEM. An inflatable projection dome will then
be used to teach the molecular mechanisms of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to
characterize, with atomic and sub-atomic resolution, the protein:protein
interactions responsible for the remarkable mechanostability of extracellular
protein complexes. The central hypothesis of this project is that evolution has
created geometrical artifices that are used by different proteins to become
stronger when under mechanical stress, and also modular and flexible when
needed. This hypothesis is based on preliminary work that has shown a simple
geometric mechanism responsible for mechanostability, but that is challenging to
be achieved at the molecular level. Here, the rationale is that understanding
the molecular details at play will allow for the manipulation of
mechanostability; for guiding the development of molecules that can inhibit
adhesion processes; and for proposing the development of biotechnology tools
that could profit from the mechanostability of these proteins. These goals will
be achieved by: 1. developing bioinformatic tools to resurrect cellulosomal
proteins ancestors to understand how mechanostability evolved; 2. Investigating
the mechanism by which staph bacteria form highly-stable bonds to the human
extra-cellular matrix. Particularly, this project will employ a combination of
classical molecular dynamics, hybrid quantum/classical calculations, and
dimensionality reduction methods, in order to characterize sub-atomic properties
of proteins under mechanical stress. Additionally, new molecular dynamics
methods for analysis and visualization will be made easier by implementing them
into graphical user interfaces. Most of the new implementations will be made
into QwikMD, which will incorporate new methods for structure prediction based
on artificial intelligence, as well as new immersive visualization renderings,
which will allow for the use of portable planetarium-like domes and virtual
reality headsets for science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.