* 2143628
* CAREER: Photocatalytic Optical Fibers
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Christian Pester, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2027
* USD 410,855.00

Because light can be collected freely or produced efficiently, driving chemical
transformations with light instead of heat can have significant advantages over
traditional chemical production methods. However, challenges remain in bringing
these mostly academic findings to the scale necessary for industrial adoption,
limiting the benefits to society that would result from safer and milder
chemical processing conditions. An important factor in restricting the
scalability of photochemical processes is that while high light absorptivity of
the feedstocks is desirable for reaction efficiency, it also limits light
penetration depth into the reaction medium. Commonly used photocatalysts can
also be prohibitively expensive, and residual catalyst impurities in the final
products often leads to discoloration or degradation. To address these
limitations, this CAREER project will study the use of photocatalyst-coated
optical fibers to guide light into the reactor vessels. If successful, the
proposed work will lay the scientific foundations to facilitate the
implementation of modern photochemistry on an industrial scale and enhance the
impact of academic photo-reaction engineering innovations. Immobilizing
photocatalysts on optical fibers is anticipated to improve light-penetration and
efficiency of the catalytic process. Because the catalysts are immobilized and
will not be added continuously with the reactor feed, the proposed approach will
improve the process economics and will provide a path to manufacturing both
pristine small molecules and polymers free of catalyst impurities. Eliminating
such impurities is of importance for synthesis of high purity chemicals in
biomedical and electronic applications where trace metals can introduce toxicity
or be detrimental to device performance. The research plans have the potential
to accelerate the implementation of modern and mild photochemistries on large
scales and benefit society by helping to bridge the academia-industry divide.
Education and outreach activities will also benefit from the close academia-
industry ties to be developed, connecting undergraduate and graduate students
and potential employers through field trips and panel discussions with industry
leadership. Further, this program will develop and distribute inexpensive
polymer science laboratory kits that will benefit underserved middle and high
school students by improving access to a quality STEM education
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will provide the
fundamental engineering knowledge needed to translate academic advances in
modern photochemistry to large-scale industrial applications. The objectives of
this research program are to identify critical chemical structure-property
relationships for organic photoredox catalysts that will enable surface-grafting
to immobilizing substrates without affecting catalytic activity. By
investigating a range of approaches to control the optical fiber evanescent
field, optical fiber surface-tethered catalysts will subsequently be tested as
heterogeneous photocatalysts in both batch and continuous-flow reactor systems.
Catalyst surface density will be controlled through a combination of surface
monolayer grafting and the use of bottlebrush polymer tethers. Once an optimal
fiber unit spacing and distribution is identified, process throughput and
scalability will no longer limited by light absorption, but exclusively by the
size of the reactor. By bringing light into the reactor, Beer-Lambert absorption
limitations will be circumvented to provide a highly scalable continuous
throughput methodology. Because the photocatalyst is immobilized within the
reactor (and not continuously added), it can be recycled for multiple reactions;
furthermore, the final chemical product will be free of catalyst impurities, a
condition necessary in many pharmaceutical and electronics chemical products.
From an educational and outreach perspective, this program will broadly impact
students of all ages and backgrounds by forming a coalition between university
entities, rural schools, and industrial partners. The principal investigator
will increase interfaces between undergraduate and graduate students and
potential employers through field trips and panel discussions with industry
leadership. Further, this program will pilot and distribute inexpensive at-cost
polymer science laboratory kits to secondary students to benefit underserved
middle and high school students by improving their access to quality STEM
education. Finally, targeted community outreach events will promote university
enrollment of socioeconomically challenged students while communicating
scientific principles and the importance of sustainability and plastic waste
recycling to non-technical audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.