* 2143806
* CAREER: Thermomechanical Response and Fatigue Performance of Surface Layers Engineered by Finish Machining: In-situ Characterization and Digital Process Twin
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Julius Schoop, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2027
* USD 507,288.00

Finish machining is a widely used process for precision component manufacture.
Not only does it achieve required dimensional accuracy, finish machining also
dictates the part surface integrity. The surface layer altered by machining
subject to severe and localized thermal and mechanical loading and exhibit
properties far different from the bulk material. Though shallow (order of 10 to
100 microns thick), it plays a critical role in part performance, especially,
for dynamic loading. Furthermore, the surface material response in such
finishing operations is complicated and challenging to study because of the
small length scale and extreme deformation conditions. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will pursue fundamental knowledge of the effects of
finish machining on the behavior and performance of advanced metals such as
titanium alloys, using a digital process twin (i.e., virtual representation of a
physical process) approach to increase the quality and life of high-value
components. The research outcomes have a potential to improve productivity and
competitiveness of the US manufacturing industry, with a broad application
potential in the aerospace, biomedical, and automotive sectors. The project team
will collaborate closely with leading regional and national aerospace
manufacturers to identify and address key technical requirements and workforce
education needs. In addition, partnership with the Society of Women Engineers
will be leveraged to recruit and train a more diverse workforce with full
participation of female and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core research objective of this CAREER
project is the realization of model-based intelligent finish machining through
the systematic study and modeling of finishing-specific material response to the
thermomechanical loads in finish machining. Using a high-resolution novel
process characterization testbed, the project team will perform advanced in-situ
measurements of surface material response in finishing-specific conditions.
Based on insights from in-situ characterizations from finish machining
experiments, this study will evaluate semi-analytical digital process twin
models by benchmarking their predictive performance and speed against
established numerical approaches, such as finite element modeling. The project
will also leverage high-resolution digital image correlation techniques to study
strain localization effects during both finish machining itself, and crack
initiation events during subsequent fatigue testing using micro-specimens
extracted from machined surface layers. By modeling the process-induced
structure response of finished surfaces in a faster and more reliable manner,
the research effort will lay a groundwork for a more efficient development
approach for finish machining processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.