* 2143704
* CAREER: End-User Robot Programming by Multimodal Instruction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Chien-Ming Huang, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2027
* USD 128,833.00

This research will bring assistive robots within reach of average people by
enabling such users to easily instruct them to help complete useful daily tasks,
so that ultimately many lay people, especially older adults who wish to continue
living independently, will be better able to benefit from the technology. It is
projected that by 2060, the percent of the U.S. population aged 65 years or
older will reach 23.5%. Consequently, the demand for healthcare resources and
societal support are growing substantially. Our society, however, is presently
experiencing a shortage of caregivers, and current caregivers are at increased
risk for burnout. Project outcomes will allow users with little or no knowledge
of coding or engineering to easily customize their robots through a variety of
means (e.g., demonstrations) to perform tasks that meet their needs, such as
organizing their shoes or cleaning the bathroom. Additional broad impact of the
work will derive from educational activities that broaden participation in
computing by mentoring students with diverse backgrounds and dissemination of
research findings to a wide age range of learners.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, this project will investigate the science of and
fundamental technologies for robot programming by natural multimodal
instruction. Human instructions are inherently multimodal, but the rich
information embedded in them is not always adequately captured and utilized by
robot systems. The research will computationally model multimodal instructional
cues to characterize demonstration quality for improved learning, assist lay
people in their task demonstrations, and enhance the user experience in the face
of instructional difficulties. The work will create open-source systems for
robot programming by multimodal demonstration, and produce quantitative and
qualitative knowledge of how older adults naturally instruct robots and how they
may use programmable robotic assistance to support them in their daily tasks at
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.