* 2143766
* CAREER: Moral Economies in Water Markets: Implications for Understanding Human Responses to Water Insecurity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Melissa Beresford, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2027
* USD 458,340.00

Half of the worldâ€™s population will live in water-stressed conditions by 2040.
To manage water insecurity, many communities will increasingly need to rely on
mobile, adaptable, and decentralized water infrastructures, such as private
water vending, rather than on centralized public systems alone. In the coming
years then, it will be crucial to understand how market-based infrastructures
can be designed to uphold local notions of water justice and advance the Human
Right to Water. This CAREER project will examine when and how communities
mobilize market-based moral economies to manage water insecurity in ways they
consider to be fair and just. Moral economies are normative economic
institutions in which shared notions of justice obligate individuals to provide
access to vital resources. While scientists have documented reciprocity-based
moral economies as a key human response to resource insecurity, we have little
understanding of when and how people may use market-based moral economic
arrangements to manage water insecure conditions within contemporary capitalist
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase 1 of the project, the researcher will
ethnographically examine private water vending in a major U.S. water insecurity
hotspot to understand if and when market-based moral economies for water arise.
In Phase 2, the researcher will explore the generalizability of these findings
through a cross-cultural study of market-based moral economies in six global
sites (via collaboration with the NSF-funded Household Water Insecurity Research
Coordination Network). Both phases of research will focus on three water markets
(informal exchanges, semi-formal water hauling, and formal water retail stores)
to examine how market formality enables or constrains moral economies for water.
Within each market, the researcher will examine how social distance, dyadic
social ties that are strong, weak, or absent, enables or constrains moral
economies for water. Findings from this research will: contribute to
anthropological knowledge of the social foundations of markets; further
understand how humans respond to resource insecurity in market-based economies;
advance interdisciplinary scholarship on the multi-scalar causes, consequences,
and responses to household water insecurity. Funding for the project will also
support the development of a novel research apprenticeship model that will
integrate all phases of research with graduate and undergraduate teaching in
order to train a new generation of social scientists in team-based
interdisciplinary social science and community-based research
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.