* 2143902
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Linking Household and Infrastructure Data to Understand the Impacts of Winter Storm Uri in Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Laura Solitare, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

In February 2021, Winter-Storm Uri, impacted 25 states and more than 150 million
Americans leading to extended power and water outages. Among the states impacted
by the storm, Texas was the hardest hit. The impact of Uri on the state of Texas
was far beyond expectations leading to several deaths, a significant halt in the
distribution and administering of COVID-19 vaccines, and an estimated $90
billion economic loss. Most significantly, the independent electric grid managed
by the Eclectic Reliability Council of Texas, came very close to a complete
failure. Consequently, local electric utilities had to significantly reduce
power consumption resulting in millions of households and businesses,
experiencing significant and extended periods without power. There were also
cascading failures of local water systems, as pumping stations failed. It was
widely reported that the power outages disproportionately impacted some
populations more than others, and yet there was little in the way of any
systematic evidence establishing these observations. There is a need to
scientifically document the nature of these failures, any potential disparate
impacts, and establish contributing factors using appropriate data. Such data
collection can provide opportunities to learn what went wrong at various levels,
including technical and infrastructure maintenance issues, precautionary
measures, planning, and execution. Findings from this research can be employed
to address environmental justice issues and broader infrastructure resilience
planning. As such, this project aims to perform ground truth validation by
collecting detailed data from multiple fronts including perishable data from
households and power/infrastructure sysetms. The findings of this research will
advance knowledge for building more disaster resilient infrastructure systems
which are critical for promoting the health, prosperity, and welfare of our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research lies at the nexus of engineering and
social sciences aiming to ultimately explore potential relationships between
engineering infrastructure, operational decisions and household experiences.
More specifically, this RAPID project will collect data on two fronts. The first
is household data including demographic, socioeconomic statuses together with
their experiences throughout the storm and outages. These data will be collected
a hybrid data collection method including an online survey of households,
interviews with community-based organizations (CMOs), and secondary data
collections from various social media outlets. While online data collection
helps with uncovering general trends, interviews with CMOs and impacted
stakeholders within a diverse set of neighborhoods will help address digital
divide issues within lower-income neighborhoods. Finally, content analysis of
social media posts provides another layer of information will be used to fill
the remaining data gaps and cross-examine data trends. The second data
collection activity focuses on the collection of grid and utility data related
to the locations, timing, and duration of outages during and after the storm.
These data will complement household/neighborhood data to provide both top-down
and bottom-up insights on the unraveling of the event and its associated
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.