* 2143456
* Upgrade of geochemical analytical facilities at South Dakota Mines
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Scott Beeler, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 158,475.00

This award supports the acquisition of an ion chromatography system and sample
preparation equipment at South Dakota School of Mines &amp; Technology (South
Dakota Mines) to enable a diversity of low-temperature geochemical analyses
currently not possible in the region. Ion chromatography is used to measure
major and minor element concentrations in a range of sample materials including
natural waters and soil and rock extracts. Access to an ion chromatography
system will facilitate projects focused on a range of topics including water
quality and soil chemistry. The instrument will be part of a multiuser research
facility, enabling the growth of low-temperature geochemistry research on campus
and provide access to users from across the greater region. The instrument will
also be incorporated into courses for our undergraduate geology students,
training the next generation of Earth scientists. Funds will also be used to
support hands-on workshops for training on the instrumentation for students and
staff at South Dakota Mines and local tribal colleges including Oglala Lakota
College.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Producing high-quality geochemical measurements
of rocks, soils, and natural waters is essential to address a wide range of
questions in the Earth sciences in both modern environments and through deep
time. This grant will support upgrades to the analytical geochemistry facilities
at South Dakota Mines to enable measurements of a wider range of analytes from
more diverse sample types than is currently possible with a focus on
applications in low-temperature geochemistry. Specifically, funds will be used
to purchase an ion chromatography (IC) system for cations and anions and
upgrades to low-temperature geochemistry sample preparation equipment. This
equipment is currently unavailable at South Dakota Mines or elsewhere in the
western South Dakota region, requiring outsourcing to other facilities that are
at least three hundred miles away. Collectively, this instrumentation and
equipment will enhance the research and teaching capabilities available at South
Dakota Mines for PI Keenan, Co-PI Beeler, and others, and will better leverage
existing instrumentation on campus to enable a full suite of essential low-
temperature geochemical analyses to be performed in-house. A variety of ongoing
research projects will be supported by the IC instrumentation including
investigations of biogeochemical cycling in modern and ancient environments,
studies of vertebrate fossilization processes, and assessments of water quality
in the Black Hills and Northern Great Plains region. In addition, the IC system
will be used to develop workshops and course modules for students, faculty, and
staff from South Dakota Mines and Oglala Lakota College to expand experiential
learning opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.