* 2143393
* CAREER: SaTC: Bridging the Gap Between Research and Practice: Automation and Metrics in Security Operation Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Alexandru Bardas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2027
* USD 197,036.00

Security Operation Centers (SOCs) are pivotal entities of modern enterprise
networks in industry, academia, and the government sector. Organizations usually
deploy SOCs to manage their network operations, defend against threats in the
cyber space, and maintain regulatory compliance. Automation and metrics play key
roles in the effectiveness of SOC environments. Unfortunately, security-driven
automation in SOCs is often implemented in ad-hoc ways and is not accurately
reflected in the metrics. Even though SOC environments are dealing with
constantly changing threats, IT systems on their enterprise networks and SOC
procedures are fairly static. Current SOC metrics tend to focus on straight-
forward quantitative measurements (e.g., number of closed tickets) while the
role of human analysts in the automation process is not accurately assessed.
This project's novelties include the creation of a SOC framework that enables
tailored security-focused automation for operational environments, assesses the
role of humans in this process, and reflects the outcomes in the metrics. The
project's broader significance and importance are focused on triggering a major
change in the current attacker mode of operation and shift the SOC landscape
from all defenses need to be successful, to all attacks need to be successful to
maintain persistent access -- "turning the tables" on adversaries. Moreover,
this project provides opportunities for curriculum enhancements via integrating
research results in cybersecurity courses, affords an opportunity for students
to participate in research on security operations, and thereby supports careers
in cybersecurity research or professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the technical
side, this project explores the integration of the feature-rich DevOps/DevSecOps
approaches in dynamic operational environments to establish security baselines.
In this context DevOps and DevSecOps are sets of practices that combine software
development and IT operations in cybersecurity-related setups. On the human
capital side, the research team adopts a sociotechnical approach to study
organizational environments by analyzing people and technological artifacts as
interacting components. In place of partial, social or technical approaches, the
project integrates research and education outcomes so they feed into each other.
The project includes an ethnographic SOC fieldwork component, designing multi-
segment abstractions for enabling security baselines, an analysis component of
the SOC analyst to infrastructure programmer transition, and an evaluation
effort of the SOC framework components across different environments. Results
are broadly disseminated via publications, presentations/tutorials, and online
resources. Overall, the outcomes of this project will evolve the means available
to SOCs to significantly increase the burden on attackers and lower their
capabilities to compromise enterprise networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.