* 2143620
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Tension-Induced Lung Tissue Fracture and Subsequent Pulmonary Air Leak
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Jinho Kim, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 576,065.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will support research to investigate how soft lung
tissue can be injured by mechanical ventilation. This work will also study
tissue injury that can lead to air leak in the lungs. Mechanical ventilation has
been a life-saving therapy for many clinical complications. This research will
use an engineering approach to better understand the biophysical characteristics
of lung tissue that undergoes prolonged mechanical ventilation. First, this work
will study the relationship between the strength of lung tissue and injuries
caused by air leak. Second, this work will use acoustics to quantify the
severity of air leak injuries. This work is important because how the lung
tissue responds to repeated air pressure loading remains poorly understood. It
is known that lung tissue can be damaged and torn due to repeated forceful
stretching of the lung during mechanical ventilation. Through the damaged
tissue, inhaled air can leak into the chest cavity and cause respiratory
failure. The results of this work can ultimately help minimize lung injury
during mechanical ventilation. The work will benefit society by generating
fundamental insights into how lung tissue behaves. It will also facilitate the
development of innovative technologies. Further, this research will be
integrated with education to provide student-centered STEM experiences to local
minority students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this
project is to understand how the intrinsic deformation mechanics of the lung is
altered dynamically in response to repeated overdistension, and how the
alternation is linked to tension-induced fracture of soft lung tissue that can
lead to pulmonary air leak. Accordingly, this project will investigate
quantifiable characteristics of lung tissue fracture and subsequent air leak to
provide a set of comprehensive explanations for the biomechanics of tension-
induced lung tissue injury. This study is organized under two research
objectives: 1) determining the impacts of mechanical properties of lung tissue
on initiation, propagation, and resolution of lung tissue fracture during
mechanical ventilation; and 2) identifying acoustic characteristics of air leak
sound generated via dynamic airflow-tissue interaction to evaluate the role of
acoustic signal as a quantifiable indicator of air leak injury. Successful
completion of the study will generate new knowledge that can provide fundamental
insights into non-linear deformation and fracture mechanics of soft lung tissue,
ultimately offering improved diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of tension-
induced lung injury. Further, the work will allow the PI to initiate an
impactful and sustainable research career in lung mechanics, and become an
educator who is dedicated to mitigating learning barriers for underrepresented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.