* 2143520
* CAREER: Tunable Graphene Microelectrodes for Real-time Biological Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Ashley Ross, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 12/31/2026
* USD 675,001.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry, Ashley Ross
of the University of Cincinnati is studying how graphene, a single layer of
carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice, can be used to
sense neurochemicals. By controlling the direction of the carbon atoms in the
honeycomb and placing different kinds of atoms on the surface of the graphene,
Dr. Ross and their research team will work toward making electrodes that can
electrically communicate in an effective way with chemicals that are key to
understanding the nervous system. This new approach with graphene electrodes
offers the possibility of systematically studying how tuning the orientation of
the honeycomb edge and the surface chemistry of graphene can be used to make
electrodes capable of sensing neurochemicals better than methods known for 40
years. Such tunable electrodes are expected to offer extremely rapid sensing of
changes in the amounts of neurochemicals within very tiny areas of the body,
which would be very valuable to understanding the way messages are sent and
received by the nervous system. This new route to making tailored and rapid
sensing of neurochemicals may shed light on the way in which a variety of cells
are given and receive instructions to initiate, stop, or regulate biological
responses. Importantly, the new graphene fiber electrodes have the potential to
give a glimpse into the immune response and its programming by neurochemicals,
by detecting fast changes in their amounts in whole organs. The project is
anticipated to have a long-term impact on sensing by providing new measurement
tools and an understanding of how the surface of the electrode and the structure
of neurochemicals influence their detection. The impact of the project is to be
broadened by building on an on-line discussion platform and seminar series,
titled “Analytical Chemistry Diversity Colloquium”, to increase engagement and
to nationally promote the work of underrepresented scientists in analytical
chemistry. In addition, this project will develop multidisciplinary and
discussion-based modules to be incorporated into courses to improve scientific
literacy, create an environment of inclusion, and excite students from diverse
backgrounds about analytical chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a current
knowledge gap in electrochemical sensing about enabling correlation and
prediction of how changes in electrode structure and chemistry impacts the
interface between solution-phase analytes having different structures and the
electrode surface. The ability to precisely control and correlate how specific
chemical and structural properties of the electrode impact detection of
electroactive biomolecules will significantly influence our understanding of
electrode-analyte interactions to enable exquisitely designed electrode surfaces
for improved real-time biological sensing. In this project, we will advance
knowledge of analyte-electrode interactions with fast-scan cyclic voltammetry
because it is the primary electrochemical method used to probe real-time
neurochemical signaling; therefore, this approach will have a major impact on
dynamic neurochemical sensing. This project will focus on synthesizing and
characterizing tunable graphene fiber microelectrodes to measure how carbon
surface orientation and alignment, functionalization, surface energy, and three-
dimensional structure impact electrochemical detection of neurochemicals. This
proposal will ultimately enable expansion of real-time neurochemical sensing to
beyond the brain to study nervous system regulation of immunity, communication
along the gut-brain axis, and more, by providing significantly improved
electrodes that enable ultra-sensitive and high-temporal-resolution
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.