* 2143168
* CAREER: Redefining the high field strength element systematics of subduction systems using non-traditional stable isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Mauricio Ibanez-Mejia, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2027
* USD 427,016.00

Reconstructing the nature of the geologic processes responsible for the
evolution of our planet, including when and how continents formed and plate-
tectonic cycles were established, has been a long-standing goal of Earth
Scientists. Clues for answering these questions are ‘coded’ into the
geochemistry of the ancient rock and mineral record, but interpreting these
geochemical signatures is not always straightforward. Over billion-year
timescales, the rocks that constitute Earth’s continents have been deformed and
overprinted by younger geologic processes, significantly obscuring their
original structural and chemical characteristics. In order to ‘see through’ this
complex evolution, geoscientists use chemical signatures retained by elements
that are not easily altered and/or remobilized, and thus that can provide clues
into primary rock-forming processes despite subsequent overprinting. A group of
elements particularly suited for these investigations are the so-called high-
field strength elements (HFSE), a group of transition metals with unique
geochemical characteristics which make them not only important to understand
crust formation but also very resilient to alteration. In particular, the
isotopic compositions of these elements, which can now be measured with great
accuracy and precision, can provide unique glimpses into the geochemical
processes taking place in convergent tectonic margins and during formation of
continental crust. Nevertheless, making geologically meaningful interpretations
from these data requires a robust understanding of the processes that control
the observed isotopic signatures, and developing such framework is the central
research goal this project will undertake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project will leverage recent analytical developments in the field of non-
traditional stable isotopes to i) conduct a detailed study of the mass-dependent
isotope fractionations that characterize the HFSE titanium, zirconium, and
hafnium in subduction environments; and ii) utilize these isotopic variations
for better understanding the processes leading to their fractionation and fluxes
during formation of continental crust. To achieve this, the research team will
generate a series of combined Ti-Zr-Hf isotopic datasets from key geologic
components and petrologic processes characterizing the ‘subduction factory’ and
that are known to influence the chemistry of arc-related magmatic systems.
Isotopic fractionations at the bulk-rock and mineral scales will be determined
in various global localities of orogenic peridotites, mid ocean ridge basalts,
high-pressure/low-temperature subduction complexes, lower-crustal arc cumulates,
and arc-related basalts and differentiated volcanic rocks, to understand HFSE
mass-transfer and isotopic fractionations across the entire subduction cycle.
Samples will be measured using high-accuracy methods involving calibrated
double-spikes and MC-ICP-MS measurements. In addition to the broader scientific
impacts that will result from this research, the PI will develop educational
activities that foster greater equity, diversity, and inclusivity within the
Geosciences starting from a pre-college stage. These include the development of
an afterschool bilingual program for Hispanic/Latinx high-school students in
collaboration with the Tucson Unified School District (TUSD), active recruitment
of URM undergraduates into meaningful research experiences, and training of
diverse graduate students and postdocs. As a result of this project, the PI will
also develop an accessible on-line resource for researchers and students
interested in learning more about non-traditional stable isotopes, constructed
with active student involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.