* 2143289
* Transitions: Deep Learning Models for Microbial Image Analysis and Time-Series Predictions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Mary Dunlop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2024
* USD 638,578.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep learning is a powerful
computational strategy for analyzing biological data. For example, models can be
trained to identify the location of cells within an image, a task that has
historically been cumbersome and required significant manual input. Although
deep learning tools offer great potential for the analysis of biological data,
taking advantage of state-of-the-art methods and avoiding potential pitfalls
requires significant expertise. A major goal of this project is to provide the
PI and research team applied training to take advantage of these empowering
technologies. The project is divided into three periods. The first is a
professional development period where the PI will learn state-of-the-art deep
learning techniques through a combination of coursework, tutorials, and hands-on
projects. The second part of the project focuses on applying these new deep
learning methods to develop new tools for image analysis and time-series
predictions. The third part spans all project years and involves education and
outreach initiatives. These include partnering with the Engineering Biology
Research Consortium to generate education modules on machine learning for
researchers and educators in systems and synthetic biology. It will also
introduce new curricular content that will be integrated into engineering
coursework. In addition, the project provides training opportunities for
undergraduate students. American Rescue Plan funding provides support for this
investigator at a critical stage in her career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
sources of technical innovation for this project are the development of new
tools for the analysis of time-lapse microscopy data and network inference
algorithms. Underpinning these tools are deep learning models, including those
based on convolutional and recurrent neural networks and transformers, which
represent the current state-of-the-art for image processing and time-series
predictions. The efforts will produce two classes of tools. In the first, the
researchers will develop code to accurately segment, track, and determine cell
fate within a series of time-lapse microscopy images. The second method uses
time-series data to infer network connectivity. Deep learning models can handle
complex relationships between signals such as time delays and feedback
interactions, suggesting they may be a more accurate system identification tool
than classical approaches. Overall, by taking advantage of new deep learning
algorithms, the researchers will develop novel modeling approaches that are
relevant to microbial image analysis and time-series
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.