* 2143581
* CAREER: Solid-State and Materials Chemistry applicable to Titanean Model Planetary Ices
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Tomce Runcevski, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2027
* USD 384,988.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this NSF CAREER award,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, the principal investigator and his research group carry out
experimental research on the crystallization and solid phases of some of the
smallest organic molecules. Such chemicals, like benzene and acetonitrile, are
frequently used as liquid solvents and/or fuels in industry and everyday life,
but they are also produced in the atmosphere of Titan, Saturn’s icy moon.
Carried by rainfall, they descend on the surface of Titan, where they crystalize
as planetary ices. Surprisingly, there are many open questions about the solid-
state and materials chemistry of these smallest organic compounds which are
relevant as materials on Earth, and minerals on Titan. This NSF CAREER project
includes detailed experimental characterization of the solid-state structure and
the composition of these materials systems that consist of two or more
individual molecular components that crystallize as one material with new
properties. Of particular interest, in this regard, is the discovery and design
of novel low-temperature thermal expansion materials (solids for which the
physical size drastically changes upon heating and cooling), and of materials
that can be used for the synthesis of other functional solid-state materials.
The studies on the self-assembly of small and prebiotic molecules into organic
minerals and (planetary) ices, are also relevant to two of the NSF’s 10 Big
Ideas: Windows on the Universe, and Understanding the Rules of Life; and with
the design of low-temperature functional materials, the research connects to
another of the 10 Big Ideas: Navigating the New Arctic. Along with the
experimental research, this NSF CAREER award educates a new generation of
materials scientists and equips them with the knowledge and skillset to address
challenging and long-standing questions in materials characterization. High-
school students become engaged in STEM activities, and possibly motivated to
pursue STEM careers, with the help of journal cover art and table of graphical
content design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on
elucidating the structure and composition of fundamentally relevant
multicomponent organic systems, comprised of the smallest organic molecules,
such as benzene, pyridine, acetonitrile, propionitrile, butanenitrile, etc..
This research is in part motivated by the recently concluded Cassini-Huygens
mission, which revealed that the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan harbors large
inventories of small organic molecules, solidified and crystalized as planetary
ices. The project addresses major gaps in the structural and compositional
knowledge and understanding of the smallest organic systems. Most notably, the
binary and ternary phase diagrams of these systems are vastly underexplored, and
the crystal structures of some of them remain unknown, centuries after their
discovery. This research establishes the phase equilibria in these
multicomponent systems, and provides a detailed structural account on the
crystal, local and dynamic structure of their solid-state by employing X-ray and
neutron diffraction and spectroscopy, Raman, infrared and neutron spectroscopy,
and calorimetric techniques. The obtained knowledge on the structure and
composition of these systems opens a plethora of possibilities for the design
and development of new functional materials, for example colossal thermal
expansion properties. This expansivity can be leveraged in the design of modular
thermal expansion materials for low-temperature applications. The unique
arrangement of these molecules in the crystal lattice also allows for
unprecedented solid-state reactivity and synthesis of multicomponent extended
solids with modified or functionalized graphene- or diamond-like structures.
These extended solid materials have myriad of potential applications at ambient
conditions. The educational segment of this NSF CAREER award contributes to
training of the new generation of materials researchers, equipped with the
knowledge to solve crystal structures from powder diffraction data.
Additionally, the principal investigator engages high-school students with the
help of cover art and table of graphical content
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.