* 2143228
* BIORETS: Conserving water resources and riparian biodiversity in a changing desert climate
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Rebecca Lipson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 599,107.00

Fresh water is a critical resource for both ecosystems and humans. In arid
regions, water withdrawals from rivers for urban and agricultural use have
resulted in dramatic losses of riparian and aquatic habitats and their resident
biota. As arid-land rivers dry, cultural connections to these water bodies are
also negatively affected, including those of Indigenous peoples that have
stewarded these rivers for millennia. However, recent advances in wastewater
treatment plant technologies have resulted in high quality treated effluent that
could be useful for restoring flow and ecological function in dewatered rivers.
In this Research Experiences for Teachers Sites in Biological Sciences (BIORETS)
program at the University of Arizona (UA), three cohorts of teacher participants
will collaborate with ecologists and municipal natural resource managers to
address two primary place-based research questions. First, how does the release
of effluent affect the biodiversity of aquatic and riparian species in and along
the urban Santa Cruz River in southern Arizona? Second, how do ecological
communities change over time in these newly flowing ecosystems as new species
return to the system? Teachers will work with academic mentors at UA, as well as
with members of the Tohono O’odham and Pascua Yaqui tribes, to collect and
analyze data. Teachers also will develop curricula for their K-12 students to
participate in ecological studies, learn about water resource conservation, and
reinvigorate community connections to the river. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Historically, treated effluent was generally of poor water quality
and it degraded ecological conditions in rivers that received effluent. Although
wastewater treatment plant upgrades have greatly improved effluent water
quality, large knowledge gaps remain regarding how well effluent can restore
ecosystem function and riparian and aquatic biodiversity in arid-land rivers.
These gaps are important to address because there are many competing demands for
effluent (e.g., agricultural or golf course irrigation) which could reduce its
availability to restore flow in rivers. Additionally, numerous basic ecological
processes can be studied in these novel urban ecosystems, including community
assembly mechanisms such as species turnover and priority effects. In this
BIORETS program at UA, teachers and researchers will quantify the diversity and
community structure of multiple taxonomic groups (aquatic invertebrates,
riparian birds and mammals, and wetland plants) in three newly rewetted reaches
of the river over three years, and compare observed patterns with data collected
concurrently from nearby dry reaches. Together, these data will elucidate
mechanisms of community assembly in novel ecosystems while also providing
municipal managers with real-time ecological data to inform water resource
management decisions and enhance urban sustainability. The results of this
research will answer important ecological questions, shape water management
decisions in the Santa Cruz basin, and provide a model approach for other cities
to adopt for restoring flow in dewatered rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.