* 2143811
* CAREER: From Equivariant Chromatic Homotopy Theory to Phases of Matter: Voyage to the Edge
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Agnes Beaudry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2027
* USD 158,801.00

Homotopy theory studies properties of geometric objects that are unchanged under
continuous deformations by associating quantities called invariants to these
objects. Some invariants are stable in the sense that they are independent of
certain spatial dimension shifts. They are easier to compute because they are in
some sense more algebraic. This project has two main themes. The first line of
investigation is in chromatic homotopy theory, a field of mathematics that
studies structural properties of stable invariants. This part of the project
seeks to answer questions such as: Are there families of stable invariants that
share common properties? What kind of symmetries exist for these families? How
can these symmetries be used to do explicit computations and learn new things
about fundamental geometric objects such as higher dimensional spheres? The
second line of investigation is part of a multi-disciplinary collaboration with
mathematicians and physicists, which uses stable invariants to study the phase
of matter. A quantum system is a collection of interacting particles and,
roughly, a phase is a family of quantum systems that may be different
microscopically, but share certain macroscopic properties. For certain types of
quantum systems, the phase type can be detected by stable invariants. This
project aims to construct new stable invariants of phases and to study stable
invariants of quantum systems equipped with certain symmetries. The broader goal
is to make progress on the classification of phases of matter to better
understand the fundamental properties of materials. The project has an
integrated educational component, one goal of which is to make the two areas of
research accessible to graduate students and advanced undergraduates through a
series of graduate workshops. The educational plan also includes undergraduate
and graduate research. In particular, the project will conduct research in
collaboration with existing initiatives at the University of Colorado, Boulder
that work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion in STEM. An important goal
is to increase the accessibility of research for underrepresented minorities in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable invariants are studied using
generalized cohomology theories or, more specifically, mathematical objects
called spectra. Chromatic homotopy theory aims to classify families of spectra
according to different periodic behaviors exhibited by the stable invariants
they compute. There is a close relationship between periodic behaviors and the
symmetries of the spectrum. This project uses equivariant techniques to better
understand this relationship. It has applications to the study of stable
homotopy groups of spheres. Specifically, the project explores theoretical and
computational properties of equivariant generalizations of Lubin-Tate theories
that are built from the Real bordism spectrum, an equivariant generalization of
complex bordism. The project develops techniques to compute the equivariant
stable invariants arising from these theories. In a different direction, the
project examines a conjecture that parametrized gapped invertible phases of
matter form a generalized cohomology theory. The project proposes the
construction of a ground-state bundle for parametrized quantum systems and
explores how equivariant homotopy theory can inform the study of systems with
symmetries. The project aims to increase accessibility of these topics to
students in two ways. First, the project includes two five days mathematical
events that combine a graduate workshop with research talks with a focus on the
main areas of research of the project. These are to be part of an ongoing series
that will continue beyond the five year duration of the project. These events
will create an interactive and collaborative environment between participants
and experts by incorporating active-learning in the program structure. Secondly,
the project will engage in academic term and summer undergraduate research
opportunities in topology and phases of matter with a goal to increase access to
undergraduate research for students from historically excluded groups in
mathematics. The project will also support graduate students working on
diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.