* 2143695
* CAREER: Domain-aware Statistical Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Xiao Liu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2027
* USD 500,176.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national competitiveness by transforming how governing
physics and engineering domain knowledge is integrated into data-driven models
for high-stakes applications. Applications in domain-knowledge intensive
engineering environments such as energy infrastructure, aviation safety, and
manufacturing require interpretable models, explainable decisions and actionable
insights. In these environments, the old paradiam of “letting the data speak for
themselves” is being replaced by the capability of “letting the data speak based
on the laws of physics and engineering”. This project will address the
development of methods to integrate data with physics-based models in three main
use cases, namely environmental processes to enhance resilience of our national
utilities during extreme events intensified by climate change; thermal modeling
to improve energy efficiency in Data Center operations; and structural dynamics
to enhance aviation safety in an increasingly crowded airspace. The accompanying
educational plan aims to address the gaps between general-purpose data science
education at the school and university level and the specific needs for next-
generation engineering students with diverse backgrounds. The educational plan
also aims to improve data literacy among the general public by improving
awareness of the increasing availability of data and the capability of
interpreting those data through local community
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research establishes a new Structure-
Exploiting-Preserving (SEP) domain-aware statistical learning paradigm that
enables the direct embedding of governing physics into data-driven models during
model construction. Unlike existing approaches that impose governing physics as
auxiliary regularizations or constraints, the SEP framework will enable the
embedding of data-driven models into the solution space of governing physics
(i.e., governing physics will no longer be used as auxiliary regularizations,
but an inherent component that is directly integrated into data-driven models
during model construction). This is achieved by exposing the solution structure
of governing physics (i.e., structure exploiting), and embedding data-driven
models into the solution space of governing equations (i.e., structure
preserving). Under the SEP framework and through the collaboration with industry
partners, the research will initiate a trajectory that leads to a set of new
methodologies for domain-aware statistical modeling, data-driven discovery of
governing physics, and dynamic sampling for non-stationary engineering
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.