* 2143776
* CAREER: Microcaddisflies, Morphology, and Modern Molecular Methods: Using Collections-Based Research to Establish the Microcaddisfly Phylogeny and Create Educational Opportunities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Robin Thomson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 02/28/2027
* USD 833,957.00

Caddisflies (Trichoptera) are an ecologically-important order of aquatic insects
that contribute to the processing of nutrients and the flow of energy through
food webs in freshwater habitats. Due to their varying levels of tolerance to
pollution and disturbance, caddisflies are also one of the primary invertebrate
groups used for biological monitoring of water quality. The family
Hydroptilidae, known as the “microcaddisflies” due to their small body size of
1.5-5 mm, are an extremely diverse family of caddisflies with over 2,600 known
species occurring around the world and potentially many 100s of undescribed
species. Microcaddisflies display a wide range of ecological, morphological, and
behavioral diversity and occur in interesting distributional patterns around the
world, none of which has been explored in the context of the evolutionary
relationships within the family. Current understanding of the microcaddisfly
evolutionary history suffers from a lack of statistically-supported analyses,
inconsistent use of morphological features, and very little inclusion of
molecular data. This research will focus on reconstructing the evolutionary
history of this diverse, yet under-studied, group of insects. The broader
impacts of this research include the training of one PhD student and multiple
undergraduates in modern taxonomy and systematics; a new course in the Museum
Studies program that will introduce students to the importance of insect
diversity, provide hands-on experience with specimen collection and curation,
and increase awareness of related legal and ethical issues surrounding
collections; and a noncredit course exploring insect biodiversity to be offered
to a community of lifelong learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined approach of
molecular and morphological data, applied for the first time with modern
statistical methods and analytical techniques, will be used to assess the
evolutionary history of the microcaddisflies (Trichoptera: Hydroptilidae), a
diverse yet under-studied taxon. Researchers will (1) infer the first total-
evidence phylogeny of the family Hydroptilidae, which will include the first
morphological assessment of homology across the family and the first molecular
dataset to cover the entire family using targeted enrichment techniques; (2) use
the constructed phylogeny to shed light on subfamilies and genera in need of
taxonomic updates, revisionary monographs, and new species descriptions; and (3)
determine biogeographic and divergence time estimates that will add to a more
detailed profile of hydroptilid evolutionary history. These approaches will
provide new insight into hydroptilid phylogenetics and allow for future research
on character evolution within Hydroptilidae, diversification and speciation
rates relative to the rest of Trichoptera, and larger questions of evolution
applied across the order.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.