* 2143413
* CAREER: Using seismic sources to probe megathrust fault conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Wenyuan Fan, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2027
* USD 301,354.00

Subduction zones, where an oceanic tectonic plate slides beneath a continental
plate, host devastating earthquakes and tsunamis that put some of the world’s
most densely populated coastal regions at risk. The Cascadia Subduction Zone,
which extends from northern California to southwest British Columbia, produces
magnitude 9 'megathrust' earthquakes every few hundred years (on an irregular
schedule), and the last was over three hundred years ago. Supported by this
CAREER award, Fan and his group will use over two decades of earthquake data
from large arrays of seismometers to characterize properties of the Cascadia
Subduction Zone fault, as well as subduction faults in Japan and Alaska. They
will investigate how fault zone properties in all three locations correspond to
earthquake slip behaviors, which is necessary to forecast future megathrust
earthquake ruptures and their potential impacts. The research findings will be
incorporated into a multi-pronged education and outreach plan combining
undergraduate instruction, undergraduate and graduate student research and
mentoring, and a continuous outreach project involving California high school
science teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Megathrust slip events and
faulting environments co-evolve during seismic cycles. Understanding the source
processes of various slip events at subduction zones can illuminate
heterogeneous stress and strength conditions along the subduction interface.
Imaging fine-scale material properties can also offer insights into physical
mechanisms that may regulate the development of various types of slip events.
This award will investigate these two aspects simultaneously by systematically
detecting, locating, and modeling very low frequency earthquakes at megathrust
seismogenic patch edges, resolving finite-source attributes of small to moderate
magnitude earthquakes, and imaging fault zone properties with high-frequency
body wave phases. Collectively, the results will be used to track spatiotemporal
evolutions of the fault zone environments and unravel the interaction and
triggering processes among different slip events. The award will comparatively
study three subduction zones, including the Japan, Cascadia, and Alaska
subduction zones, using both onshore and offshore seismic records. The expected
findings on small-scale properties might be universal to all megathrust faults,
while findings on stress and strength heterogeneities could inform future
hazards at Cascadia and Alaska based on the knowledge from the Japan subduction
zone. The education initiative will put into place foundational and sustainable
bridging activities that will establish pathways for students from
underrepresented minority groups into seismology and geophysics degrees and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.