* 2143422
* CAREER: A Holistic Framework for Designing Multifunctional Materials and Structures Using Computational Optimization Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ahmad Najafi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2027
* USD 533,220.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award contributes to
national prosperity by improving methods for the design of advanced lightweight,
environmentally friendly, and highly-efficient materials and structures to
address major global challenges. The award supports fundamental research to
extend traditional design of single-function materials and structures by
formulating a new holistic framework for design of intricate multifunctional
structures and materials through new multiphysics algorithms that are able to
optimize material constituents and architectures simultaneously. Such materials
are critical to many technologically advanced biomedical, clean energy,
aerospace, and transportable electronics applications. This project offers
design-themed educational and outreach activities to enhance public knowledge
and attract talented students to STEM careers in the design area. The
educational plan improves design-related educational activities by integrating
several modular lectures based on the “philosophy of design” into design courses
offered in engineering departments. The project also targets academically at-
risk and underrepresented minority (URM) students to reduce school dropout via
an out-of-school-time (OST) STEM education program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overcoming current design limitations for multifunctional
materials and structures is challenging because i) the mathematical models that
are used to predict the performance of such designs are complex, ii) numerical
solutions for such models are computationally expensive, and iii) it requires
interdisciplinary/multiphysics design methods capable of tailoring materials at
multiple scales to balance opposing design drivers. To address these challenges,
this CAREER project will create a 3-M (Multiphysics, Multiscale,
Multifunctional) Design framework that establishes new algorithms capable of
optimizing paradoxical functions in a material system. The cores of this new
framework are efficient reduced-order models (ROMs) and machine learning
(ML)-based surrogate models integrated into multiphysics/multiscale optimization
methods to enable the efficient design of such materials with desired
multifunctional properties. The framework created in this project will allow
tailoring multifunctional materials by balancing among conflicting design
requirements that could not otherwise be achieved using single-function design
strategies. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the new framework, the 3-M
Design framework will be used to design structural battery (SBCs) and
microvascular (MVCs) composites with superior properties. SBCs show significant
potential in producing mass-less batteries used in the automotive, aviation, and
robotics industries. Actively cooled MVCs make it possible to use fiber-
reinforced polymer composites in high-temperature automobile, aerospace, and
microelectronic applications. The 3-M Design framework is material independent
and can be used for the design of different multifunctional materials that may
have opposing design requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.