* 2143432
* CAREER: Designing Linguistically Responsive Environments for STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Minjung Ryu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2027
* USD 374,993.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The number of students from non-dominant linguistic
backgrounds (NDLBs) is increasing in U.S. higher education. Most students from
NDLBs in the United States have grown up in Spanish-speaking households, yet
there are increasing numbers of students who speak other languages such as
Arabic, Somali, Swahili, and Nepali. While students from NDLBs bring useful
resources for academic success, they also experience challenges when learning
STEM content within English-dominant learning environments. Research in K-12
science education has shown that students from NDLBs learn and participate
better when their learning environments offer opportunities to move flexibly
between two or more languages. Through such practices, the students can build on
linguistic and knowledge resources developed in their primary languages, and
their multilingual identities can be validated. Despite evidence that supports
this flexible language use for STEM and English learning, it has been rarely
studied at the college level as a way to enhance college students’ STEM
learning. This project seeks to fill this gap by, first, examining how college
students from NDLBs use multiple languages in the context of STEM learning, and,
second, by designing a STEM learning environment that encourages and supports
flexible use of languages for students from NDLBs. This project will advance
understanding about the interrelationship between STEM learning and language use
and to investigate pedagogical environments and practices that better facilitate
STEM learning. Given that students from NDLBs are a growing population in the
U.S. education system, findings can have broad impacts on students and educators
in post-secondary STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The practice of moving
dynamically between, and combining elements of, two or more languages to make
sense of multilingual contexts is known as translanguaging. The project team
will conduct three studies: Study 1 seeks to identify the translanguaging
practices of college students from NDLBs through task-based paired interviews
that engage two speakers of a common language; Study 2 aims to use semi-
structured interviews to examine linguistic experiences in STEM learning
environment of college students from NDLBs; and Study 3 intends to design and
test a learning environment that supports the learning of students from NDLBs by
encouraging translanguaging practices appropriate for college STEM learning and
participation. The project team will administer Studies 1 and 2 in two different
institutional contexts, an urban R1 university (University of Illinois at
Chicago) and Spanish-bilingual community college (Saint Augustine College).
Similarities and differences between the two institutions will provide critical
insights into the conditions under which students from NDLBs may develop various
translanguaging strategies and fully leverage their linguistic resources. Study
3 will be implemented in a freshman general chemistry course at the University
of Illinois at Chicago. Taking the approach of design-based research, the
project team will design the learning environment by building on the findings of
Studies 1-2 and relevant literature, analyze the data collected through the
intervention (videorecordings, interviews, and surveys) to revise the learning
environment design for the second iteration, and generate robust evidence-based
theories about the creating linguistically responsive learning environment in
college STEM education. This CAREER award is supported by NSF's IUSE: EHR
Program which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.