* 2143346
* CAREER: Navigating Thermodynamic Landscapes for Phase Equilibria Predictions using Molecular Modeling and Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Yamil Colon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2027
* USD 408,234.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will use
advanced computer simulations and machine learning algorithms to advance
fundamental understanding of adsorption of gases in porous materials. Adsorption
involves the concentration or rejection of molecules interacting with a material
surface. It is a ubiquitous phenomenon present in our everyday lives and in many
industrial and biological settings. Important technological applications that
depend on adsorption processes include drug delivery, power production and
energy storage, water harvesting, and others that affect the overall societal
well-being of humanity. This research project makes use of powerful
computational modeling tools to uncover a comprehensive picture of the
interactions between the gas species and materials onto which they adsorb. This
research will lead to fundamental insights into the adsorption process and the
identification of promising new adsorbents that are crucial for technological
advancements in areas of national importance including health care, climate
change, and water scarcity. Integrated outreach and education components within
this project include increasing literacy of machine learning at the
undergraduate and graduate levels through course design; hosting middle school
teachers through the Notre Dame Senior STEM Teaching Fellows Residency program
to create course materials for 6-8th graders centered on probability and
statistics; and translation of the middle school course material into Spanish
for dissemination to Hispanic communities to improve their representation in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will integrate advanced
molecular modeling and machine learning methods to create a universal gas
adsorption model. By specifying the absorbent material, an adsorbate gas
species, and the adsorption conditions (temperature and pressure), the model
will be able to accurately predict the amount of gas that is adsorbed within the
material pores at equilibrium. An adsorption model with such predictive
capabilities would constitute an important engineering design tool, eliminating
the current bottleneck posed by the high computational cost of screening all
potential materials with molecular simulations and fundamentally advancing drug
delivery, power production and energy storage (e.g., hydrogen), and atmospheric
water harvesting and carbon capture technologies. The development of models to
predict the nature of gas physisorption in porous materials will be developed
within an active learning (AL) framework to efficiently navigate the large
chemical spaces of adsorbates and adsorbents. The properties of absorbent
materials and gas molecules will be represented as ‘features’ alchemically to
maximize the range of materials and molecules that can be studied in a
computationally feasible manner. The AL algorithm will inform, in an automated
fashion, which simulations to perform to achieve accurate predictions with a
limited number of simulations, thus allowing for an exhaustive yet efficient
exploration of the feature space. The research plan is based on three
objectives: (1) implement and validate an active learning framework capable of
navigating adsorption landscapes, (2) navigate the feature landscapes of simple
gas adsorbates, and (3) simultaneously navigate the feature landscapes of
molecules and porous materials for gas adsorption. Because the proposed AL
framework will be readily adaptable to other adsorption/material design
scenarios, phase equilibrium studies beyond gas adsorption will benefit. These
research efforts will be complemented by outreach efforts to middle schools and
the public through bilingual curriculum development and middle school teacher
training in probability and statistics, and dissemination of the course
materials in Spanish to the local Hispanic community and in Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.