* 2143557
* High-Resolution Transcranial Ultrasound Neuromodulation at Large Scale
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Vishal Monga, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

High-Resolution Transcranial Ultrasound Neuromodulation at Large
Scale&lt;br/&gt;Neuromodulation has the potential to map neural functions;
enhance our perceptual, motor, and cognitive capabilities; and restore sensory
and motor functions lost through injury or disease. Despite decades of research
and development, state-of-the-art noninvasive neuromodulation techniques still
suffer from extremely poor spatial resolution (100-1000’s of mm3). This project
includes scientific research that explores orthogonal crossed beams of
ultrasound as a noninvasive transcranial means for unprecedented &lt; 0.1 mm3
spatial resolution neuromodulation at large scale. Compared to its noninvasive
counterparts, this crossed-beam ultrasound neuromodulation technology has the
potential to improve the spatial resolution (focal spot) by several orders of
magnitude. Therefore, it will yield a unique building block for a comprehensive
set of noninvasive neural interfaces. It will open new opportunities in
neuroscience with significant improvements in spatial resolution and coverage of
noninvasive neuromodulation of the brain, initially in animals. Ultimately, it
will also have huge translational potential for many clinical applications in
humans, such as the treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders and
brain-machine interfaces. Leveraging the multidisciplinary nature of the
research, this project also includes a significant integrated outreach and
educational component created around a “Machine-Learning-inspired Physical
Troubleshooting” framework to impact K-12 teachers and students, minorities, and
undergraduate and graduate students. The troubleshooting framework will
stimulate the interest of K-12 students in electrical engineering to recruit
more students (particularly women) to this major, will educate a broad audience
from undergraduate students to K-12 teachers and their students (particularly
pre-college female students) in the science and applications of this research,
and will enhance teachers’ and students’ research skills through systematic
troubleshooting and problem-solving activities. Graduate curriculum on circuits
and optimization-based machine learning will also be transformed with
multidisciplinary projects and guest lectures to educate graduate students in
the design and applications of smart integrated systems.&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes and explores high-resolution transcranial ultrasound stimulation (HR-
TUS) system, in which extracranial ultrasound transducer arrays electronically
steer ≤ 1 MHz crossed focused ultrasound beams, guided by imaging and machine
learning models, at different neural targets with ultrasound pressure focal
spots of &lt; 0.1 mm3. Building on the investigators’ complementary expertise in
integrated circuits, ultrasound-based systems, wireless neural interfaces, and
machine learning for image analysis, this project will establish the fundamental
basis for large-scale HR-TUS with orthogonal crossed ultrasound beams guided by
imaging and machine learning models. This project will investigate fundamental
limits of spatial resolution and coverage within a human brain volume in HR-TUS
by developing numerical and computational models based on wave equations to
explore the effects of different geometries, frequencies, and configurations of
phased arrays and their interactions with the skull and brain tissue in the
context of orthogonal crossed beams. This project will also explore imaging and
machine learning models for accurate anatomical targeting, focusing, and beam
crossing in the presence of skull/tissue effects on ultrasound beams and
displacements in ambulatory subjects. To reduce the system complexity, size, and
power consumption in three-dimensional stimulation of tissues at large scale,
the novel solution of this project is a large two-dimensional array on a
flexible substrate consisting of optimally arranged modular selectable linear
arrays and their application-specific integrated circuits. A system-level
demonstration at the end of this project will establish the feasibility of the
HR-TUS. The image-guided HR-TUS system with machine learning model will provide
a first-in-class platform for learning-based acoustically guided transcranial
ultrasound neuromodulation (all acoustic) with high spatial resolution (&lt; 0.1
mm3) at large scale (over the whole brain).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.