* 2143635
* CAREER: New Regimes of Coherent Nonequilibrium Dynamics in Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Thomas Iadecola, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2027
* USD 181,672.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the broad field of nonequilibrium quantum dynamics
with a view towards emerging quantum technologies. Quantum computing is a new
mode of computation that harnesses the principles of quantum mechanics to store
and process information. Rapid experimental progress is ushering in an era of
useful near-term quantum computing platforms, with potential applications
ranging from cryptography to drug design. Quantum computation relies on
controlling the nonequilibrium dynamics of systems of many interacting quantum
particles. Comprehending such dynamics thus plays a critical role in enabling
future advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many-particle quantum systems tend to
lose information about the state in which they were prepared. This tendency,
known as quantum ergodicity, is detrimental to quantum computation, which hinges
on the ability to preserve delicate quantum states and perform operations on
them. The research component of this project will develop a theoretical
understanding of a variety of mechanisms through which quantum ergodicity can be
avoided. It will also consider how to realize these mechanisms on present-day
quantum hardware with the long-term goal of expanding the toolkit for the study
and manipulation of complex quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
science and technology has been identified as a key national research priority.
Sustaining leadership in this field requires nurturing a robust quantum
workforce. To this end, the education component of this project includes
developing an interdisciplinary quantum computing curriculum at Iowa State
University (ISU), whose success will grow the quantum talent pipeline. The
principal investigator will also engage in outreach around quantum physics
topics in partnership with two ISU-led initiatives, Science Bound and Go
Further, aimed at increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. These activities will reach
hundreds of precollege and college students and tap into popular excitement
about quantum physics using hands-on activities and active learning
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education in the broad field of
nonequilibrium quantum dynamics with a view towards emerging quantum
technologies. The research component addresses the foundational question of how
quantum many-body systems can fail to relax to thermal equilibrium and maintain
quantum coherence in the presence of strong interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities are organized into three interrelated
thrusts whose goals are: (1) Elucidate the role of emergent dynamical
constraints in the far-from-equilibrium behavior of gauge theories and related
quantum spin models. This question will be investigated using a combination of
perturbation theory and numerical exact diagonalization to extract the
timescales of relaxation processes in such systems. (2) Explore a general
construction of quantum many-body scars, a dynamical regime where thermalization
can be avoided by preparing the system in a special class of initial states. The
construction hinges on the use of infinite-temperature thermofield-double
states, which are of interest in both the high-energy physics and quantum
information science communities. (3) Discover novel roadblocks to thermalization
and decoherence intrinsic to quantum circuits, the natural setting for quantum
computation. This project focuses on quantum circuits related to classical
cellular automata, as well as circuits based on deterministic aperioidic
sequences. All three topics are relevant to present-day experiments on platforms
including cold atomic gases of bosons and fermions, arrays of Rydberg atoms in
optical tweezers, and present day noisy intermediate-scale quantum
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component of this project includes
developing an interdisciplinary quantum computing curriculum at Iowa State
University (ISU), whose success will grow the quantum talent pipeline. The PI
will also engage in outreach around quantum physics topics in partnership with
two ISU-led initiatives, Science Bound and Go Further, aimed at increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. These activities will reach hundreds of precollege and college
students and tap into popular excitement about quantum physics using hands-on
activities and active learning approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.