* 2143177
* CAREER: Observing topological magnetoelectric effects by magneto-optics and quantum transport
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Suyang Xu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 318,907.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Quantum technologies can solve some of the
worldâ€™s most challenging problems including medicine design, artificial
intelligence and cyber security as well as fundamental physics and chemistry
research. Therefore, their realization is crucial for national health,
prosperity and security. In order to develop quantum technologies, new materials
are needed in which quantum effects are pronounced and therefore can be
accessed, controlled and harnessed. This project focuses on a particular quantum
mechanical phenomenon called the magnetoelectric effect, which describes the
coupling between electricity and quantum mechanical spin. By discovering and
exploring novel materials, this project aims to achieve control of quantum spin
by electrical means with unprecedented precision, efficiency and robustness. The
project pushes the knowledge boundary of quantum physics, with the potential to
make completely unexpected discoveries. The project trains next-generation
quantum scientists and engineers. Graduates can find employment in academia in
the area of fundamental quantum science research and in technology companies
pursuing quantum technologies. This project also includes strong educational and
outreach activities with particular focus on helping underrepresented groups by
collaborating with a historically black research university and promoting STEM
in K12 students and among the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify fundamentally new kinds of
magnetoelectric effects that are uniquely enabled by the nontrivial topology and
Berry curvature in topological materials. In sharp contrast to the
magnetoelectric effects found in wide-gap magnetic insulators, the
magnetoelectric effects in topological materials can exhibit unprecedented
characters such as being quantized, diverging, and dissipationless. The project
focuses on three classes of topological phases, Axion insulators, magnetic Weyl
semimetals, and gyrotropic superconductors, and the project utilizes magneto-
optics, nonlinear optics and quantum transport. The observation of topological
magnetoelectric effect represents discoveries of new fundamental quantum
physics, which pushes the frontiers of important topics of current quantum
condensed matter research including topology, correlation, magnetism and
spintronics. The topological magnetoelectric effects also open the door for
urgently needed new device principles, most noticeably topological
magnetoelectric devices, where simultaneous tuning of electrical and magnetic
properties can be achieved without dissipation through a cohesive, multi-
disciplinary approach involving electronics, physics and materials. The project
contains unique education and outreach activities, including new teaching
concepts to bridge and fuse physics and chemistry, collaboration with a
historically black research university to create year-long research exchange
activity, as well as promoting STEM in K-12 students and the general public by
blending quantum science with cultural and art
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.