* 2143405
* CAREER: Cellular Mechanisms of Killer Toxin Resistance in Yeasts
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Paul Rowley, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/28/2027
* USD 346,686.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungal cells separate themselves
from their environment by constructing a robust cell wall made of carbohydrates
and proteins with an underlying membrane. This enables the compartmentalization
of metabolic processes and protects fungal cells from external stressors,
including commercial fungicides that are used extensively to control unwanted
fungal growth. Antifungal proteins produced by different species of fungi can
attack the cell wall and membrane causing injury and the death of susceptible
fungal cells. These antifungals have been cited as potentially being useful to
control the growth of undesirable fungi. This research will explore the
fundamental cellular mechanisms that are employed by fungi to resist
intoxication by antifungal proteins. Specifically, the project will test how
mutations in genes used for cell wall and membrane construction and stability
result in resistance to antifungal proteins. Antifungal proteins are produced by
a significant proportion of fungi, especially by yeasts that are associated with
insects, fruits, and fermentation (e.g. brewing and baking). The general
familiarity of the public with yeasts will enable schoolchildren and patrons of
the local farmer’s market to participate in the isolation of yeasts that produce
novel antifungal proteins. These outreach activities will be enhanced by the
participation of undergraduate research students to enable the identification of
novel antifungal proteins and their application to further investigate the
function and organization of the fungal membrane and cell wall. Students from
underrepresented groups at the University of Idaho will also be included in
research activities. The central goal of this approach is to increase retention
of university students, enrollment in higher education of postsecondary and
postbaccalaureate students, and to improve public STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to discover the
cellular mechanisms that are important for fungal resistance to antifungal
“killer” toxins. This will uncover novel pathways that are important for cell
surface function and resilience. The research hypotheses are that the Regulator
of Ace2 and Cell Morphogenesis (RAM) signaling network plays an undescribed role
in cell wall and membrane organization, and that the localization and diversity
of the killer toxin receptor Kre1p is essential for intoxication by killer
toxins. These hypotheses were formulated based on preliminary data that has
identified mutations in the RAM network that result in killer toxin resistance
and the loss of membrane and cell wall integrity. To test these hypotheses, it
will be determined how mutations in the RAM network that cause killer toxin
resistance alter the networks organization, localization, and function relating
to cytokinesis and cell polarity. Specifically, the effect of these mutations on
the localization of the killer toxin membrane receptor (Kre1p) will be tested.
This approach will be complemented by an in-depth study of the effect of Kre1p
diversity on killer toxin resistance and the immunity mechanisms of killer
yeasts that prevent self-intoxication. The outcome of this research will be to
confirm the novel role of the RAM network in cell surface organization. This
will be complemented by the investigation of the RAM network and Kre1p and their
role in killer toxin resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.