* 2143671
* CAREER: Identifying Aspects of Research that Exacerbate Undergraduate and Graduate Student Depression and Developing Interventions to Improve Student Mental Health
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Katelyn Cooper, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 120,270.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing the understanding
of the relationship between scientific research experiences and depression among
undergraduates and graduates, and by developing interventions to improve student
mental health. Depression is one of the top mental health concerns among
undergraduate and graduate students and disproportionately impacts those who are
already underserved in science, including women, first-generation college
students, individuals from low socioeconomic backgrounds, members of the LGBTQ+
community, and people with disabilities. Recent research has established that
aspects of scientific research experiences can exacerbate depressive symptoms.
However, it is unknown what aspects of research that exacerbate depression are
most commonly experienced by students, which aspects of research are most
detrimental to student mental health, and whether specific aspects of research
disproportionately affect depression for particular student groups. This CAREER
project will address these gaps in the literature using interview and survey
studies. Additionally, the project will develop brief, self-guided online
interventions designed to help undergraduate and graduate researchers
productively cope with challenges in research that can worsen mental health.
This project will integrate research and teaching by developing biology
education course-based undergraduate research experiences that will be offered
to students enrolled in Arizona State University’s online life sciences Bachelor
of Science degree programs. Online students will engage in authentic research
activities focused on the relationship between science education and
depression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use an
exploratory sequential mixed-methods design to examine the relationship between
scientific research and depressive symptoms among undergraduate and graduate
students in the life sciences. Additionally, the project aims to develop and
evaluate single-session interventions to help undergraduate and graduate
students cope with aspects of scientific research that can exacerbate depressive
symptoms. Specifically, exploratory interview studies will further probe why
biology undergraduate and graduate students perceive that aspects of research
exacerbate, and sometimes alleviate, depressive symptoms, as well as identify
moderators of the relationship between research and student depression. These
studies will also explore potential targets for creating more inclusive research
environments. The findings from the interviews will inform national survey
studies to assess the relationship between research and depression among biology
undergraduate and graduate students at scale and what approaches undergraduate
and graduate researchers perceive would be most effective in transforming
research spaces to be more inclusive. The results of these studies will be used
to develop single-session interventions to help students cope with common
challenges in research; the interventions will be easy to administer,
independent of instructors or mentors, freely available, and deliverable to
students at scale. To integrate research and teaching with the intent to build a
foundational body of research on the relationship between science education and
depression, and to normalize mental health concerns among students, biology
education course-based undergraduate research experiences will be developed and
taught to students in Arizona State University’s online life sciences Bachelor
of Science degree programs. This approach will deliver authentic research
experiences to a population of students who have very few research opportunities
and who often report higher rates of depression than their peers completing
degrees in person. Funding for this award is being provided by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education program and the NSF Research Traineeship program in
recognition of the alignment of the project with the aims of these two programs
that focus on the undergraduate and graduate STEM education enterprises,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.