* 2143898
* CAREER: LUCO: A Noninvasive Miniaturized Blood Gas Sensor for Respiration Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ulkuhan Guler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Among the vital signs of human health, respiratory parameters are key indicators
of the physiological status of the human body. The accurate diagnosis of
respiratory diseases mandates a measure of blood gases. The determination of
blood gases requires an arterial blood sample, an invasive and painful process.
This procedure, however, provides only a discrete measurement of respiratory
efficacy during a rapidly changing situation. Transcutaneous monitoring is a
noninvasive method of continuously measuring oxygen and carbon dioxide diffused
through the skin, and any changes they undergo correlate closely with changes in
blood gases. The contemporary methodology for measuring transcutaneous oxygen
and carbon dioxide requires a heated sensor (that may burn the skin and require
frequent alteration of the sensing spot) and a costly non-portable, bulky,
corded sensing unit. This project will address a critical unmet need for a cost-
effective noninvasive miniaturized wearable device capable of sensing multiple
blood gas parameters that provide a comprehensive picture of oneâ€™s respiratory
status from a home setting. The continuous and remote tracking of vital
respiratory parameters will provide relevant and accurate data that alert a
caregiver and influence the course of treatment. As the proposed system enables
massive longitudinal blood gas data collected in non-clinical settings,
clinicians and researchers can remotely assess and measure pulmonary outcomes
objectively, and clinicians can further improve the home care management of
patients with a fragile respiratory status. The educational program
complementing this award will support STEM engagement in schools, provide
research opportunities for underrepresented groups - particularly women, train
students in state-of-the-art circuits and systems, biomedical, and optics, and
support the future engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create a first-of-its-kind wearable blood gas monitor for managing
the home care of individuals. More specifically, the core scientific
contributions will include 1) the creation of a novel miniaturized custom-
designed wearable sensor that measures two modalities of blood gases; 2)
identification of factors affecting sensor readings such as temperature and
drift for the self-calibration of blood gas sensors; 3) the exploration of
innovative electronic interfaces for a specialized analog front-end for the
proposed unique sensor with heterogeneous decay time, including one with an
ultra-fast response; 4) determination of the feasibility and usability of the
system during real-life activities in home settings by capturing the dynamic
respiratory physiological status of individuals with longitudinal data. Having
the ability to sense two vital respiratory parameters (namely, transcutaneous
partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide) with one wearable device is
unique and superior to the current practice of measuring only oxygen saturation,
and fills an important gap in the miniaturization of the transcutaneous blood
gas sensor for noninvasive wearable device applications. In addition, the
longitudinal new data will enable new biomedical research opportunities to
assess therapies and further investigate medical conditions in which oxygen and
carbon dioxide play a critical role, including novel respiratory diseases that
are not yet fully understood (e.g., COVID-19). Progress on enabling the
affordable and scalable remote monitoring of oxygenation and ventilation at home
is transformative for prospective medical and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.