* 2143485
* CAREER: Going Beyond Linear Models for Attack Detection and Defense in Control Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Justin Ruths, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 04/30/2027
* USD 536,974.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will contribute new
knowledge related to the security of automation and control systems. Modern
control systems enable automation across industries, from manufacturing to
chemical processing, and regulate and monitor critical infrastructure, such as
power, water, fuel, and transportation. However, these systems are susceptible
to cyber-based attacks that target the computers that operate them. Cyber-based
attacks could damage physical infrastructure, compromise safety, and harm the
environment. Attack mitigation techniques rely on detecting discrepancies
between the reported behavior of a physical process and the behavior predicted
based on a model, or digital twin, of the process. However, existing models are
often insufficient to capture the complex behavior of real-world applications.
This award supports fundamental research for the development of detectors that
aptly recognize, deter, and mitigate attacks. It will thus benefit the U.S.
economy and society through increased resilience to cyber-attacks. Further, to
enable a diversified and integrated workforce capable of meeting the security
needs of the nation, this award will develop connections between university and
community college students. It will support outreach activities and live
demonstrations at local schools and community events to positively impact
engineering education and to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
technical fields of study.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The sensitivity of model-based
detectors is intimately connected with the quality of the model used. To date,
work has focused on linear dynamical models, which do not capture the complex
behavior of real-world applications. To fill this gap, this award will develop a
systematic framework for the security analysis of systems with uncertainty and
of switched dynamical models. This research will mathematically characterize the
relationship between different sources of uncertainty and detector sensitivity.
It will parameterize the impact of a potential attack in terms of the system and
detector uncertainty, establishing a vulnerability index based on system and
uncertainty characteristics. The research team will act as both attacker and
defender to develop new attack vectors that leverage the uncertainty present in
systems that switch between different modes of
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.