* 2143569
* CAREER: Multi-atomic Layered Electronic Metal-organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Dawei Feng, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2027
* USD 398,848.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic hybrid materials (MOMs), such as
coordination complexes, coordination polymers (CP), and metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs), possess vast structural diversity and thus have been extensively
investigated for magnetism, catalysis, sensing, gas storage and separation, and
biomedical applications. Ideally, embedding the synthetic tunability of MOMs
with the electronic properties (e.g., electrically conductive MOMs, called
eMOMs) would expand the molecular functionality of conventional inorganic
electronic materials, offering new opportunities to address challenges in many
vital electronic/electrochemical devices, including wearable devices, sensors,
electrocatalysts, and electrochemical energy storage. Unfortunately, to-date
conventional MOMs are primarily insulators by nature. With this CAREER project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, Prof. Dawei Feng studies a general approach to synthesize
new types of eMOMs based on two dimensional (2D) multiple layered atomic
structures (M-eMOMs). This research utilizes the structural diversity of MOMs to
unlock their full potential in advanced electronic and electrochemical devices.
The PI and his team also partner with the Materials Research Science and
Engineering Centers (MRSEC) education group and the Institute for Chemical
Education (ICE) at University of Wisconsin-Madison to organize “Make MOFs at
home” after school enrichment program. Through the integrated education plans,
middle schoolers get hands-on experiences in synthesizing MOMs using safe, daily
accessible materials to foster their interests in STEM, and undergraduate and
graduate students receive interdisciplinary training in materials science,
chemistry, and fabrication of energy storage devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The compositional diversity
and synthetic tunability of metal-organic materials (MOMs) give them great
potential for a series of applications where precise tuning of structures and
functionalities plays a vital role. Integration of electronic properties (e.g.,
electronic conductivity) into MOFs is of particular interest as it adds diverse
functionalities on top of electronic properties, which greatly enriches the
class of current electronic materials and the scope of their applications.
However, the majority of MOMs are insulators with just a few exceptional
examples, most of which adopt single atomic layered p-d π conjugated 2D
structures. This NSF CAREER project develops new classes of electronically
conducting MOMs, called eMOMs through assembling multi-atomic layered 2D
structures with p-d σ conjugation, namely M-eMOMs. The metal species and organic
ligands are systematically micro-tuned to manipulate the electronic
characteristics and functionality of M-eMOMs. Kinetically controlled synthetic
methodologies are adopted to achieve highly crystalline M-eMOM products for
precise measurement of their intrinsic properties. This permits elucidation of
fundamental aspects of interactions between the metal and organic building units
and the subsequent impact on the bulk electronic properties. In turn, this
research is poised to enable applications in various areas, including
electrocatalysis and flexible electronic devices. This work not only provides a
new platform to integrate metals with organic building units but also introduces
new 2D material candidates with vastly expanded molecular engineering
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.