* 2143334
* CAREER: Understanding Kirkendall Pore Formation and Evolution: Correlating Compositional, Geometrical, and Thermal Influences
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Ashley Paz y Puente, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 194,545.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When you wake up in the
morning to the smell of bacon or watch food coloring spread in water you are
appreciating diffusion. In general terms, diffusion is the movement of things
from areas of higher concentration to areas of lower concentration. Even though
it is not obvious at room temperature, diffusion is happening in the solids
around us as well - just at much slower speeds than what we witness when we
smell something in the air or see something spread in water. Because certain
types of atoms diffuse at higher rates than others, they can leave behind empty
spaces called vacancies. If there are enough vacancies near one another in a
material, they can merge and form pores. Typically, scientists try to avoid
porosity in a material because it can decrease the mechanical, electrical or
thermal properties especially when pores occur near a surface. Interestingly, it
was discovered in the 1940's that diffusion in solids could be carefully
controlled and as a result, influence where porosity in a material is located.
This discovery is called the "Kirkendall effect" and it can be used to
intentionally tailor the location of pores in a material so they become
beneficial. Hollow structures for example can have several advantages in
applications ranging from batteries to biomedical implants. This project
supports fundamental research to determine how composition, geometry, and
temperature influence the movement of vacancies and the evolution of these
"Kirkendall" pores. By understanding the effect of composition, geometry and
temperature we can design better materials that either eliminate porosity if
harmful to the material or use them to create useful structures if advantageous
for a given application. This project also includes a significant educational
component that focuses on exposing students to, and engaging them in, materials
science across high school, undergraduate and graduate levels. Through both
recruiting and outreach activities integrated with this project, broadening
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM will be
emphasized to help diversify the engineering careers talent pool for years to
come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project aims to further understanding and control of vacancy-induced
migration via the Kirkendall effect while engaging in multiple education and
outreach activities to profoundly impact students in high school, undergraduate
study and at the graduate level. The overall research goal is to systematically
investigate the compositional, thermal and geometric influences on vacancy
migration and Kirkendall pore evolution. Specifically, the three research
objectives are to (i) evaluate the effect of Cr additions, (ii) assess the role
of radial symmetry and aspect ratio and (iii) determine the magnitude of
temperature gradient required for Kirkendall pore coalescence in Ni-Cr-Al-Ti
based systems. These objectives are accomplished via experiments involving the
fabrication and analysis of diffusion couples and diffusion coated micro-objects
via conventional ex-situ metallography and 4-D microstructural characterization
enabled by in-situ X-ray tomography. The broader impacts of this work are to
help produce a diverse STEM-capable workforce for various career pathways by
incorporating central concepts addressed in this project into education and
outreach activities that expose and engage students in materials science. The
education and outreach activities center on the following three education
objectives: (i) expanding a Materials Camp for high school students and teachers
(ii) enhancing a “How It’s Made” hands-on undergraduate honors seminar course,
and (iii) creating innovative diffusion modules to enable flipped classes for
materials science graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.