* 2143267
* CAREER: Molecular control of differentiation in the enteric nervous system
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Julia Ganz, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2026
* USD 689,565.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enteric nervous system (ENS) –
the “brain in the gut” – regulates important gastrointestinal tract functions
such as digestion and nutrient uptake. To fulfill this role, a complex network
of specific cell types – nerve cells and glial cells – need to be assembled
during development. The genetic factors that regulate the generation of these
different cell types and the circuits they form during development are poorly
understood. It is also not known if the circuits in distinct regions of the gut
(for example, the stomach and intestine), are constructed using different
signals, or if the same developmental signals are used along the whole length of
the gut. This project will provide fundamental insights into how the enteric
nervous system develops, and the interactions between the neural circuits of the
gut and surrounding tissues. Understanding how gut neural cell types get
generated is also essential for a better comprehension of how these nerve cells
regulate gut physiology and function. In addition to its scientific goals, this
project will also provide extensive, hands-on research experiences for
undergraduate students, with a particular emphasis on students from groups who
have been historically underrepresented in biological research, through 1) a new
research-intensive undergraduate course on genome editing and 2) organized
research experiences for undergraduates starting in their first year. Additional
training opportunities are provided for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, as well as public outreach activities that aim to increase
scientific literacy by showcasing the advantages of zebrafish research in
neuroscience via interactive booths at regional science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ENS is the largest part of the peripheral
nervous system providing the intrinsic innervation of the gut. Despite the
critical role of the ENS for gut development and function, there is a
significant gap in knowledge regarding the genes and fundamental principles that
control ENS neuronal development. Each gut subdivision has specific functions –
accordingly, the ENS also shows regional molecular and cellular differences
along the gut. A fundamental yet unexamined question that remains is the degree
to which ENS neurogenesis is regulated by region-specific programs within each
gut subdivision. Addressing this question is essential for a complete
understanding of the core principles that underlie ENS neurogenesis, as well as
a better understanding of how the ENS develops in concert with surrounding gut
cells. This project will determine region-specific gene activities and their
regulatory programs in sets of experiments. The first set will elucidate
molecular mechanisms that control region-specific ENS neurogenesis. The second
set will identify region-specific regulatory programs using epigenomic and
transcriptomic profiling to detect and functionally test regulatory components.
The third set will discover the extent to which region-specific regulatory
programs control ENS neurogenesis by using a CRISPR genome editing pipeline to
assess the region-specific function of selected transcription factor genes. This
work will significantly expand knowledge about the genes and regulatory programs
that control ENS neurogenesis, as well as provide research experiences for
undergraduates through developing a new CRISPR genome editing course and
independent scientific research in the PI’s lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.