* 2143969
* Supporting and Providing Access for Deaf Students in Signed Language Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,01/31/2024
* David Quinto-Pozos, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 90,680.00

This project supports the diversification of researchers who work on signed
languages and their communities of users. Historically, the majority of signed
language researchers have been hearing people, most of whom are adult learners
of a signed language. However, there are few deaf and hard of hearing (hereafter
deaf) signers among the ranks of signed language researchers. This project uses
a mentorship model to provide a small group of deaf college and university
students from throughout the United States with professional-development
activities and support for attending the international Theoretical Issues in
Sign Language Research (TISLR) conference. TISLR is the premier conference for
signed language research in the world. The aim is to provide key opportunities
for deaf students from the United States that will support their progression in
graduate work and future involvement in the field of signed language
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will accomplish its goals in two key
ways. First, deaf students who are chosen (via rigorous application process) to
be part of pre- and post-conference mentorship activities will meet virtually
with current deaf researchers, to discuss methods for engaging in academic
research, presenting one’s findings at conferences, publishing the results of
one’s work in scholarly journals, and engaging with the deaf community in order
to share research findings and promote future recruitment of deaf students to
the field. Second, deaf students will attend the TISLR conference (either in
person or virtually), supported by American Sign Language-English interpretation
services. The interpretation services are crucial because many conference
presentations and activities will occur in (oral) English. Interpretation
support will allow the deaf candidates supported by the project to access oral
language and engage fully with the conference program and with other researchers
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.