* 2143312
* CAREER: Formalizing the Concept of Teamwork in Heterogeneous Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Philip Dames, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2027
* USD 230,801.00

A new field of study, multi-robot analytics, provides an unconventional approach
to developing effective multi-robots teams. Multi-robot analytics greatly
extends the concepts of sport analytics, a data-driven analytical decision-
making methodology for improving performance in team sports that has transformed
the study and business of athletics, to study how robots within a team
coordinate, how to develop these multi-robot teams, and how to field a team most
efficiently. This matters greatly in search-and-rescue emergencies, e.g., a
building collapse or a natural disaster, where fielding the most effective
available team possible would make a significant difference in the outcome and
overall safety. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project creates
the technical foundations for this new field of research and its application,
promotes the participation in the STEM disciplines underpinning robotics by
high-school students near Temple University, and works with local businesses and
technology companies in the Philadelphia region to build a strong local
workforce in the rapidly growing field of advanced robotics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the cyber-physical foundations and the
computational framework for multi-robot analytics, which will lead to the
development of coordination and control strategies for heterogeneous multi-robot
systems that effectively use the relative strengths of each individual robot and
that generalize to new team compositions and situations. The result of this
project includes a collection of standardized test scenarios, an extensible
simulation environment, new metrics to assess the performance of multi-robot
systems, and a multi-agent reinforcement learning framework that will maximize
overall performance across a range of scenarios. These tools are provided in an
open-source software development toolkit that will be shared with the larger
research community to advance the study of multi-robot systems and their
effective use. Finally, this project will devise methods to predict the expected
performance of multi-robot systems in challenging new scenarios and will develop
novel metrics for multi-agent reinforcement learning that properly attribute
each agent’s contribution to the team’s performance. Collectively, these efforts
allow for a nuanced and analytical understanding of how to compose heterogeneous
multi-robot systems and design effective team coordination and control
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.