* 2143339
* CAREER: Physiological genomics of sexually dimorphic developmental plasticity on butterfly wings
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Brian Counterman, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 780,674.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal changes of the colors on butterfly
wings are perhaps the most exquisite illustration of how the environment can
influence an organism’s development. Understanding how a change in the seasons
triggers a cascade of complex changes inside a caterpillar that weeks or months
later results in drastic changes in the butterfly’s wing color has boggled
people’s minds for centuries. The research of this project aims to fill this gap
in our understanding using an integrative approach to track the changes in wing
development and, importantly, test how such changes impact the butterfly’s
future mating success. The results will offer a detailed picture of the
fundamental processes involved when an environmental trigger causes changes in
organismal development. The educational plan of this project leverages the
charismatic nature of butterflies and tractability of seasonal plasticity to
establish an outreach program that aims to increase interest and participation
in the sciences of rural middle school teachers and students. Through a series
of organized events, middle school students will develop their own research
projects that they will complete throughout the year. The experiences aim to
positively alter the science education environment for all involved, which could
have life-long impacts on their appreciation of science, much like the life-long
impacts developmental environments can have on an
organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to study the genomic
changes involved in seasonal plasticity and genetic assimilation of a sexually
dimorphic trait: butterfly wing color patterns. The project further aims to test
how plasticity and assimilation of secondary sexual traits that influence
adaptation and speciation, such as butterfly wing patterns, impact organismal
mating success. Counterman will combine genome sequencing, genetic mapping, gene
expression, DNA accessibility, and CRISPR-based gene editing approaches to
characterize the genetic changes involved in plasticity and assimilation. These
experiments will be complemented with mate preference trials to assay how the
plastic wing patterns impact mating success and may be a target of sexual
selection. Equally important, the project aims to establish an education and
outreach program that trains and empowers middle school teachers and students to
develop hypothesis-driven research projects they can pursue inside and outside
of the classroom. Collectively, this project reflects a major effort to (i) fill
important gaps in our understanding of the genetic mechanisms involved in
plasticity and assimilation, (ii) provide an example of a genotype-to-phenotype
connection that extends from DNA to whole organism, and (iii) train teachers and
students in conducting biological research that has long-lasting impacts on
views and interests in STEM for future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.