* 2143816
* CAREER: Designing Meaningful Learning Experiences for Statistical Literacy in Secondary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Travis Weiland, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2027
* USD 419,279.00

Statistics and data science are increasingly necessary for an informed citizenry
and for STEM professions. Learning about statistics concepts requires
understanding how statistics and data are used in to interpret and describe
patterns in real world situations. As middle and high school math classes
include more statistics, teachers will need support in developing knowledge and
resources for teaching statistical concepts and applications. In any learning
context, students draw on their own knowledge and experience to understand new
topics and concepts. This project will engage students and teachers in finding
meaningful ways to use statistical reasoning to make data-based arguments and
reason about patterns they observe in society. This CAREER award is funded by
the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines the development of
statistical literacy that combines statistical reasoning and thinking. The focus
is in designing and refining an empirical theory of change for supporting the
development of teachers’ statistical literacy. In this case a critical
statistical literacy also includes how students learn about statistics in ways
that are grounded in their experience and understanding of the world.
Statistical literacy for students and teachers helps interpret and explain
social phenomena using data collection and analysis. Students should be prepared
to develop data-based arguments for interpreting and explaining real phenomenon.
The project will use professional learning communities for teachers to learn
about statistical literacy and develop learning experiences for their students.
The research will examine teachers’ knowledge development and their use of
statistical learning experiences for students. The data collection includes
quantitative and qualitative sources. These include video analysis of the
professional learning communities, measures of teachers’ statistical knowledge,
and evidence from classroom interactions with students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.