* 2143227
* CAREER: Facile molecular computation and diagnostics via fast, robust, and reconfigurable DNA circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Christopher Thachuk, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2027
* USD 303,843.00

"Smart" systems pervade society. Computers appear to be on every desk, in every
backpack, and in everyone’s pocket. Smart appliances, smart watches and smart
autonomous cars are no longer distant research goals; they entwine with the
fabric of everyday life. Yet, compared with biology, humans' ability for
manipulation of structure and dynamics at the nanoscale is found wanting.
Imagine a world where one can program "smart" molecules – as is done today with
software – to not only store and process information, but to also manipulate
matter with nanometer precision, to sense (bio-)chemical signals from their
environment, to perform robust and complex computation, and to actuate a
physical response in situ. Such mastery over the physical world using molecular
computers will have as profound a change on society as contemporary computers
have had on the ability to store and process information electronically. This
research proposes new techniques, new design principles and new architectures to
program the molecular world with robust, "field-programmable" DNA circuits.
These circuits will be reconfigurable by non-experts and without sophisticated
laboratory equipment, they will be capable of exquisite detection, and they will
be embeddable within paper to enable future applications that include scientific
outreach and point-of-care diagnostics that can be easily distributed in low-
resource settings. Integrated with the technical goals of this project is the
development of summer research experiences for upper level K-12 students, and an
undergraduate class in molecular computation that will broaden participation in
computing by reaching across subject boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop new DNA strand displacement (DSD) architectures that
maintain the robustness property of recent "leakless" systems and prioritize
ease of preparation via biological production, ease of use by non-experts, and
ease of reconfiguration by implementing programmable logic arrays. Robust and
composable DSD modules will be developed for exponential signal amplification in
vitro and in paper-based devices. These new architectures are grounded in theory
and tempered by practical experimental concerns. New algorithms and software for
molecular design and automation will be implemented to meet these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.