* 2143920
* CAREER: Defining the Role of Lipid Perturbations in Cell Survival
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Stephanie Cologna, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2027
* USD 531,975.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand
how lipid dynamics are crucial for cellular survival. Lipids are essential
components of all fats, some vitamins, and many signaling molecules between
different cell types in all multicellular creatures, including mammals. The
studies here will focus on lipids related to brain-cell function and survival.
By changing the levels of cholesterol and other lipids in cells and measuring
cell survival, the findings will show how these lipids affect normal mammalian
brain-cell function. In addition, the researchers will carry out a partnership
with Jane Addams Middle School. In everyday life, lipids, and specifically
cholesterol, are often perceived as “bad” for humans. The research illustrates
the critical role of cholesterol both in terms of cellular function and
dysfunction. The project will develop a collaborative educational experience to
expose middle school students to the biochemistry of lipids including
cholesterol, how they are related to everyday life, as well as to provide these
students a glimpse of a day in the life of a scientist. American Rescue Plan
funding of this project will provide support for this investigator at a critical
stage in her career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maintenance of lipid homeostasis and
distribution is crucial for proper cellular function and survival. The PI is
interested in understanding the interplay of cholesterol trafficking, storage,
and distribution on cellular survival, with a specific focus on the central
nervous system. This work will investigate perturbations of cholesterol
trafficking which results in alterations of fatty acids and hydroxylated
ceramides and thereby contributing to programmed cell death. Use of a
combination of in vitro and in vivo studies by means of the PI’s expertise in
biological mass spectrometry, biochemistry, and molecular biology will further
our understanding of these critical lipids in cell maintenance and survival. In
addition to this basic science goal, the project will benefit society through a
collaborative effort with Jane Addams Middle School to develop a framework for
students to understand basic concepts in lipid biochemistry important for
individual and societal well-being, to provide a new experience for students
from differing backgrounds, and to engage these students with futures in
scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.