* 2143043
* GOALI: Direct Immersion Cooling for Battery Thermal Management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Amy Marconnet, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 380,000.00

This GOALI project focuses on understanding the fundamentals of a new approach
to cool battery cells directly with a liquid instead of conventional cooling
method requiring additional hardware for removing the heat. Excessive and non-
uniform temperatures within battery cells lead to reduced performance and
lifetime of the batteries, as well as life- and property-threatening issues such
as fires and explosions. Reducing the temperatures and variations in temperature
through this new liquid cooling approach could significantly enhance the safety,
performance, and reliability of the battery systems. But the fundamentals of the
cooling approach are not well understood. New cooling fluids are needed to meet
the multi-functional requirements of the system. Models and experiments are
needed to assess the impact of the new cooling system on the battery
temperatures. This project will focus on both the fundamental properties of the
cooling fluid and its impact on the performance of the battery itself through a
combination of experiments and modeling. New knowledge from this work can lead
to improvements to batteries that will have a ripple effect on improvements to
technology including electric vehicles and mobile devices, as well as indirectly
on the environment through improved energy usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
focuses on direct immersion cooling of battery cells as a method to reduce
internal temperature gradients and improve performance through three fundamental
thrusts: (1) First, the team will experimentally evaluate the impact
formulations have on new immersion cooling fluids then leverage statistical and
machine learning tools to understand the function-property relations. (2)
Second, a data-driven modeling framework will be established to integrate
experimental data on thermal, electrochemical, and fluid transport properties to
predict performance of the battery system. (3) Third, the team will calibrate,
then validate, the modeling framework against experimental data and use it to
elucidate the fundamental physics of battery cooling. This project combines
fluid molecular structure and composition analysis, novel multi-physics
metrology, and multiscale physics modeling to generate the new knowledge
necessary for a fundamental understanding of direct immersion cooling of
lithium-ion battery cells. This work will combine fundamental studies of new
cooling fluids to enhance heat dissipation with experimental and computational
investigation of the coupled thermal and electrochemical performance of battery
cells. Ultimately, this work enables the rational, data-driven design of
improved battery systems that push the existing limits on key performance
metrics, while maintaining safety, through new chemistries, materials, and
geometries. Beyond the technical aspects of this university-industry
partnership, educational activities including internships and training programs
are proposed that would facilitate educating the next generation of battery
engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.