* 2143233
* CAREER: Quantum Coherence, Optical Readout, and Quantum Transduction for Spin Qubits from First-Principles Calculations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yuan Ping, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2027
* USD 210,316.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education to
develop computational methods to investigate properties of smallest computation
units â€“ quantum bits that are important for storing and manipulating data in
quantum computers. These quantum bits (qubits) have a spin state, an angular
momentum that is a quantum mechanical property of an elementary particle, such
as an electron, as their basic element. Characterizations and study of these
building blocks help in determining how to make quantum computers dependable and
scalable. The PI will develop computational tools to understand critical
properties of different materials and their qubits. These properties include
their ability to support complex computer applications (quantum coherence), to
read high-fidelity information (quantum readout) and to transfer information
efficiently (quantum transduction). Modelling these properties of different
materials will help in predicting how they will behave in different conditions
(for example, different temperatures) before performing experiments to observe
their behavior. Methods developed in this project will accelerate discovery of
materials that show promise for scalable quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach plan includes
strengthening undergraduate education on physical chemistry through summer
bootcamp and developing computational materials research through new courses and
REU programs, and supporting women and underrepresented groups through
organizing coffee hours and seminars through UCSC WiSE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is to develop first-principles computational platforms to study
critical physics processes in quantum information science (QIS) - quantum
coherence, readout, and transduction of spin qubits. Understanding kinetics of
excited states and spin qubit relaxation and decoherence is the core issue of
spin-based QIS. Quantum coherence determines how long the spin state will last
or the information will be intact; qubit readout efficiency determines if one
can extract information from qubit with high fidelity; quantum transduction
determines if quantum information can be transferred and communicated among
qubits over a long range. All these properties are materials-specific, and have
been mostly computed by simplified models which require prior inputs from
experiments. In this project the PI aims to develop a fully first-principles
computational platform to tackle these issues for spin qubits, which do not
require prior input parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general approach is to
leverage the ab-initio density-matrix dynamics framework for open quantum
systems that the PI has developed to resolve environmental couplings, have
predictive capabilities for quantum relaxation and coherence time of spin qubit,
as well as spin qubit initialization and readout efficiency through spin-photon
interface. The latter will incorporate inputs of radiative, nonradiative and
intersystem-crossing rates including many-body interactions. Accurate
predictions of these physical parameters from first-principles will eliminate
the need for prior input parameters or simplified models for general systems and
open the path for designing novel quantum materials, such as new spin-defects
and qubit network, which will create unprecedented performance for applications
in quantum information science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach
plan include strengthening undergraduate education on physical chemistry through
summer bootcamp and developing computational materials research through new
courses and REU programs, and supporting women and underrepresented groups
through organizing coffee hours and seminars through UCSC WiSE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.