* 2143868
* CAREER: In-Kernel Execution of Storage Functions
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Asaf Cidon, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2026
* USD 168,541.00

Emerging hardware storage devices can achieve millions of operations per second.
They can also access data in as little as 2-3 microseconds, representing an
order of magnitude improvement over legacy flash memory and hard disk
technologies. However, at such low latencies, the overhead of the operating and
file system becomes a significant bottleneck to end-to-end storage performance.
Storage requests may slow down by 2x or more. The project designs XRP (eXpress
Resubmission Path), a Linux-supported framework that allows applications to
write storage functions that can be executed by the operating system. XRP allows
applications to bypass almost entirely the overhead of the operating and file
system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main research challenge is that by bypassing
the operating system’s storage layers, XRP lacks important context about the
user’s request, such as who owns the block it is accessing, and how to traverse
the application’s data structure safely and concurrently. The project organizes
four primary research thrusts: (a) adding support for XRP in the Linux kernel
and file system, (b) supporting a variety of storage operations and integrating
with real-world storage systems, (c) enforcing quality of service, isolation and
fairness of in-kernel storage functions, and (d) implementing in-kernel handling
of over-the-network storage requests.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fast storage devices
will fundamentally change the way software systems are built, and will require a
redesign of the entire storage stack underpinning these systems. By eliminating
the software overhead when accessing such devices, while maintaining operating
system support, XRP will enable systems to achieve both high throughput and low
and predictable tail latency, while leaving intact the existing isolation,
security and safety guarantees of the Linux kernel. The immediate benefits will
include high-performing datacenter data systems at a reduced cost, which will in
turn translate to cost-effective cloud services for end users.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts will be released under open-source licenses to
enable other researchers, and work with hardware and cloud providers to
transition our research into practice. The project repository will be available
via the principal investigator’s website:
https://www.asafcidon.com&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.