* 2143752
* CAREER: Methods for Data-Driven Service Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Harsha Honnappa, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2027
* USD 506,494.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project contributes to
the advancement of the Nation's health, prosperity, and welfare by studying the
fundamentals of data-driven engineering of service systems. Service industries
such as healthcare, communications, transportation and logistics, comprised over
67 percent of US gross domestic product and employed more than 78 percent of the
working population in 2020, according to the US Federal Reserve and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics. Engineering service systems to increase operational
efficiency and cost effectiveness is a crucial task with significant socio-
economic implications for the US Designing and operating these systems has
benefited from the use of sophisticated mathematical models of these systems.
However, identifying a model appropriate to a system of interest is a remarkably
hard problem. This award supports a fundamental understanding of how to utilize
large operational data sets and emerging machine learning technologies, to
facilitate such model identification. The research products of this award will
enable engineers, policy makers and academicians to better improve operational
and cost efficiencies, and as a consequence improve overall national welfare.
The educational plan as part of this award aims to radically improve student
advising and mentoring in large, public universities and colleges, by utilizing
machine learning to predict student performance and enable student advisors and
faculty mentors to implement early advising interventions. These interventions
can substantially improve student retention and graduation rates, particularly
among at-risk populations such as first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large service systems exhibit multi-scale
spatiotemporal variations and they are naturally modeled using stochastic
network models operating in random and nonstationary environments. Model
identification and calibration are fundamental to data-driven engineering. This
research project fills an important gap in the literature, where most of the
focus is on stationary models. The research in this award proposes the
development of novel semiparametric methods for model calibration in stochastic
network models operating in random and nonstationary environments. The research
leverages and extends state-of-art techniques from stochastic analysis,
optimization over measure spaces and point process theory to develop these
methods. In the case of model inference, the project investigates theory that
builds on and significantly extends M-estimation, minimax and function
approximation analyses to the semiparametric setting of service system models.
The complex nature of stochastic network models creates a desideratum for an
understanding of which classes of such models can be uniquely identified. The
project addresses identifiability analyses and utilizes information geometry to
understand the landscape or manifolds of the model space to address this
question. Together, the theory and methods will lead to a comprehensive
‘graybox’ methodology for calibrating service system
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.