* 2143493
* CAREER: Toward a Foundation of Over-Parameterization
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Simon Du, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 05/31/2027
* USD 226,926.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over-parameterized models, a
modern machine learning technique to make predictions, are revolutionizing
application domains, including computer vision, natural language processing, and
robotics. However, these powerful models have not yet become the predominant
method in many data-driven domains because they are extremely resource-hungry:
recent models cost millions of dollars to train. This project will tackle this
challenge by thoroughly characterizing the theoretical properties of over-
parameterization. Based on this solid foundation, the investigator will design
resource-efficient methods to make modern machine learning technologies
accessible to a broader audience. An education plan is integrated into this
project --- the investigator will mentor students, develop new courses, organize
workshops, and develop course materials for a high school machine learning
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major components. The
first thrust characterizes over-parameterization from width. The grand goal is
to develop a unified theoretical framework, based on which the investigator will
design new width shrinkage methods to reduce over-parameterized model resource
requirements. The second thrust will develop principles on the acceleration and
regularization effects of over-parameterization from depth. Insights will help
us design more explicit optimizers and regularizers to compress the model so
shallow neural networks can achieve performance similar to deep neural networks
ones. The third thrust will identify conditions under which pre-trained over-
parameterized models can learn representations that improve sample efficiency in
downstream tasks. The investigator will then design methods that select a small
subset of data in pre-training without degrading performance, reducing
computational resource requirements. In addition to theoretical developments,
the project also aims to implement all algorithms developed as open-source
software, evaluate them on standard benchmarks and deploy them on real-world
applications in the transportation domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.