* 2143866
* CAREER: Complexity From Simplicity: Multi-scale Computational Deciphering of the Viral Life Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Elsje Pienaar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2026
* USD 290,084.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses like Ebola and SARS-CoV-2
spread and cause disease through the combined action of multiple viral proteins
working together. Limiting viral reproduction in patients will require a
holistic view of how all of these proteins work together in one infected cell
and across many cells in our bodies. This project will use a combination of
experimental data and computer simulations to understand and predict the complex
interactions that drive Ebola virus infection. Such an understanding will allow
the identification of any weak points in this protein network that can be
targeted with new drugs. The project will also develop new research tools to
advance the use of computer simulations to accelerate viral research. The
educational objectives of the project will complement the research objectives by
training the next generation of scientists (from high school to graduate student
level) to readily combine computational and experimental research methods.
Together, the research and educational objectives will enable a comprehensive
understanding of Ebola virus biology, integrated computational/experimental
research tools, and a scientific workforce that can take advantage of
computational technology to advance public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this proposal is to identify interconnected subcellular and
inter-cellular mechanisms that drive viral replication and spread within a host,
using Ebola virus as a model system. Mechanistic computational models are
powerful tools that generate virtual versions of real biological systems, to
enable analysis of complex systems-level dynamics. In this project, mechanistic
computational models, closely integrated with experimental data, will be used to
identify key mechanisms in Ebola virus reproduction. New multi-dimensional
analyses will be developed to elucidate coupled mechanisms, and computational
predictions will be tested experimentally. Research objectives will quantify: 1)
the impact of individual protein dynamics on viral production at the subcellular
level using systems of ordinary differential equations; 2) the spatio-temporal
impact of inter-cellular processes on cell-to-cell viral spread and
proliferation using agent-based models; and 3) the combined impact of
subcellular and inter-cellular mechanisms on viral replication across scales
using multi-scale simulations. These simulations will be calibrated to and
validated against experimental data from the Ebola virus minigenome system that
allows careful isolation of individual viral proteins and steps in the viral
life-cycle (e.g. transcription and assembly). The research objectives will
support educational objectives at the intersection of biology and computation.
The educational objectives will: integrate quantitative methods into existing
biology curricula in an accessible and sustainable way; and advance
interdisciplinary training in undergraduate biomedical engineering students.
These objectives will be accomplished through a multi-tiered educational
approach that connects students and teachers within, and between, high-school,
undergraduate and graduate levels. The project will develop: 1) quantitative
learning modules for biology courses; 2) international interdisciplinary
undergraduate courses; and 3) interdisciplinary research training for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.