* 2143449
* CAREER: Why Are Ponds Biogeochemical Hotspots? Examining How Ecosystem Structure and Function Scale with Waterbody Size
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Meredith Holgerson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 03/31/2027
* USD 371,555.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ponds are small, shallow, and
globally abundant waterbodies that provide important ecosystem services: ponds
cycle nutrients, filter contaminants, promote high biodiversity, and regulate
carbon emissions and storage. Several metrics of ecosystem function are
disproportionately greater in ponds than lakes, including greenhouse gas
emissions, ecosystem productivity, and nutrient concentrations. The greater
biogeochemical activity in ponds may be due to stronger connections between
bottom (benthic) and surface (pelagic) waters, a term called benthic-pelagic
coupling. This research examines how benthic-pelagic coupling influences pond
ecosystems using field surveys and whole-pond manipulations, which includes
training of undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher.
This project further examines how the public use ponds and perceive water
quality, informing the establishment of appropriate pond water quality standards
that account for benthic-pelagic coupling. A key feature of this project is the
close interaction of researchers with public agencies that regulate these
aquatic habitats for citizen enjoyment and ecological
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic ecosystem function reflects processes
occurring in both benthic and pelagic habitats, yet a framework integrating
benthic-pelagic coupling with ecosystem function is lacking. This CAREER award
links benthic-pelagic coupling to ecosystem function in temperate ponds, which
offer an ideal study system due to the variable strength of benthic-pelagic
coupling across ponds and their tractability for whole-ecosystem manipulations.
The project focuses on two metrics of ecosystem function: ecosystem metabolism
and greenhouse gas production and emissions, which reflect organic matter
processing. The first goal of the project links the strength and timing of
benthic-pelagic coupling to ecosystem function by sampling ponds with different
mixing regimes, and by establishing experimental ponds that mix rarely,
intermittently, or often. The second goal of the project determines how light
availability and animal communities mediate benthic-pelagic coupling, which will
be tested in experimental ponds and integrates research with an undergraduate
limnology course. The third goal of the project establishes how benthic-pelagic
coupling influences water chemistry and public perceptions of water quality,
which includes public outreach, an undergraduate course, and partnerships with
state waterbody managers. Ultimately, our framework to link benthic-pelagic
coupling with pond carbon and nutrient cycling will help us to understand how
small and shallow waterbodies function and predict how they will respond to
environmental change such as warming, browning, eutrophication, and algal
blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.