* 2143873
* CAREER: Learning Predictive Models for Visual Navigation and Object Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Saurabh Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2027
* USD 244,105.00

Efficiently moving around and interacting with objects in novel environments
requires building expectations about people (e.g., which side will an oncoming
person pass by), places (e.g., where are car keys likely to be in a home), and
things (e.g., which way will a door open). However, manually building such
expectations into decision-making systems is challenging. At the same time,
machine learning has been shown to be successful in extracting representative
patterns from training datasets in many related application domains. While the
use of machine learning to learn predictive models for decision-making seems
promising; the design choices (data sources, forms of supervision, architectures
for the predictive models, and interaction of the predictive models with
decision-making) are deeply intertwined. As part of this project, investigators
will identify the precise aspects in which machine learning benefits navigation
and object interaction; and co-design datasets, models, and learning algorithms
to build systems that realize these benefits. The project will improve the
state-of-the-art of predictive reasoning for navigation and object interaction
by designing approaches that can leverage large-scale diverse data sources for
training. Models, datasets, and systems developed in this project will advance
navigation and mobile manipulation capabilities. These will enable practical
downstream applications (e.g., assistive robots, telepresence), and open up
avenues for follow-up research (e.g., human-robot interaction). The project will
contribute to the education of students and the broader community through
curriculum development, engagement in research projects, and accessible
dissemination of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will co-design data
collection methods, learning techniques, and policy architectures to enable
large-scale learning of predictive models for people, places, and things for
problems involving navigation and mobile manipulation. Investigators will tackle
the following three research tasks: (1) designing predictive models for people,
places, and objects that are necessary for decision making; (2) identifying data
sources and generating supervision to learn these predictive models at-scale;
and (3) hierarchical and modular policy architectures that effectively use the
learned predictive models. Investigators will re-use existing sense-plan-control
components (motion planners, feedback controllers) where applicable (e.g.,
motion in free space), and introduce learning in modules that require
speculation (i.e., high-level decision-making modules, e.g., identifying
promising directions for exploration, predicting where will an oncoming human go
next, what is a good position to open a drawer from). Investigators will
evaluate the effectiveness of proposed methods by comparing the efficiency of
systems with and without predictive reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.