* 2143673
* CAREER: Rational Design of Immune Cell-Homing Biomaterials for Immune Regulation
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Hua Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2027
* USD 258,391.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials introduced into the human body often cause
immune responses that may result in the dysfunction or rejection of materials.
Past research effort has been largely focused on reducing or eliminating the
immune responses, i.e., making the biomaterials invisible to the immune system.
However, this passive approach fails to capture and leverage the positive side
of immune responses, which can instead improve the performance of biomaterials
in many disease contexts. This project aims to understand how macroporous
biomaterials can be utilized to recruit specific types of immune cells (e.g.,
dendritic cells and T cells; two prominent types of immune cells in the body),
which can be further trained at the material site to better combat cancer cells
and pathogens. By hypothesizing that immune cell recruitment is affected by the
physical properties of materials, including pore size and mechanics, this
project will develop a macroporous biomaterial that enables independent tuning
of pore size, stiffness, and viscosity, elucidate the impact of each parameter
on the immune cell recruitment, and further rationally design materials that can
primarily enrich dendritic cells or T cells. Potential outcomes from this
research will be new technologies to precisely control the bodyâ€™s immune
responses, effective cancer immunotherapies for treating cancers that are
difficult to tame with existing therapies, and a biomaterial platform for
developing future immunotherapies for autoimmune disorders, infectious diseases,
and injured tissues. These research efforts will be integrated with education
and outreach activities, including the development of biomaterial lectures and
demos for middle-school students, high-school students, and freshmen. It aims to
raise the awareness of the importance of biomaterials education to match the
increasing impact of material science in biomedicine. In view of the lack of
general knowledge about immunology and vaccine, as reflected during the covid-19
pandemic, immunology modules will be developed from an engineering perspective
and introduced to classes and summer camps to educate the next generation with
basic concepts of immunology and vaccination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The emerging concept of utilizing chemokine-loaded
macroporous biomaterials to actively recruit and program desired immune cells in
situ and thus regulate systemic immune responses has shown great promise for
developing effective immunotherapies against diseases. However, the immune cell
recruitment profile, i.e., numbers and fractions of different immune cells, of
materials has been unpredictable. This project will elucidate the mechanism for
immune cell recruitment and enrichment within macroporous materials and the
impact of material properties on immune cell behaviors. Pore size, mechanics,
and chemokine release kinetics of materials likely dictate the immune cell
recruitment profile, but independent and flexible control of these parameters
remains a challenge. This project will develop a macroporous hydrogel system
that enables independent tuning of pore size, stiffness, viscosity, and
chemokine release kinetics (Aim 1), elucidate the impact of each parameter on
the immune cell recruitment, migration, and proliferation in vitro and further
rationally design materials that can primarily enrich dendritic cells or T cells
(Aim 2), and validate their promise for developing potent cancer immunotherapy
(Aim 3). Successful completion of this project will enable rational design of
macroporous materials that can preferentially enrich specific types of immune
cells, for precise orchestration of immune responses in different disease
contexts. Additionally, the research efforts will be integrated with the
educational training of students at all levels, especially by promoting
biomaterials education to match the rising impact of materials science in
biomedicine and educating the next generation with basic concepts of immunology
and vaccination from an engineering perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.