* 2143256
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Sensor Attack Detection and Recovery in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Fanxin Kong, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,990.00

New vulnerabilities arise in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) as new technologies
are integrated to interact and control physical systems. In addition to software
and network attacks, sensor attacks are a crucial security risk in CPS, where an
attacker alters sensing information to negatively interfere with the physical
system. Acting on malicious sensor information can cause serious consequences.
While many research efforts have been devoted to protecting CPS from sensor
attacks, several critical problems remain unresolved. First, existing attack
detection works tend to minimize the detection delay and false alarms at the
same time; this goal, however, is not always achievable due to the inherent
trade-off between the two metrics. Second, there has been much work on attack
detection, yet a key question remains concerning what to do after detecting an
attack. Importantly, a CPS should detect an attack and recover from the attack
before irreparable consequences occur. Third, the interrelation between
detection and recovery has met with insufficient attention: Integrating
detection and recovery techniques would result in more effective defenses
against sensor attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address these
key problems and develop novel detection and recovery techniques. The project
aims to achieve timely and safe defense against sensor attacks by addressing
real-time adaptive-attack detection and recovery in CPS. First, this project
explores new attack detection techniques that can dynamically balance the trade-
off between the detection delay and the false-alarm rate in a data-driven
fashion. In this way, the detector will deliver attack detection with
predictable delay and maintain the usability of the detection approach. Second,
this project pursues new recovery techniques that bring the system back to a
safe state before a recovery deadline while minimizing the degradation to the
mission being executed by the system. Third, this project investigates efficient
techniques that address the attack detection and recovery in a coordinated
fashion to significantly improve response to attacks. Specific research tasks
include the development of real-time adaptive sensor attack detection
techniques, real-time attack recovery techniques, and attack detection and
recovery coordination techniques. The developed techniques will be implemented
and evaluated on multiple CPS simulators and an autonomous vehicle
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.