* 2143712
* CAREER: Development of Stereoselective Cu-Catalyzed Reductive Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Joshua Sieber, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Joshua Sieber of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Commonwealth University
(VCU) will investigate and develop new chemical tools to synthesize amine-
derived polar organic compounds. These compounds are prevalent in nature, and
the pharmaceutical industry uses and develops them to study biological processes
and create new therapeutics for the treatment of human diseases. However, such
compounds are often extremely difficult to access and synthesize. The goals of
this research are to develop new synthetic tools to enable easy access to these
important amine-derived organic compounds using earth-abundant copper metal-
based catalyst systems. Studies will also be performed to understand how these
processes work so that the efficiency of these new techniques can be continually
improved. The educational objective of this CAREER proposal aims to recruit and
prepare a diverse STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
workforce for careers at the frontiers of the chemical sciences through hands-on
training of the scientific method using the framework of synthetic organic
chemistry. This goal will be achieved through: 1) introducing Richmond Public
High School students to careers in synthetic organic chemistry through
interactive classroom visits and opportunities to perform scientific research in
the principal investigator’s laboratory in the summer, and 2) developing a new
undergraduate advanced organic chemistry laboratory at VCU aimed at providing
synthesis skills to students for applications to industrial careers in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of synthetic methodology to enable
the construction of C–C bonds is at the core of organic chemistry. Having a
“toolbox” of C–C bond-forming reactions enables the synthetic chemist to access
many molecular organic targets desired for applications in chemical biology,
medicinal chemistry and materials science. This proposal aims to develop new
stereoselective and regiodivergent Cu-catalyzed processes to introduce multiple
heteroatom-groups in the final product in a single reaction step to allow for
convenient and straightforward access to chiral poly(heteroatom)-containing
compounds. The core of the investigation will consist of the study of
allenamides in asymmetric Cu-catalyzed reductive coupling reactions with
aldehyde and imine electrophiles. Development of these processes is expected to:
1) improve the synthetic efficiency for the preparation of molecular
architectures that are difficult to prepare by other techniques; 2) allow for
the conversion of basic feedstocks to a wide range of enantio-enriched chiral
building blocks of significance in natural product synthesis, chemical biology
and chiral catalyst design, and 3) provide mechanistic insights to aid in the
future development of general, stereoselective catalytic umpolung (polarity-
reversed) processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.