* 2143882
* CAREER: Learning Visual Representations of Motor Function in Infants as Prodromal Signs for Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Sarah Ostadabbas, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2027
* USD 260,383.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is
a neurodevelopmental condition that affects social communication and flexible
behavior in up to 1.5% of the population. Movement disorders are considered one
of the first signs of ASD, and probably precede social or linguistic
abnormalities. But differences in motor movement quality are also associated
with other conditions, such as Cerebral Palsy and Developmental Coordination
Disorder, so while early motor deficits are not in themselves diagnostic of ASD
they are risk indicators. This research will directly aid in early
identification of motor deficits in infants, thereby enabling early treatment
resulting in better quality of life as well as reduced healthcare and education
costs. Additional broad impact will derive from inclusion of an underserved,
low-income population with health disparities from Puerto Rico, which will help
ameliorate a critical public health research gap (since prior studies have
focused overwhelmingly on White, high socio-economic status samples, with only
limited relevance to historically marginalized and at-risk communities). In
addition, educational activities will engage high school through graduate
students to create a pipeline of future data scientists and engineers that
democratizes access to broader communities. To maximize impact, project outcomes
will be disseminated in peer-reviewed articles, outreach programs, and open
code/data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to
establish a computer vision-based, artificial intelligence-guided infant motor
function monitoring and assessment system to enable unobtrusive tracking of
measures of motor impairment while the infant is in their natural environment.
To this end, the research will learn and quantify visual representations of
motor function in infants and develop novel data/label-efficient AI techniques,
including biomechanically constrained synthetic data augmentation, semantic-
aware domain adaptation, and human-AI co-labeling algorithms. The collaboration
with the Puerto Rico Testsite for Exploring Contamination Threats (PROTECT)
cohort will enable large-scale clinical validation of the extracted measures of
early motor function in infants between the ages of 5-10 months and their
relationship with the standardized risk screening tests performed at 18 and 24
months of age. A public outreach activity presenting live demonstrations of the
developed AI tools will help raise awareness of the importance of AI-guided
automatic motor function monitoring early in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.