* 2143662
* CAREER: Reliable Superinsulated Building Envelopes via Predictive Multiphysics Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Danial Faghihi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2027
* USD 595,593.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports research to investigate the design of
additively manufactured insulation components of building envelope (roofs and
walls) based on novel high-performance materials, using predictive computational
modeling, and applying rigorous uncertainty quantification methodologies. The
extraordinary properties of fiber-reinforced silica aerogel composites make them
the most promising insulation materials that can significantly reduce energy
consumption and carbon dioxide emission of next-generation buildings, leading to
extensive environmental benefits, improving human health and welfare, and
enhancing national economic competitiveness. This project will establish
validated computational capabilities to fundamentally understand the functional
behavior of aerogel composites and exploit their superinsulation properties in
modern building envelopes. The knowledge created in this project will positively
impact other fields, such as energy storage technologies, thermal management in
aerospace engineering, and other composite materials employed in almost all
engineering systems. An educational and outreach program will also be
established centered around computational engineering that embraces self-
directed, portable, and lifelong learnings. The activities consist of (1)
stimulating collaborative skills in engineering education, (2) training
workshops for high-school and undergraduate students with focus on involving
women and minorities, (3) improving gender diversity in the computing workforce,
and (4) enhancing partnerships between academia and industry through
collaborations and joint workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of
this research is to create predictive computational models that cope with all
aspects of uncertainties and can guide the discovery of multi-functional and
high-performance building insulation components. The research objectives are to:
(1) establish new multiphysics models of fiber-reinforced silica aerogel
composites; (2) validate the predictive reliability of the model against
experimental measurements using a Bayesian framework; (3) leverage the
predictive model to design low-cost, multi-material thermal breaks with desired
mechanical resiliency, thermal insulation, and soundproofing performances; and
(4) fabricate and test the designed components to validate their performance and
iteratively inform modeling refinement. These advancements will be made possible
by novel microstructural-based theories of materials, accelerated Bayesian
calibration solutions, unique optimization algorithms for design under
uncertainty, and rigorous validation and verification of computational models.
The overarching theme of this research is harnessing multi-functional capacities
of additive manufactured aerogel composites to open up the possibility for high-
volume fabrication of more resilient and sustainable building insulation
components. This project will support the PIâ€™s long-term vision to uncover
engineering systems with new performance regimes using physics-based predictive
computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.