* 2143400
* CAREER: Searching For Biosignatures in Exoplanet Atmospheres
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ji Wang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 04/30/2027
* USD 855,921.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). One of the key science objectives for coming
generations of astronomers will be the search for signs of life (biosignatures)
on other worlds. The two US-based ELTs and the US ELT Key Science Programs will
ensure the US astronomy community's involvement in searching for biosignatures
in the coming decade. However, even when the ELTs are constructed, several
technological hurdles need to be overcome because the community is still orders
of magnitude away from directly imaging habitable planets in terms of angular
separation and starlight suppression. This program will develop a novel
instrument concept that will address these problems: a dual-aperture fiber
nuller. The proof-of-concept instrument developed will eventually be mounted to
the Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) as a pathfinder instrument for future
instrument in the US ELT program. Outreach work will include a series of events
at the Center of Science and Industry (COSI) and OSU to celebrate exoplanet
discoveries and the resulting Nobel Prize in 2019. The events will include an
exoplanet-themed After Dark Night, public lectures featuring Nobel Prize
winners, a newly-developed planetarium show, and an exoplanet exhibition. This
material will be brought to students in rural Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
laboratory demonstration will: (1) help to better understand the error budget in
system throughput and identify key areas for improvement; (2) compare with other
leading concepts for direct spectroscopy with ELTs; and (3) develop a testbed
that sets the stage for high-contrast instruments for ELTs. One outcome of this
design reference study is to realistically estimate a timescale for deployment
of the testbed instrument on the LBT. The new instrument can be a stepping stone
to address technological hurdles to the search for biosignatures with ELTs such
as coronagraphy at sub lambda/D resolution and diffraction-limited echelle
spectroscopy. In parallel, the team will develop a spectral modeling framework
to address challenges in inferring properties of planet atmospheres: (1)
benchmarking performance against ground truth; (2) applying the framework to
directly-imaged exoplanets; (3) dealing with data sets that vary in spectral
resolution (10&lt;R&lt;100,000) and wavelength coverage; and (4) extending from
gas giant planets to small rocky planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.