* 2143419
* CAREER: Shape-Encoded Electrokinetic Particles for Multiplexed Biosensing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Charles Shields, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2027
* USD 395,312.00

Three factors drive the urgent need for improved biosensors. First, success of a
therapeutic intervention is linked to the time of initial diagnosis. For
pathologies beginning at the cellular or molecular level, early identification
of rare disease-associated biomarkers—especially before symptoms manifest—can
dramatically improve the likelihood of survival. Second, reliance upon a narrow
set of biomarkers can greatly limit the accuracy of initial diagnoses,
especially for diseases like cancer. Third, for pathologies that progress
rapidly (e.g., hours for many infectious diseases), slow readouts can impair
outcomes and increase the cost of intervention. Thus, there remains a need to
study new biosensing technologies that address these challenges. This project
will develop an active particle-based biosensor where particle speed is
associated with the amount of biomarker captured. Particles will have different
shapes, each encoding for a different biomarker, enabling the detection of
multiple biomarkers simultaneously. The outcome of this work will be a method to
capture and quantify heterogeneous biomarkers (e.g., proteins, nucleic acids,
exosomes) in a single test. By integrating concepts in physics, chemistry, and
biology, this project will appeal to high school students by highlighting the
exciting and multidisciplinary nature of biosensing. This outreach component
will be accomplished through a “reverse science fair”, whereby graduate students
will present their work to a panel of high school student judges through
interactive demos. The integrated research and education plan will also include
a mentorship program that engages local high school students through year-long
capstone projects to encourage their participation in biosensing research as a
frontier scientific discipline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
project is to understand the factors that influence the motion of electrokinetic
active particles to enable a new and efficient method of detecting heterogeneous
biomarkers. Electrokinetic active particles are particles with asymmetric
surface polarizabilities. At high electric field frequencies, conductive regions
on the particles induce a charged screening cloud in the proximate fluid,
driving nearby ions to flow more rapidly than ions near the dielectric regions.
Particles subsequently propel by induced charge electrophoresis (ICEP). The
capture of biomarkers by affinity ligands on the conductive regions of the
particles alters their speed of propulsion. The central hypothesis of this
research is that the specific capture of biomarkers on the conductive regions of
the particles will enable the direct quantification of biomarker concentration
by basic microscopy and particle tracking. To test this hypothesis, the project
will: (1) study the relationship between biomarker size, charge density, and
concentration on ICEP using numerical predictions and experiments, (2) study the
capture specificity of particles with electrically permissive antifouling
coatings, (3) examine sensitivity as a function of antibody coating density, and
(4) validate the efficacy of the biosensors to simultaneously detect a diverse
panel of biomarkers from blood in a single assay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.