* 2143610
* CAREER:  Understanding the Role of Spin-Dynamics in the Formation of Magnetic Microstructure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Doyl Dickel, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2027
* USD 266,244.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports basic research and education with an aim to understand the
magnetic behavior of materials using computer simulations that model their
properties at atomic length scales. Magnets are crucial materials that enable
modern technologies from electric motors and generators to headphones. However,
even the behavior of the most common magnet, iron, is difficult to understand at
the atomic scale using existing computational modeling techniques. In this
project, the PI and his students will develop new computational methods to
accurately describe the coupled evolution of atomic spins and their arrangement
within the material using tools of machine learning as applied to materials
modeling. The methods will be applied to understanding phase transformations and
their connection to magnetic properties in elemental iron and cobalt. The
understanding and new knowledge gained from these studies can then be used to
guide the development of new magnets by helping to select materials and
determine the processes to make the most efficient magnets possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational activities
at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels, as well as community
outreach, particularly among under-represented groups. In addition to training
graduate and undergraduate students in the area of computational materials
modeling, the PI will develop a course in machine learning theory and methods.
While most people know that machine learning and magnetism are important, there
are a number of misconceptions about what they are and how they work. The PI
will work with local secondary schools and adult education groups to provide
opportunities to learn more about these topics and help dispel some of the
mystery around them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research with an aim to understand the interplay between magnetic
moment and crystal coordination in determining the magnetic and microstructural
properties of materials. Despite numerous attempts, classical molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations have failed to adequately capture the behavior of magnetic
materials. Even the well-known martensitic transformation of iron from ferrite
to austinite is beyond state-of-the-art MD methods, as they are not able to
accurately describe the magnetic moment as an environmentally dependent dynamic
variable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI and his students will
develop the methodology to accurately describe coupled spin and lattice dynamics
at the MD scale and apply it to iron and cobalt, enabling a significant advance
in the understanding, modeling, and development of magnetic materials. This will
be accomplished by using machine learned artificial neural network based
interatomic potentials which explicitly consider the spin of individual atoms as
a degree of freedom. These potentials will be trained using extensive databases
of density functional theory results and used to model phase boundaries in both
iron and cobalt, monitoring the role of local magnetic moments in the energetics
and stability of such boundaries, and the evolution of these boundaries as phase
transformations occur within the material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the PI's educational activities at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, as well as community outreach, particularly among under-
represented groups. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students
in the area of computational materials modeling, the PI will develop a course in
machine learning theory and methods. While most people know that machine
learning and magnetism are important, there are a number of misconceptions about
what they are and how they work. The PI will work with local secondary schools
and adult education groups to provide opportunities to learn more about these
topics and help dispel some of the mystery around
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.