* 2143941
* CAREER: Understanding metal/support interactions in catalysis with statistical learning
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Thomas Senftle, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2027
* USD 456,204.00

Heterogeneous catalysts consisting of metal nanoparticles supported on oxide
surfaces are essential for promoting rapid and energy efficient manufacturing of
fuels and chemicals, as well as controlling emissions of environmental
pollutants. Catalyst research and development has historically relied primarily
on experimental methods – often involving time- and resource-intensive materials
screening. In recent years, however, increasing effort has been directed toward
predictive design of advanced catalyst technologies, enabled by advances in
theory, computational methods, and artificial intelligence. The project develops
and applies advanced simulation tools, based on machine learning, which will be
used to establish strategies for controlling metal/support interactions to
enhance catalyst stability, activity, and selectivity. Models built with these
tools will accelerate research efforts to design new types of catalysts
consisting of either isolated metal atoms or small clusters dispersed on high-
surface area metal oxide supports. In addition to improving catalyst reactivity,
product selectivity, and stability, the project will enable discovery and design
of catalysts that reduce the amount of expensive and strategic metals (such as
platinum, palladium, and rhodium) used widely in chemical manufacturing and
pollution control. Beyond improving catalytic technologies, the project will
extend educational efforts by establishing an outreach program for underserved
communities through the Tapia Center for Excellence and Equity in Education at
Rice University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Synergistic interactions between metal
nanoparticles and oxide supports are known to influence catalyst performance.
The goal of the project is to develop a theoretical framework that uses
statistical-based machine learning, together with density functional theory, to
understand metal/support interactions (MSIs) in heterogeneous catalysis. The
first objective is to apply computationally efficient statistical learning
methodologies to identify the physical descriptors of metal binding on oxide
supports, which in turn can be used to predict metal sintering rates and cluster
morphology. The second objective is to predict catalytic activity and
selectivity by constructing models that relate MSIs to adsorbate binding
energies and the associated kinetic barriers that control mechanisms for
prototypical model reactions, such as carbon monoxide oxidation. The third
objective is to apply thermodynamic analyses to understand the stability of
support modifications that are strategically introduced to enhance MSIs. Thus,
the overall methodology not only will identify desirable surface modifications
for controlling catalytic behavior by tuning MSIs, but also will predict the
environments in which such modifications can be achieved most
readily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.