* 2143976
* CAREER: A Model for Achieving Flexible and Scalable Conceptual Assessment – A Prototype in Undergraduate Quantum Mechanics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Bethany Wilcox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2027
* USD 319,068.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
creating a flexible and robust tool to measure student learning in undergraduate
quantum mechanics courses. Such a measurement tool is important because
applications of quantum mechanics within science and industry represent a
growing area of potential and priority for the country. As technologies such as
quantum computers are well on their way to being a reality, it will be critical
that the STEM education community provides effective educational programs the
produce a quantum-literate workforce that can work in these cutting-edge
industries. Having a tool that can measure students’ learning of quantum
mechanics concepts is a vitally important part of ensuring that these programs
are effective at achieving their goals. This project also aims to provide the
ability to compare the effectiveness of different quantum education courses and
programs to identify efficient and innovative instructional strategies and
approaches. Additionally, this new measurement tool seeks to provide a mechanism
by which we can identify differential performance between different groups of
students within quantum education. Differences in performance are often
reflective of inequities in the educational system in which some groups are
better supported than others. Identifying these inequities is the first step to
changing the system to ensure that all students, regardless of their identities
or backgrounds can be successful, thus supporting the goal of retaining and
supporting a diverse population of students in STEM programs and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals above, this project intends to
establish and implement a new model for the design and structure of assessments
in Physics Education Research (PER) through the development of a flexible
coverage prototype assessment. This work is timely in that it addresses a
growing need for assessments that better support the educational goals of the
community, and the flexible nature of the assessment will allow for its broad
adoption and facilitate positive impact on student learning on a broader scale
than has previously been achieved. The proposed prototype assessment seeks to
target undergraduate quantum mechanics (QM). QM represents an ideal content area
to test this new assessment model because it is a foundational component of
undergraduate physics programs, but also features significant variation in the
content covered at different institutions. The proposed instrument - the Quantum
Physics Assessment (QuPA) - will be composed of questions from existing, static
QM assessments, as well as new items developed to target important topical areas
of QM not already captured by the existing assessments such as quantum
information. To accommodate flexible content coverage and ensure the QuPA items
are unbiased, Item Response Theory (IRT) will guide the validation of the QuPA.
The use of IRT to develop assessments like the QuPA, while novel in PER, is a
state-of-the-art approach used in multiple other fields. Results from the QuPA
will also be analyzed to identify curricular approaches which result in higher
student performance relative to other approaches. Detailed documentation and
dissemination of the development and validation of the QuPA to multiple STEM
disciplines will provide a model allowing others to replicate this process in
the development of future assessments for other content
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.