* 2143626
* CAREER: Develop PROTAC-CID, a Novel Small Molecule Inducible Platform for Controllable Gene Expression in Mammalian Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Xue Gao, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2027
* USD 502,071.00

It is difficult to control gene expression in mammalian cells. Accomplishing
this is key to developing effective cell therapies. Small molecules can exert
that control. Unfortunately, small molecules are often toxic, and tend to have a
limited, on-off capability. The aim of this project is to develop an improved
small molecule system for mammalian cells. This system will be tunable instead
of on/off. Highly sensitive, it will interact with multiple genes to direct more
complex behaviors. Undergraduates from underrepresented groups and high school
teachers will learn techniques of synthetic biology and CRISPR
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteolysis Targeting Chimeric
(PROTAC)-Chemically Induced Dimerization (CID) systems will be developed as
sensitive, multiplex, tunable, and safe toolkits to control gene expression in
mammalian cells. Combining PROTAC-CID with genome editors will enable precise
genomic modification. This will greatly increase the accuracy and safety of
using genome editors for basic and therapeutic applications. The specific
research goals are to 1) establish a novel PROTAC-CID inducible gene expression
system; 2) engineer multiplex inducible gene regulations; 3) design high-
induction and low-basal level PROTAC-CID systems for Cre recombinase expression,
and 4) develop PROTAC-CID inducible CRISPR base editors. Successful completion
should result in novel PROTAC-CID inducible gene expression platforms for
multiplex gene regulations in living eukaryotic cells. These systems will
provide deep insights into the approaches to achieve high-induction and low
basal-level gene expressions. Finally, applying PROTAC-CID systems to CRISPR
base editors will permit inducible genomic DNA modification at a defined time to
reduce the off-target effect and increase the accuracy and safety in genome
editing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.