* 2143755
* CAREER: Measuring the Structural Transitions of Electrosprayed Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Ian Webb, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2027
* USD 610,023.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Ian Webb and his group at Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis are developing methods to investigate how proteins change their
structure as they transition from liquid phase to gas phase. This work is
important as it has the potential to significantly increase the understanding of
protein structure and how it changes during electrospray ionization (ESI). The
studies have the potential to illuminate which specific regions of proteins are
responsible for compaction and expansion in the gas phase. Through interaction
with industrial partners, research results are to be disseminated to other
laboratories which will increase the impact of the methods and contribute to the
advancement of available infrastructure for biomolecular structural analysis.
Individuals and families living near the Children's Museum of Indianapolis will
benefit from the education plan which aims to broaden exposure to STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of mass spectrometry to study structures of
proteins and protein complexes is widespread. However, the extent which proteins
keep their native structures inside a mass spectrometer is under debate. This
proposed research will use mass spectrometric tools to directly determine the
changes in structure to natively folded proteins during mass spectrometric
analyses with chemical probes. Successful implementation of the proposed project
will lead to a greater understanding of the side chain chemistries and
structural motifs that are either stabilized or destabilized in solution, the
gas phase, or in the transition between solution and gas phase. This research
also includes an integrated educational plan with the goal of bringing a
structural mass spectrometry experiments to local Indianapolis community
children ages 6-12, parents/guardians, and educators in an exciting and
informative STEM learning experience at the Children’s Museum of Indianapolis.
The Children’s Museum’s urban location, free admission to individuals and
families living within six surrounding neighborhoods, and many STEM learning
resources attract a diverse group of attendees, with great potential to increase
interest in STEM from historically excluded families in these communities. This
partnership between the Webb laboratory and the Children’s Museum will make
chemical measurements more accessible, allowing individuals from historically
excluded groups to participate directly in STEM
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.