* 2143188
* CAREER: Beyond Low-Inertia Systems - Grid-Forming Control Foundations for Converter-Dominated Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Dominic Gross, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 506,880.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to develop a foundation for real-time control of
power electronics and renewable generation that ensures reliable operation of
large-scale zero-carbon power systems on time scales from milliseconds to
seconds. Today, dynamic stability concerns fundamentally limit the contribution
of renewable generation in large-scale power systems. The project will bring
transformative change to electric power systems by increasing sustainability,
enhancing resilience to severe weather events, and contributing to the
decarbonization of the U.S. economy. This will be achieved by innovations in
modeling and control of power electronics and renewable energy resources that
will enable their full participation in ensuring system stability and
resilience. The intellectual merits of the project include developing new
optimization-based control paradigms for grid-connected power electronics and
analysis methods that will provide a principled understanding of the dynamics of
large-scale power systems dominated by renewable generation and power
electronics. The broader impacts of the project include increased sustainability
and reliability of electric power systems and improved mitigation of and
recovery from severe weather events. The project will also address integration
of power electronics, control, and power systems education and contribute to
developing a diverse and globally competitive power engineering and green-collar
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How to control grid-connected power electronics
and renewable generation with limited flexibility to ensure dynamic stability of
zero-carbon electric power systems is not well understood. The main technical
focus of this project is to develop a framework for control design and stability
analysis that (i) explicitly accounts for static and dynamic constraints of
power electronics and renewable generation, and (ii) prevents adverse dynamic
interactions between controls and physics on overlapping time scales. Solving
this complex problem will require new models, control approaches, and tailored
tools for stability analysis. A particular focus will be on control techniques
that (i) enable seamless integration of vast numbers of distributed power-
electronic devices by inducing collaborative dynamics, and (ii) autonomously
leverage their combined flexibility to reduce the need for centralized
coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.