* 2143195
* CAREER: The True Mass-Radius-Period Distribution of Small Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Darin Ragozzine, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/28/2027
* USD 358,558.00

One of the chief goals in exoplanet research today is to understand the mass
distribution of planets in the universe. Having accurate masses will help
establish mass/density vs. orbital radius relationships, and to identify rocky
Earth-like planets in the habitable zone. These advances represent an important
new avenue to understanding planetary formation processes. The work proposed
here will mine the Kepler data and use new techniques to identify masses of
planets in all 706 multi-transit (multi-planet) systems observed by the Kepler
spacecraft. Right now, masses can be estimated for about 10% of this sample: the
systems in which transit-time variations (TTVs) are observed. The results of
this work will guide future observations and searches done for Earth-like
planets, be they done with space-based telescopes, such as JWST, or ground-based
telescopes, such as the future US-ELTs. Outreach and education efforts include
the mentoring of at least five students from under-represented groups, the
development of research-based education resources, the development of a library
of animated gifs related to astronomy, and supporting development of a chapter
on exoplanets in an OpenStax astronomy textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will conduct an analysis of all 706 Kepler multi-transiting systems (MTSs) using
their publicly-available PhotoDynamical Multi-planet Model (PhoDyMM). A
photodynamical model includes the full n-body dynamical evolution of a planetary
system, but fits directly to the Kepler photometric lightcurve itself. Until
now, most analyses of MTSs have relied upon transit timing variations (TTVs) as
the multiple planets tug each other around, slightly delaying or accelerating
expected transits. Full photodynamical analysis has been applied to only 20 of
the 706 known Kepler MTSs. This technique also makes use of the Kepler short
cadence data, which traditional TTV analysis typically ignores. In addition to
finding masses for many super-Earths and other larger planets, the team expects
to make at least 50 new mass determinations of the smallest exoplanets, until
now inaccessible to current methods. This method has the promise to detect new
planets at the lower end of the mass distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.