* 2143857
* CAREER: Engineering instructive niches to precisely guide single stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Jae-Won Shin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

Stem cells have the ability to develop into different types of cells. These
cells are necessary to build and maintain normal tissues. However, damaged
tissues often do not heal themselves. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) project will pioneer new approaches to understand how stem
cells can be precisely guided to regenerate tissues by building instructive
niches (microenvironments) around them, one cell at a time. The approach
developed can potentially be integrated with other existing biomanufacturing
approaches to fabricate new tissues by providing gel-coated cells with locally
defined properties as building blocks. The educational program will provide both
high school teachers and students from diverse backgrounds with opportunities to
be engaged in hands-on research activities that integrate multiple fields in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). This integrated effort is
designed to promote early exposure to multidisciplinary thinking and learning
processes that are critical to solve challenging problems in biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's career goal is to achieve a
paradigm shift by showing that microgels can be designed as instructive cues to
precisely understand and control single stem cell functions. Toward this goal,
this CAREER project is based on the central premise that building instructive
niches that recapitulate physiologically relevant extracellular matrix
properties around single cells offers a unique direction that will enable
investigations into how microenvironments regulate stem cell functions at an
unprecedented resolution. To confirm this premise, the project will investigate
how three-dimensional microenvironments can be designed to precisely direct
fundamental processes that are essential for cell fate decision, including cell
growth, symmetry breaking, asymmetric division and differentiation at the single
cell level. Multidisciplinary approaches will be employed to pursue this
project, including biomaterial design, droplet microfluidics, biophysical
methods, mathematical modeling, imaging and genetic engineering. The research
will yield a library of designed microenvironment models that can be used to
recapitulate and control specific biological processes of cell fate decision in
a deterministic manner. A greater understanding of cell fate decision enabled by
the tools developed in this research will aid in endeavors to develop effective
stem cell-based therapies and biomanufacturing approaches for tissue
regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.