* 2143351
* CAREER: Enabling Trustworthy Upgrades of Machine-Learning Intensive Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Weiming Xiang, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 05/31/2027
* USD 196,939.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
sustainably benefit from software upgrades throughout their life cycles.
However, as CPS become machine-learning-intensive due to rapidly increasing
interactions between CPS and machine learning technologies, two major
distinguishing factors associated with machine learning techniques raise
significant safety concerns about CPS upgrades which play a critical role in
enabling lifetime safety assurance. First, upgrades of machine learning
components, which inherently result in system changes, come at significant
safety risk for safety-critical CPS due to the vulnerabilities of machine
learning techniques. Second, the traditional safe-by-verification upgrade
framework, in which upgrades and verification have to be two separate
procedures, is no longer valid for machine learning processes that update
instantaneously during system operations. This project targets these unique
challenges by developing scalable verification and monitoring methods for
upgrades as well as safe upgrade procedures to enable trustworthy upgrades and
achieve lifetime safety assurance in machine-learning-intensive
CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the state-of-the-art in the
research of safety in machine-learning-intensive CPS from local time windows to
global life cycles. With the expected research results, machine learning
components in CPS can upgrade with desired safety assurance for lifetime safety
purposes. In particular, this project will develop a novel scalable incremental
verification framework as well as self-adaptive runtime monitoring methods for
upgrades of machine-learning-intensive CPS. The proposed approach will also
design safety-assured upgrade procedures by developing novel upgrade renewal
procedures, safety-aware upgrades, and safety backup co-design methods. The
project will develop an indoor vision-based autonomous vehicle testbed with
upgradable neural networks for a variety of upgrade scenarios to perform
rigorous evaluations. The integration of research and education plans will
address CPS workforce shortage gaps, develop CPS curriculum, and design hands-on
training for students. Activities such as engagement in K-12 STEM camps and
collaboration with government and industry partners are also designed to inspire
students early and promote public understanding of CPS, which aims to build a
healthy and sustainable CPS workforce supply. The designed activities are
uniquely positioned to attract members of underrepresented groups with a focus
to enhance the diversity of the federal, state, and local CPS
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was funded under the NSF CPS
CAREER program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.