* 2143592
* CAREER: Enabling the Next Generation Wideband Microwave Radiometers for the Remote Sensing of the Cryosphere
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Mustafa Aksoy, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2027
* USD 385,336.00

Understanding the Cryosphere, Earth's surface covered by snow and ice, and
predicting future changes in its ice volume and mass are critical to track the
climate and the water cycle on our planet. Because of the extreme environmental
conditions, high costs of sparse in-situ measurements, and concerns about
increasing human footprint associated with these regions, remote sensing
instruments are preferred to monitor the Cryosphere. Among these instruments,
microwave radiometers, i.e., passive receivers measuring microwave radiations
from their targets, have many advantages since they can provide data independent
of cloud conditions and solar illumination, and their measurements are highly
sensitive to important ice properties such as thickness, temperature, density,
and grain size. Provided with enough bandwidth, these instruments are,
hypothetically, capable of profiling these properties from the surface to the
deep ice. However, radiometer operations to observe the Cryosphere are currently
far from ideal. First, they are limited to a few narrow frequency bands to avoid
interference from active sources such as radars and wireless communication
systems. Second, the electrical properties of ice, which determine the amount of
electromagnetic radiation it emits, are not fully characterized versus frequency
and temperature. This CAREER research, by modeling the electrical properties of
ice across wide ranges of frequencies and temperatures and developing efficient
interference mitigation algorithms, will enable the next generation of microwave
radiometers capable of utilizing wide microwave frequency bands to fully probe
Earth's ice bodies. Furthermore, with an education plan integrated with the
research activities, this project will grow the investigator as a prominent
scientist-educator and provide an applied, hands-on electromagnetics training
for students at his institution. &lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetic penetration depths
vary with frequency in ice; thus, wideband microwave radiometers can be used to
profile thermal and physical properties of ice bodies versus depth. The
overarching goal of this career development project is to enable next generation
of such instruments for the remote sensing of the Cryosphere. In pursuit of this
goal, the complex permittivity of ice will be measured across wide frequency
(0-50 GHz) and temperature (200-273 K) ranges for its electrical
characterization. Measured permittivity values will be verified by comparing
simulated microwave radiations over the Antarctic and the Arctic to the
measurements of polar-orbiting space-borne microwave radiometers. Furthermore,
multi-dimensional, machine learning based radio frequency interference detection
and mitigation algorithms for microwave radiometers will be developed to allow
their operations across wide frequency bands occupied and shared by active
services. Lastly, a digital wideband radiometer prototype will be developed at
the grantee's institution to implement these algorithms and validate the project
outcomes through snow remote sensing measurements at fully characterized ground
sites. The research activities will be incorporated into the engineering courses
as a part of the investigator's applied electromagnetics education philosophy to
educate future engineers and scientist in the field of microwave remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.