* 2143044
* CAREER: Voice Technologies for Helping Older Adults Navigate Uncertain Information in Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Robin Brewer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 110,683.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People often create strategies for
determining if the information they encounter online is credible. For example,
they may evaluate the website’s structure, professionalism, or other design
features. However, many of these strategies are not helpful when searching for
information when using voice technologies, many of which lack screens and thus
don’t present visual credibility cues. Further, older adults, who often use
voice technologies to address accessibility challenges posed by vision, motor,
and cognitive disabilities, are also often more susceptible to contradictory or
uncertain information that characterizes important topics such as healthcare.
Combined, these factors place older adults at greater risk of making risky
decisions when accessing information online. This project investigates
approaches for developing voice technologies that help older adults with
credibility assessment, managing uncertain or inconsistent information, and
making informed decisions. The work will advance knowledge about how older
adults use voice technologies in seeking information online, develop models for
non-visual information seeking, and create new ways of interacting with voice
assistants and information to reduce these risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project draws upon behavior change research to investigate how to nudge older
adults towards better information decisions when using voice technologies. To do
so, the research team will engage older adults as community partners, not only
in involved in data collection, but also as members of the research team. The
research will (1) provide empirical evidence of older adults’ information
behaviors when using voice interfaces; (2) evaluate a range of choice
architecture strategies for voice-based information seeking and decision-making,
using findings to inform the design of a framework for non-visual information
seeking; (3) implement the design framework through a toolkit of novel audio
tools; and (4) deploy these tools, evaluating their effectiveness at mitigating
information uncertainty “in-the-wild” with older adults. The outcomes of the
work will advance research in human computer interaction, information retrieval
and sensemaking, and aging. Further, as voice interface design is understudied
in computing education, this project will also contribute new modules for
teaching voice application design to middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.