* 2143424
* CAREER: Active Learning in the Real World
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Shayok Chakraborty, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 04/30/2027
* USD 213,323.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The explosive growth of digital
data in the modern era has expanded the possibilities of solving real-world
problems using computational learning frameworks. However, annotating the data
with labels, which often includes manually adding informative tags on variables
of importance in order to train a machine learning model has remained an
expensive process in terms of time, labor and human expertise. Active learning
algorithms alleviate this challenge by automatically identifying the salient and
exemplar samples from large amounts of unlabeled data, which need to be labeled
manually. In a traditional active learning setup, the labeling entities, called
oracles, are assumed to be infallible; that is, they always provide the correct
answers (in terms of class labels) to the queried samples. However, in real-
world applications, the oracles are often imperfect; they may provide incorrect
annotations and may even be reluctant to provide any annotations. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop novel active leaning algorithms
under such challenging, real-world constraints, in an effort to bridge the gap
between ideal world and real-world active learning. This project has the
potential to tremendously reduce human annotation effort in the design of real-
world AI systems (such as medical diagnosis, security and surveillance), thereby
creating a significant societal impact. As part of this project, the
investigator plans to educate a wide spectrum of students which will help to
ensure a strong pipeline of computer scientists to satisfy the technical needs
of the nation; he will also seek to increase the number of females and students
from underrepresented minorities in graduate STEM related
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project will be realized
through two research objectives. First, a novel active learning framework will
be developed, which can jointly identify the informative unlabeled samples
together with the optimal labeling oracles for each sample. This should maximize
the probability of obtaining the correct label. Second, novel query and
annotation mechanisms will be explored which are less error-prone and easier to
answer, thereby increasing the chances of obtaining reliable annotations. The
second objective will be demonstrated through two innovative query frameworks:
(i) a deep active learning algorithm for vision-based facial age estimation,
where the annotators merely need to provide the best estimated upper and lower
bounds on the age of a person within a given span, rather than the exact age
which may be difficult to estimate; and, (ii) a deep active learning framework
for multiclass classification, where the human annotators are allowed to provide
alternative labels in response to a given query apart from the topmost choice.
This is useful in applications where the annotators are not cognizant about all
the classes and may have more than one class choices in mind for a given sample.
Extensive user studies will also be conducted to understand the benefits and
drawbacks of the proposed solutions. This research will open the door to the
development of novel active learning frameworks which are designed to operate in
the presence of challenging, real-world constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.