* 2143910
* CAREER: Reward Learning Shapes the Fear Circuit
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Alicia Izquierdo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2024
* USD 540,302.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience research tends to
conceptualize particular brain regions as specialized to encode particular types
of memories. This has led to concerted efforts to locate specific memory engrams
in the brain that we could eventually manipulate at will. For example, we often
think about fear memories as being exclusively encoded in the brain’s “fear
center”, called the amygdala. If we could locate the fear engram in the
amygdala, one day we might be able to erase problematic fear memories. However,
our recent work has challenged this idea of regional specialization.
Specifically, we found that a brain region usually restricted to encoding
rewarding memories, the hypothalamus, can be recruited to encode future fear
memories if subjects have recently experienced something rewarding. Now, we will
1) investigate if this constitutes a shift away from the traditional amygdala
fear circuit, 2) reveal the wider circuit that supports hypothalamic regions in
the encoding of fear memories, and 3) expose whether the recruitment of
hypothalamic circuits to encode fearful memories is permanent or transient.
Together, this work will reveal a more fluid approach to conceptualizing memory
formation in the brain. We will disseminate this knowledge to the wider
community in an undergraduate seminar course while trialing the teaching
philosophy “learning by observing and pitching in”, which is designed to
accommodate the educational needs of the diverse student population at UCLA.
Further, this project will support paid research opportunities for undergraduate
students to work on the proposed experiments and prepare them for careers in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We generally conceive of particular
neural circuits as being specialized to encode particular types of information.
However, we have recently revealed a phenomenon that calls this into question.
We have shown that lateral hypothalamus (LH) can be recruited to encode fear
memories, given appropriate prior experience (Sharpe et al., 2021, Nature
Neuroscience). That is, LH GABAergic neurons are not necessary to encode fear
memories in experimentally-naïve rodents. However, if rodents have had
experience in reward learning, which is dependent on LH function, LH GABAergic
neurons become critical for the encoding fear. This showed that reward learning
“primes” LH to encode fear memories. We hypothesize that reward learning
recruits a novel LH fear circuit to encode fear, which constitutes a shift away
from the traditional amygdala circuit, in a manner that degrades with time since
reward learning experience. We will use cell-type specific optogenetics and
fiber photometry of a genetically-encoded calcium sensor, to investigate the
causal and correlative dynamics of this phenomenon. We propose to examine: 1) if
reward learning reduces the role of basolateral amygdala in encoding fear, 2)
where the LH receives the necessary aversive teaching signal to encode fear
memories, and 3) if increasing the delay between reward and fear procedures
attenuates the involvement of LH GABAergic neurons in encoding fear. This will
reveal a dynamic system that shifts between circuits that encode information
depending on prior experience, which may have evolved to help us adapt to
changing environments by utilizing existing cognitive schema from recent
learning episodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.