* 2143817
* CAREER: Cryptic sulfur cycling and organic matter preservation in marine oxygen deficient zones
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Morgan Raven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 234,094.00

CAREER: Particle-Hosted Sulfur Cycling and Organic Matter Burial in Oxygen
Deficient Zones &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Areas of the ocean without dissolved
oxygen are called anoxic zones. These environments are increasing due to human
activities and climate change. Large amounts of organic carbon are buried in
sediments below anoxic zones. However, we do not fully understand why organic
carbon is preserved in these zones. This project seeks to understand a newly
discovered process that may contribute to carbon preservation in anoxic zones.
The process is called organic matter sulfurization. Through this process,
organic matter is transformed and effectively ‘pickled’ by reacting with
sulfide. Rapid sulfurization reactions were identified for the first time in
sinking marine particles and may have larger effect on carbon burial in
sediments than previously thought. This project will be the first to provide
measurements of the scale and significance of rapid organic matter sulfurization
in modern anoxic zones. This project includes field and laboratory studies. The
research will involve a team of students, including a graduate student and six
undergraduates, who will be supported through a peer mentorship program.
Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from the inaugural class of a newly
developed Practical Research Skills course (Earth 101A) at the University of
California Santa Barbara. This course aims to make undergraduate research
opportunities in the Earth Science Department more inclusive and accessible to
minoritized students. It seeks to help undergraduates develop critical thinking
and observational skills that have broad applicability. This project will launch
a self-sustaining and vigorous research program in marine biogeochemistry,
heavily invested in undergraduate research education, with impacts that will
outlast its five-year duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
goal of this project is to assess the contribution of sulfurization reactions to
organic carbon preservation in anoxic environments. After constructing and
testing a set of customized particle traps, an expedition will be conducted to
the marine anoxic zone off the coast of Mexico. Sinking particles, suspended
materials, and surface sediments will be collected at three sites on the Mexican
shelf and slope, that have generally high local productivity and gradients in
bottom-water oxygen concentration. In the field, the rates and isotopic
fractionation of microbial sulfate reduction and organic sulfur formation will
be measured with stable and radioactive isotope tracers. Subsequently, organic
sulfur sources from both natural samples and laboratory experiments will be
characterized using mass spectrometry, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and other
geochemical techniques. Together, the results of this work will identify the
timing and location of organic matter sulfurization in this environment, which
have substantial implications for both modeling marine carbon fluxes and
interpreting the geologic record. This study will provide the first quantitative
estimates of the scale of organic matter sulfurization in anoxic marine zones,
its contribution to sedimentary carbon burial, and its sensitivities to
environmental change. Simultaneously, this project will improve the Earth
Science undergraduate curriculum at the University of California Santa Barbara
through the development of a clear, supportive, and accessible mechanism for
including students from diverse backgrounds in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.