* 2143677
* CAREER: Decoupling electrodeposition from corrosion for precise tuning of metal deposits in high energy batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yuzhang Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2027
* USD 562,500.00

Electrochemical deposition of reactive metals is the central process in several
important clean energy technologies, including high-energy batteries using
metallic anodes. Understanding and engineering these electrochemical systems are
critical to achieving the Nation’s goal of a zero-carbon emissions future, where
grid-scale energy storage can facilitate renewable yet intermittent sources of
green energy (e.g., solar, wind) and the transportation sector is increasingly
electrified. The project’s objectives to understand and engineer metal
electrodeposition for energy storage will generate broad impact for future
technologies that benefit society, including electric vehicles, electric-powered
flight, and grid-scale energy storage. The project’s education and outreach
activities will promote scientific discoveries to the broader community by
leveraging informal settings. Such informal settings have been shown to be
particularly effective learning environments for underrepresented students in
STEM, for whom equitable access to educational opportunities will be provided
through the project’s activities. For example, the researcher's YouTube channel
will disseminate the project’s results to the general public in an engaging way,
raising awareness for the importance of energy research and exciting the future
generation of young scientists and engineers. The project’s integrated research
and educational plan will lead to energy-dense lithium metal batteries that
bring the US closer to achieving decarbonization goals, expand the number of
underrepresented students pursuing STEM, and enable a diverse and globally
competitive US workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research project
will investigate the nanoscale mechanism of Li metal electrodeposition; the
current understanding of which is complicated by the simultaneous formation of a
surface corrosion film, the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). A deeper
understanding of these processes will enable high-energy batteries capable of
extreme fast charging. The objective is to bridge this gap in understanding by
decoupling metal electrodeposition from SEI film formation to study each process
independently. The project’s approach will use ultramicroelectrode geometries to
enable ultrafast electrodeposition current densities that can outpace
electrolyte decomposition rates. State-of-the-art cryogenic electron microscopy
techniques will preserve and image the nanoscale interfaces that form. The
project’s objectives are to (1) understand and tune electrodeposition
morphologies decoupled from surface corrosion/SEI formation, (2) reveal the
reaction kinetics of the SEI film, and (3) use these insights to engineer
efficient high-energy batteries capable of fast charging. This approach is
distinct from past work, which could not decouple these two processes and study
them separately from each other. By providing the first images of how Li grows
intrinsically without the influence of a corrosion film and quantifying the
film’s reaction kinetics, the project’s results will provide significant
insights into precisely tuning Li deposition
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.