* 2143849
* CAREER: The Spatiotemporal Dynamics of the C. Elegans Intestinal Gene Regulatory Network
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Erin Osborne Nishimura, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2027
* USD 542,888.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene regulatory networks direct
development, cell identity, and homeostasis. How some gene regulatory networks
change from directing organ development in embryonic stages to supporting organ
functions in juvenile and adult stages has not been sufficiently explored.
Furthermore, the microbiome's influence on the biology of organ systems is just
beginning to be appreciated. This project aims to capitalize on the 20-cell
Caenorhabditis elegans intestine as a model organ system to determine how
intrinsic (gene regulatory network) and extrinsic (microbial) factors influence
transcription over developmental time. This project will also support an
outreach initiative to introduce community college students to diverse STEM
fields, support them through the transfer stage, and assist them in gaining
research opportunities in Computational Biology. American Rescue Plan funding of
this project supports this investigator at a critical stage in her
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gene regulatory network that directs
organogenesis of the C. elegans intestine is a classic model system. It
culminates in ELT-2 (Erythroid Like Transcription factor), a highly conserved
regulator. Using genomics approaches, the proposed work will test whether ELT-2
influences changing gene expression through autonomous mechanisms or in
combination with dynamic partners. Specifically, the project will explore the
relationship between ELT-2 and its homolog ELT-7. Intestinal microbes greatly
impact intestinal biology, yet C. elegans are typically studied in isolation
from natural microorganisms. A newly curated C. elegans microbiome resource
(CeMbio) affords new opportunities to determine how microbes influence
intestinal transcription. By investigating this at the single-cell level, the
proposed work will determine how cell identity and the microbiome intersect.
Overall, this project will illuminate how organ systems transcriptionally
orchestrate biological processes with single-cell precision, over developmental
time, and in response to the microbiome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.