* 2143249
* CAREER: Synergistic physics-based and deep learning cardiovascular flow modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Amirhossein Arzani, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2022
* USD 299,170.00

Accurate quantification of blood flow across different scales is crucial to our
fundamental understanding of cardiovascular disease and clinical decision
making. While computational and experimental blood flow modeling has seen
tremendous progress, we still have difficulty generating reliable data. Low
resolutions and unknown parameters overburden high fidelity modeling.
Additionally, blood flow dynamics near the wall where disease localizes are hard
to quantify due to thin boundary layers and challenges in near-wall transport
modeling. Finally, the large datasets that blood flow models produce are
difficult to efficiently store and interpret. This project will develop software
that synergistically integrates novel deep learning and traditional physics-
based modeling to address these issues. The software will promote the progress
of scientific cardiovascular disease and fluid flow modeling research and
ultimately advance national health. The project will create new education
programs integrated with research to promote fluid flow computer modeling
education by blending data analysis, visualization, and computer modeling. The
education program will be integrated with regional initiatives to promote STEM
participation in underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER program is built on four overarching goals. First, physics informed
neural network (PINN) models will be used to overcome inherent blood flow
modeling limitations. Second, the models will be used for gaining a physical
understanding of blood flow patterns across different scales. Auxiliary PINN
models will be defined to bridge blood flow patterns away and near the vessel
wall and understand the minimal data collection necessary for near-wall blood
flow modeling. Subsequently, a hybrid computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and
PINN model will be developed for on-the-fly CFD and deep learning modeling. The
goal is to compress and store the wealth of information that is generated and
often ignored by CFD solvers and tackle difficult multiscale problems that
challenge traditional CFD approaches. Finally, an education program called FAST
(Fluids, Art, and StoryTelling!) will be developed to generate enthusiasm for
integrated computer modeling and engineering education. The goal is to leverage
the art of visualization and storytelling to show the hidden beauty in fluid
mechanics computer modeling. This CAREER program will build a foundation for
hybrid and complementary deep learning and physics-based modeling approaches
that advance fundamental and transformative blood flow modeling research and
will enable lifetime leadership in integrating research with
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.