* 2143578
* CAREER: In-situ Capture and Conversion of CO2 to Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kandis Abdul-Aziz, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2027
* USD 538,140.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decades, global
emissions of greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4), have
risen steadily, thus creating an urgent need for technology capable of capturing
and/or converting those molecules to higher-value chemicals. The project
investigates the effectiveness of perovskite materials to serve the dual
function of capturing CO2 and catalyzing its conversion to hydrocarbons by
reaction with CH4. Specifically, the aim is to tune the perovskite composition
to promote efficient capture of CO2, followed by reaction with CH4, to produce
syngas, ethane, and ethylene - all of value as essential platform chemicals that
can be readily converted to polymers and fuels. Thus, the project explores a
novel approach to achieving the simultaneous goals of mitigating greenhouse gas
emissions while securing future supplies of energy and chemical raw materials.
The project integrates the research with an education and outreach plan
introducing students to sustainable engineering precepts, while broadening and
diversifying the future science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates structure-composition-
function properties of sorption-enhanced perovskite oxide catalysts for
hydrocarbon synthesis via either dry methane reforming (DRM) or CO2-mediated
oxidative coupling of methane (CO2-OCM). Specifically, the project focuses on
SrTiO3 and CaTiO3 given their inherent basicity (which promotes the adsorption
of CO2), combined with their capability to activate CO2 and CH4 using oxygen
vacancies. Preliminary studies by the investigator have determined that the
SrTiO3-based multifunctional catalysts, doped with Ni, can capture CO2 and
convert it to syngas, ethane, and ethylene. The project will use SrTi1-xMxO3/SrO
or CaTi1-xMxO3/CaO (with M=Ce, Mn and x = 0 – 0.1) systems to selectivity adsorb
CO2 from simulated ideal or flue gas mixtures. Specific goals include: (1)
elucidating the transport and reaction kinetics for CO2 capture and release in
air and flue streams, (2) evaluating the effects of dopant metals on the
kinetics, selectivity, and stability of the multifunctional catalysts under
reaction conditions, and (3) enhancing the surface area of the perovskite-based
catalysts by synthesizing them on monolith supports, and 4) ensuring the
stability of the catalysts by investigating cyclic operation to periodically
regenerate the catalysts due to metal-dopant exsolution, and/or perovskite
structure destabilization under reaction conditions. The project utilizes a
broad range of characterization and evaluation techniques, highlighted by in
situ and operando high-pressure/high-temperature FTIR and Raman spectroscopic
characterization of adsorbed surface species (FTIR) and oxygen vacancies
(Raman), the latter in collaboration with Dr. T. J. Kim at Stony Brook
University. Integration of the research with educational and outreach
initiatives focuses on sustainable engineering concepts related to chemical
engineering, particularly with respect to improving the inclusiveness of women
in the chemical engineering field. Efforts along those lines will be
incorporated into well-established education and outreach programs for
underrepresented students at the investigator’s institution. Specifically, the
investigator plans to 1) start an annual graduate preparation retreat program
for first-year graduate women in engineering, 2) develop research experience for
undergraduate women and transfer students, 3) develop hands-on engineering
activities for K-8 girls to solve environmental problems, and 4) expand
undergraduate and graduate chemical engineering course
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.