* 2143678
* CAREER: Regulating On-Demand Delivery Platforms
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Zhuoxin Li, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 12/31/2022
* USD 109,813.00

This project investigates the regulation of emerging platform organizations in
the restaurant industry. Digital technologies have substantially changed the
landscape of the industry, with online delivery becoming an essential revenue
source for restaurants. Delivery platforms collect customer orders via a mobile
app and have drivers pick up the food and deliver it to customers. These
platforms, however, have had an uneasy partnership with restaurants. Delivery
platforms possess strong power over independent restaurants and set platform
fees as high as 30% to extract most of the surplus created on their platforms.
Although there are heated debates on whether and how to regulate delivery
platforms, the lack of empirical studies hinders the progress towards effective
policymaking. This project investigates the impact of delivery platforms on
restaurants and the implications for policymakers. The findings from this
project advance our knowledge on how on-demand platforms and other powerful
platforms create value for businesses, organizations, and our society. This
project also enhances our knowledge about how to regulate powerful
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project has three objectives:
1) Investigating the Realities of On-Demand Delivery. Whether restaurants
benefit from delivery platforms, or what types of restaurants are more likely to
benefit (e.g., independent vs. chain) are fundamental questions of importance to
restaurant owners and policymakers; 2) Investigating the Effectiveness of
Current Regulatory Policies. More than a dozen of cities and states have
recently imposed regulations that cap the commissions that delivery platforms
can charge. This project investigates if such regulatory policies are effective,
and the promises and perils of implementing such regulations; 3) Designing
Optimal Regulatory Policies. Building on the findings from 1) and 2), this
project seeks to design optimal regulatory policies that improve total social
welfare, balancing restaurant revenue, consumer surplus, and the sustainability
of the on-demand delivery business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.