* 2143547
* Collaborative Research: MOSAiC Sea ice Samples for Stratigraphy, Microstructure, and Inherent Optical Property Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Bonnie Light, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 101,182.00

The Arctic sea ice cover is changing. As the climate has warmed, ice cover has
experienced a shorter growing season and reduced spatial coverage, ice thickness
has decreased, and melt is earlier and more intense. However, it is not fully
understood how ice freezes, how it melts, how it responds to climate, and how
climate responds to it. To fill this gap in knowledge, the investigators will
study the microstructural properties of multi-year ice cores taken during the
year-long Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
(MOSAiC) field campaign, where a research ship was frozen into Arctic Sea ice in
the fall and allowed to drift for a year (Oct 2019 - Sept 2020). The
investigators will cut thin slices from these core samples to document the ice
microstructure. They will take digital images of these slices using a camera and
microscope. The investigators will examine the number, size, shape, and
orientation of the crystals and pockets to determine large-scale physical
properties of the ice, including how it conducts heat, and reflects light. This
project will improve our understanding of how sea ice may change in a warming
Arctic. The investigators will create a searchable library of images and sea ice
properties. The investigators will include college students in this work.
Students will learn how to develop questions they can test and practice critical
thinking. A filmmaker will work alongside to communicate this research to the
public. The investigators will display a collection of photography and short
movies at their institutions. They will share findings through scientific
publications and conferences. The investigators will archive the data and
results at the US Arctic Data Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal acts on
an opportunity to prepare and analyze ice core samples collected from the recent
year-long Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
(MOSAiC) field campaign (Oct 2019 - Sept 2020). We will use this ice to produce
thin sections, create a comprehensive digital inventory of the imagery, carry
out microstructural and textural analyses, generate optical data for
understanding structural-optical relationships, and investigate the role of
sediment inclusions in the context of changing sea ice microstructure and the
partitioning of shortwave radiation. The investigators will develop a searchable
library of images and microstructure properties of the sampled ice.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the research, learning the scientific
method, and developing critical thinking skills. The investigators will work
with a filmmaker to communicate this research to the public. They will curate a
collection of imagery and short movies for display at the investigatorsâ€™
institutions. Findings will be disseminated through scientific publications and
conferences and archived at the US Arctic Data Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.