* 2143952
* CAREER: Solution Catalysis Containing Seemingly Incompatible Steps
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Chong Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2027
* USD 240,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT)program in the Division of
Chemistry, Chong Liu of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) is
developing new catalytic transformations in contain normally incompatible steps
within the reaction cycles. With the use of electrochemistry, nanomaterials, and
machine learning, the Liu team seeks to establish general design principles and
develop new catalysts for important chemical reactions including the conversion
of carbon dioxide and methane into commodity chemicals. Dr. Liu also strives to
facilitate inclusive, interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate
students from different backgrounds. Dr. Liu is applying machine learning and
natural language processing to aid the curriculum development of general
chemistry courses at the University of California, Los Angeles. If successful,
such efforts have the potential to improve learning experiences and outcomes for
tens of thousands of undergraduates. Successful completion of such a project
will boost societyâ€™s appreciation of STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) education and help train the next-generation workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, Chong Liu and his team at UCLA
are developing design principles for solution catalysis containing
competing/incompatible reaction steps and applying such principles to a variety
of applications. In these endeavors, nanomaterials-based electrochemistry serves
as a platform to control the spatial distribution of reactant species at the
microscopic level. Aided by machine-learning-based inverse design, the research
will focus on the mechanistic study and practical application of such concepts
to the activation of light alkanes, reductive dechlorination of organic
pollutants, and the catalytic cascade that couples the electrochemical reduction
of CO2 with the hydroformylation reaction. In the long run, such research will
answer two important questions in the field of catalysis: (1) Can one develop a
general platform applicable to a variety of spatially controlled solution
catalysis with translatable know-how? (2) How can one quantitatively tailor the
spatial control of chemical reactions based on the intrinsic reactivity of a
targeted reaction step? Mimicking biology by controlling the spatial
distribution of solution catalysis at the microscopic level offers to potential
for the development of new chemical transformations that would be difficult, if
not impossible, to develop in homogenous solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.