* 2143145
* CAREER: Coupled Phenomena Resilience and Dynamics in Bentonite Barriers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kristin Sample-Lord, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2027
* USD 509,945.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will address national and
global challenges of water security, environmental protection, and preparation
of future STEM professionals. The research focuses on transforming how we
measure, predict, and educate others about the long-term performance of clay
barriers used for environmental protection. Engineered clay barriers,
particularly those utilizing bentonite clay, are commonly used to protect
communities and their water resources from pollutants from industrial,
municipal, and radioactive wastes. Sustaining performance of protective barriers
over time within evolving geoenvironments is critical to preserving national
water quality and public health. However, variable chemical, temperature,
hydraulic, and stress conditions that occur in bentonite in the field have
complex, coupled effects on the rate of contaminant transport through the
barrier. Until recently, research on these coupled phenomena has primarily
focused on overly-simplified conditions that do not represent the real-world
dynamics of clay barriers exposed to wastes. This research includes
comprehensive experimental and analytical evaluation of coupled contaminant
transport properties of bentonite barriers under more realistic conditions. The
results will improve prediction and modeling of how contaminants escape through
clay barriers over time, supporting design of resilient barrier systems and
improved protection of public health and the environment. The integrated
education and research objectives include research experiences for undergraduate
students, middle and high school STEM outreach for women and underrepresented
groups, and development of an activity library to advance geoenvironmental
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
advance scientific understanding of how environmental dynamics and coupled
phenomena impact long-term resiliency of bentonite-based containment barriers.
The project includes advanced experimental measurements of coupled transport
properties of bentonites under changing chemical, temperature, hydraulic, and
stress conditions for both virgin and field-exhumed samples. The objectives of
the integrated research and education plan include: (i) measurement of coupled
phenomena and chemical transport properties of traditional and polymer-enhanced
bentonites; (ii) improved modelling of coupled mass flux through clays; (iii)
undergraduate involvement through mentored research experiences; and (iv)
development of a digital activity library to enhance geoenvironmental
engineering education. The results will answer fundamental questions about how
barrier performance is impacted by evolving chemical-hydraulic-thermal-stress
conditions, field exposure, and material enhancement. This project will allow
the PI to advance the knowledge base in geotechnical, environmental and water
resources engineering, as well as clay science, and support her long-term career
in innovative geoenvironmental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.