* 2143287
* CAREER: Privacy Preserving Transactions with Accountability Extensions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Foteini Baldimtsi, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2027
* USD 212,857.00

The amount of digital data collected and handled electronically is constantly
increasing and poses serious threats to user privacy. While a number of
cryptographic mechanisms that enhance data privacy exist in the literature, they
suffer from prohibitive computational and communication costs and do not offer
accountability mechanisms. Without improvements in efficiency and addition of
accountability mechanisms, it is unlikely that the so much needed privacy-
preserving systems will be massively adopted. Towards the goal of bringing
privacy-enhancing technologies closer to adoption, this project defines and
constructs a number of new cryptographic building blocks such as new types of
digital signatures, cryptographic accumulators and zero-knowledge proofs which
are at the core of mechanisms used to enhance privacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to build practical protocols, the project introduces new security
relaxations and security models (such as user-device separation) while adhering
to the principles of provable secure protocol design, and designs accountability
mechanisms for different system participants without relying on trusted third
parties and secret trapdoors. The research is organized under three main thrusts
which focus on different application areas. Namely, the project investigates
anonymous decentralized payments (blockchain based), anonymous authentication
(via the use of anonymous credentials), and auditable multi-party computation
(MPC) for specific functions. The performed research includes collaborations
with Policy and Economics researchers in order to design meaningful
accountability mechanisms and leverage blockchain incentives. The project
provides education on fundamentals and practices of cryptography and privacy-
preserving techniques to students with various backgrounds: from K-12 students
to engineering and CS students, as well as policy students and senior executives
studying at the MBA level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.