* 2143469
* CAREER:Charting the Quantum Computing Landscape for Process Control
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Helen Durand, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 04/30/2027
* USD 449,907.00

Control systems are critical to our ability to perform automated tasks in
engineering systems. While computers have enabled increasingly sophisticated
methods for automation across all US manufacturing sectors, there are many cases
where these algorithms become computationally prohibitive, making it impossible
to maximize system performance. An open question is whether the emerging field
of quantum computing can provide a solution to these computational constraints;
however, because of the unique way quantum computers carry out their
computations, the safety and performance implications for control systems
incorporating quantum computers currently are unknown. This research program
will develop the theory and computational tools needed to implement control
systems on quantum computers. The work will provide the first comprehensive
treatment of this topic with the goal of elucidating what types of algorithms
quantum computer scientists should explore to create the next generation of
automatic control systems. The research will define the utility and theory of
controllers implemented on quantum computers, examining the interpretability of
potentially non-deterministic controller outputs, privacy issues when
implementing the controllers on a quantum Cloud architecture, and computation
time reduction techniques for the controllers that are specific to the quantum
environment. In addition, this project will initiate a unique outreach program
based on tutorials and entertaining films for teaching science through stories.
This program will engage undergraduate students across the nation and across
disciplines in creating animated shorts and will involve high school students
and undergraduate students in hands-on coding experiences that will serve to
automate the animation development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
constitutes the first comprehensive exploration of control system theory,
design, and implementation using quantum computers. The research focuses on
identifying the properties quantum computing algorithms must have to enable
computing control actions for chemical processes. The goals of the work are to:
1) develop algorithmic implementations of current controllers (e.g., PID, Model
Predictive Control) for quantum computers, with the control-theoretic conditions
under which properties of a controller, such as safety/stability and
performance, are maintained at acceptable levels when quantum computing
algorithms are used to compute control actions; 2) develop chemical process-
relevant interpretability metrics for control implemented on classical
computers, and extend these to a quantum computing framework; 3) assess
computation time reduction methods unique to the quantum computing context; 4)
develop privacy and stability guarantees for encrypted control on quantum Cloud
computers; and 5) simulate chemical processes under control actions computed by
classical computers and quantum simulators (including noise). This project will
also initiate a unique outreach program, launching a “crowdsourcing” effort for
tutorial and film creation that will form the foundation of the Principal
Investigator's long-term outreach plan. This plan will involve undergraduates
and high school students in the creation of animated shorts and codes for
automating aspects of the animated short creation. These computational tools
will aid the next generation of engineers in participating in exciting the
community about STEM via stories that convey aspects of engineering and present
a diverse group of characters who are scientists and engineers as role models
for younger students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.