* 2143446
* CAREER: Expanding and controlling the product spectrum from anaerobic bioprocessing of wastes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Matthew Scarborough, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2027
* USD 463,020.00

Microbiome-based processes are increasingly being utilized by environmental
engineers to recover valuable resources from organic wastes. For example,
anerobic digestion is used to generate biogas for heating, electricity
generation, and to produce methane. Anaerobic digestion with chain elongation
has emerged as a promising environmental biotechnology platform for converting
organic wastes to high-value chemicals that can serve as chemical building
blocks for the manufacturing of polymers and industrially relevant products.
During chain elongation, microorganisms combine volatile fatty acids generated
from the anaerobic digestion of organic substrates with electron donors such as
ethanol or acetate to produce longer chain chemicals. However, the ability to
tune and control the product spectrum of chain-elongating microbiomes has
remained elusive. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of these microbiomes with the ultimate goals of
developing new and optimal feedstocks and reactors to tune and control their
product distributions. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the
development of a circular bioeconomy using organic wastes as feedstocks. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of a graduate student and an undergraduate student at
the University of Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic wastes such as food and
agricultural residues can be converted into high value chemicals such as medium-
chain carboxylic acids (MCCAs) using anaerobic digestion with chain elongating
microbiomes. However, there are critical knowledge gaps in the fundamental
understanding of MCCA generation by chain elongating microbiomes. First, the
potential of protein-rich feedstocks for MCCA production is not well understood.
Second, the ability to control and tune reverse beta-oxidation pathways that
drive the production of MCAAs by chain elongation has remained elusive. Third,
tools for modeling MCCA production from complex organic feedstocks are only
beginning to emerge. This CAREER proposal will address these critical knowledge
gaps. The guiding hypothesis of the proposed research is that anaerobic
microbiomes can be controlled and steered to generate MCCAs in a predictable way
using amino acid and protein feedstocks. The specific objectives of the proposed
research are to: (1) Evaluate amino acid and protein rich substrates and new
feeding strategies to tailor and control MCCA production, (2) Design and
evaluate new bioreactors for improved MCCA production and extraction, and (3)
Develop computational tools to model chain elongation bioprocesses. The
successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the
development of more efficient and cost-effective bioprocesses to recover
valuable chemicals from organic wastes while reducing their environmental
impact. To implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project,
the Principal Investigator (PI) will work with the University of Vermont (UVM)
Extension 4-H to teach and inspire high school students to explore the use of
microbiomes to protect the environment and public health. In addition, the PI
plans to develop and teach two new courses at UVM including a course-based
undergraduate research experience that focuses on the circular bioeconomy
(biorefining) and a graduate course to prepare environmental engineering
students to use ‘omic’ technologies and computational tools to characterize and
simulate microbiomes of environmental relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.