* 2143689
* CAREER: GLEAN: Gearing Rapid Malware Forensics Toward Holistic Mobile Botnet Takedown
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Brendan Saltaformaggio, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 01/31/2027
* USD 199,760.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research benefits national
security by advancing science in cyber forensics and malicious software
(malware) prevention. Cybercriminals construct massive networks of malware
running on infected victim devices that connect to command-and-control servers
online. For decades, law enforcement and commercial entities have attempted to
take down these globally distributed malware networks with mixed success. This
research develops an automated approach to holistic take down such type of
malware: both monitoring and disabling their command-and-control servers as well
as remediating or removing the malware from the victim’s devices. This approach
puts malware operators at a disadvantage (they must reinfect victim’s devices),
thus protecting users and organizations. The output of this research, including
software, demo videos, and scholarly publications, is being made freely
available to the public to empower future research in this area. Discoveries
from this project are being transitioned into workforce development activities
and educational materials that introduce students to current and emerging cyber-
attack investigation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes that
takedown attempts must not only remediate command-and-control (C&amp;C) servers
but also disable or remove frontend bots from infected devices, effectively
eliminating the chances for a botnet revival. The investigator uses code
reflection for C&amp;C payload distribution, a popular trend in bot design that
enabled many botnets to survive takedowns. This research is developing GLEAN, a
program-analysis-centric pipeline combining automated malware forensics
techniques toward holistic remediation of frontend bots and command and control
backends. First, GLEAN identifies network behaviors, capabilities, and code
reflection routines in the malware sample. Next, GLEAN performs covert
monitoring of the C&amp;C server via protocol identification to establish an
effective strategy for their takedown. Finally, GLEAN enables the automated
generation of a customized remediation payload, by examining the malware’s code
reflection routines, capable of disabling the bot or alerting the infected-
device’s user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.