* 2143638
* CAREER: Determining The Fundamental Rules of RNA Tertiary Contact Formation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Joseph Yesselman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2027
* USD 724,189.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structured ribonucleic acids (RNAs) play
critical roles in cellular functions, underlie the function of RNA viruses, and
serve as blueprints for new artificial machines such as biosensors, biomolecular
scaffolds, and regulators of synthetic biosynthesis pathways. RNA structure is
composed of discrete and modular RNA motifs – helices, junctions, and loops.
Functional RNAs often contain long-range tertiary contacts between two or more
RNA motifs that lock RNA strands into well-defined structures required for
function. This project aims to understand how tertiary contacts form in RNA
structure. Tertiary contacts are the “glue” of RNA structure allowing them to
form complex 3D structures. This project will decipher the rules of their
formation, ultimately generating the first predictive model of tertiary contact
formation. In conjunction, the program seeks to educate the next generation of
scientists and the public in RNA folding and structure by engaging students and
citizen scientists in novel science-based video games that allow participants to
directly contribute to research outcomes. This will entail a new course on the
molecular design of biomolecules that employ scientific videos games, which will
allow students to design new biomolecules that will be experimentally tested in
the lab. Findings from this integrated research and education program will have
important long-term applications in harnessing RNA structure to build the next
generation of RNA biosensors and therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structured
RNAs fold into complex 3D conformations that perform fundamental biological
processes. These RNAs often contain long-range tertiary contacts between two or
more RNA motifs that lock RNA strands into well-defined structures required for
function. Currently, there is no method that can reliably predict tertiary
contact formation. Predicting tertiary contacts is challenging as it is unknown
which motifs will form tertiary contacts and whether it is possible for these
motifs to be brought into proximity to form an interaction. This program seeks
to develop the first predictive model of tertiary contact formation. Towards
this goal the PI will use novel 3D RNA design and massively multiplexed
biochemical assays to identify which motifs can form tertiary contacts;
determine the 3D conformational flexibility of RNA elements that permit tertiary
contact partners to be brought into proximity to interact, and build tertiary
contact formation model and utilize it to improve the activity of a ribozyme.
The development of a predictive model of tertiary contact formation will improve
the fundamental understanding of structural mechanisms of RNA-regulated
processes such as gene expression, protein translation, and mRNA splicing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate of
Biological Sciences and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.