* 2143186
* CAREER: Microclimate Amelioration Underlying Biodiversity-Ecosystem Functioning Research
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Alexandra Wright, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2027
* USD 976,464.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many species are currently
threatened with extinction. This extinction crisis has important implications
for how ecosystems function. In particular, loss of species may lead to loss of
biological buffers that have been in place for thousands of years. The loss of
these buffers could make systems more vulnerable to stressors such as drought.
Understanding how biodiversity helps buffer our ecosystems from environmental
stressors is an essential next step to predicting the consequences of future
extinctions. This understanding will also help us understand how ecosystems can
possibly retain function with fewer species. This project examines how different
species of plants can modify the microclimate around them, such as decreased
temperatures, increased humidity and increased soil moisture. The modification
of microclimate may be one important mechanism allowing many species to coexist,
which is a key to biodiversity. This project also provides research
opportunities and education to graduate students and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the role of microclimate
modification effects in determining relationships between biodiversity and
ecosystem function. The approach is to design a series of biodiversity
microclimate humidification experiments both in a greenhouse setting and in a
network of sites across Los Angeles County, California. Several species of
grasses native to California are used in the experiments because they are very
sensitive to changing moisture conditions. This project examines microclimate
modification effects in three important ways: (1) using a biodiversity
experiment to examine the strength of microclimate amelioration and whether it
can explain positive biodiversity-ecosystem function relationships under natural
drought conditions, (2) using careful physiological measurements to assess
whether microclimate amelioration is driven by plant functional traits (e.g.
rooting depth or water use efficiency), whole community structure (e.g. canopy
complexity and boundary layer conditions), or merely creating a physical shade
barrier, and (3) examining the role of microclimate amelioration in higher plant
diversity communities in an urban arid ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.