* 2143263
* CAREER: Fluid-Structure-Surface Interactions of Flexible Bodies at the Air-Water Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Banafsheh Seyed-Aghazadeh, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 401,658.00

Understanding the fundamentals of fluid-structure-surface interactions in
underwater flexible bodies (like near surface arrays for energy harvesting or
near surface robots) will provide new scientific insights for a broad range of
applications. When an underwater flexible body operates near the surface of the
fluid, its proximity to the air-water interface can cause free surface
deformations. To understand the effect of such deformations on the dynamics of
the body, this project will investigate the role played by the coupling between
the structural dynamics of the body and the hydrodynamics of its surrounding
flow. The design of near surface arrays of energy harvesters is an excellent
example of an application where the interaction can be utilized to improve their
performance. Moreover, near surface robot designers can benefit from
understanding the fundamentals of fluid-structure-surface interactions that can
facilitate expanding their mission envelope, ranging from detecting and mapping
polluted water spill on the surface, to surveillance of coastal zones, to
offshore structural health monitoring. The scientific endeavors in this proposal
are integrated with educational activities that will inspire and attract people
to engineering and science disciplines, from K-12 schoolchildren in the
Southeast Coast of Massachusetts to graduate students through classroom
lectures, project-based learning modules, and game-based outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to systematically
investigate the fluid-structure-surface interactions of flexible films near the
air-water interface. Through a set of water tunnel experiments, high speed
imaging techniques, and volumetric high-resolution time-resolved particle
tracking velocimetry (TR-PTV) measurements, fluid-structure-surface interactions
of a flexible film in axial flow placed at varying submerged heights near
surface will be studied. Of particular interest are studying the onset of
instability, occurrence of any possible flow-induced vibration response, and
vortex dynamics in the wake of the film. Comparisons will be made with classical
flutter responses observed for flexible films placed in uniform flow, distant
from the free surface. Next, an energy-based reduced-order nonlinear model of
the near-surface flexible film will be developed by coupling its nonlinear
structural dynamics with three-dimensional flow field information, obtained
through TR-PTV measurements. A mathematical algorithm incorporating higher-order
finite element solution approach of Differential Quadrature Method will be used
to solve the fully coupled partial differential equations of motion. The
findings are expected to impact the scientific research community and society by
providing us with a detailed understanding of fluidelastic behavior of flexible
films in proximity of free surface in a wide range of possible operational
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.