* 2143264
* CAREER: The Three-Dimensional Structure of the Proton
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Christopher Monahan, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2027
* USD 0.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the America Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protons and neutrons are the
basic building blocks of almost all visible matter, and account for 95% of the
mass of the visible universe. Protons and neutrons are composed of smaller
particles, quarks, bound together by the strong nuclear force, which is carried
by gluons and is responsible for all nuclear matter, from hydrogen ions to
neutron stars. The exact arrangement of quarks and gluons inside protons and
neutrons is not well known. This project helps understand the three-dimensional
arrangement of gluons within protons and neutrons. The PI uses large-scale
supercomputing facilities to calculate the distribution of gluons inside protons
and neutrons. These calculations complement data on proton and neutron structure
obtained from experiments performed at Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility and the future Electron-Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
The PI mentors students carrying out this research, is developing a graduate
level course on computational methods for the strong nuclear force, and works
with undergraduate students to create interactive physics simulations for a
broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project calculates the three-
dimensional structure of gluons within protons and neutrons, by using first
principles calculations of quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of the
strong nuclear force. At energies relevant to proton and neutron structure, QCD
is strongly coupled and cannot be solved analytically. Lattice QCD, in which QCD
is formulated on a discrete lattice and correlation functions are computed
stochastically using Monte Carlo methods, provides a systematic approach to
determining the properties of protons, neutrons, and other strongly-bound
particles. The project determines the gluon generalized distribution functions
(GPDs) of the proton, which quantify the three-dimensional arrangement of gluons
within the proton, using lattice QCD calculations. In addition, the project will
calculate correlations between gluon and quark structure. These calculations
complement experimental data on proton and neutron structure obtained from
experiments at Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility and at the future
Electron-Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory, and provide a basis for
combining experimental and theoretical data in a consistent
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.