* 2143434
* CAREER: Enriching Conversational Information Retrieval via Mixed-Initiative Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Hamed Zamani, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2027
* USD 570,863.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has become clear that providing
access to information through natural language conversations will play a
significant role in the future of search technology. This will be enabled by
developing efficient and effective conversational search engines. Existing
systems are generally designed based on a query-response paradigm, in which the
user initiates the interaction by submitting typing a word or phrase, and the
system responds with one or more documents. This process repeats itself until
the user either receives a useful response or terminates the search session.
This is not an optimal design for interaction. A better approach would be to
create search systems that operate like a conversation. In a conversational
search systems, for instance, the system may ask a clarifying question or can
recommend new information even though it is not an explicit response to the
search query. A conversational search system, the conversation should yield the
information that is needed to facilitate the ultimate goal of user satisfaction.
The mentioned query-response paradigm does not support these natural
conversational interactions. This CAREER award aims to advance the state-of-the-
art by envisioning solutions that go beyond this query-response
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, this project studies
theoretical and machine learning solutions for generating and handling mixed-
initiative interactions in information seeking conversations. In more detail,
this project explores the following three research thrusts: (1) developing
theoretical foundations for measuring mixed-initiative information seeking
conversations; (2) developing models for clarifying the user's information needs
which is considered as the most common mixed-initiative interaction type; and
(3) developing models for proactive informational contributions to ongoing
conversations. In addition to these algorithmic and modeling contributions, this
project also develops a number of invaluable resources for advancing the field
of conversational information retrieval, including a conversational scholarly
assistant agent that will be used as a tool for online experimentation and
public data creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.