* 2143159
* CAREER: Realizing Alternative Cements with Chemical Kinetics: Tuned Mechanical–Chemical Properties of Cementitious Magnesium Silicate Hydrates by Multi-Scale Synthetic Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Erika La Plante, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2027
* USD 576,560.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high energy needs and
environmental burden of the construction industry have driven efforts to
discover new cementitious materials. Cements based on the bonding between
magnesium and silicon, such as magnesium silicate hydrates (MSH), are among the
less explored alternatives. The characteristics that control their cementitious
nature, i.e., the rates of precipitation, structural mechanisms for
strengthening, and stability in relevant environments, are not known and this
hinders their widespread use. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project will reveal new pathways for the chemical synthesis of cementitious MSH
and the chemical control of their consequent morphological, mechanical, and
chemical properties. Meaningful undergraduate research experiences targeting
women and underrepresented minority students at the home and neighboring
institutions including a community college will improve STEM and transfer
student outcomes, enrich graduate student training, and create a pipeline of
students interested in materials science and engineering, cultivating the
nation’s future workforce. To enhance the experience, the students will create
educational videos that showcase the “Materials Science of Cements and Concrete”
that will be distributed to small construction businesses in Dallas–Fort Worth
to improve job appreciation and skill in the construction workforce that
supports the area’s rapidly growing population through infrastructure
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will emphasize an integrated
approach involving dynamic high-resolution methods to probe, drive, and
manipulate MSH synthesis, structures, and properties from nucleation to bulk
growth with a focus on the phenomena that occur at the MSH–fluid interface. This
will be accomplished through the following steps. First, precipitation rates,
morphologies, and compositions that quantitatively describe MSH growth kinetics
will be investigated using a combination of in situ and ex situ surface-
sensitive analytical methods and interpreted using mechanistic models applied to
sheet silicates. Second, MSH mesocrystalline organization will be understood
within the electric double layer theoretical framework and manipulated using
polyelectrolytes and electrochemical forcing. Third, local mechanical and
surface properties will be quantified and related to macroscale mechanical
properties of MSH binders, and the rates and mechanisms of MSH degradation will
be investigated. Key analytical methods used include atomic force microscopy,
kinetic geochemical modeling, infrared spectroscopy, electron microscopy,
electrochemical methods, and synchrotron X-ray scattering. This research will
ultimately reveal processing–structure–property relationships in MSH cements,
establishing their viability as a binder material for construction purposes and
an alternative to ordinary Portland cement. The fundamental science and
discovery gained will expand our understanding of low-temperature mineral
crystallization processes and the subsequent property development across spatial
and temporal scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.