* 2143864
* CAREER: Simulations to Inform the Design of Force Responsive Copolymer Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Antonia Statt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2027
* USD 212,128.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Plastic
materials are surrounding us in our everyday life and are essential to our way
of living, from construction materials to cell phones, polymers (long
macromolecules made from repeating units) are an integral part of modern
materials. Aside from their wide technological applications, they also pose
risks to human health and cause significant environmental pollution. Because of
this, it is important to work on sustainable polymers with precisely tuned
functions, which can have many applications from sensors, failure mechanics,
self-healing materials, to biological materials. Particularly interesting are
polymers which will respond to external forces, for example a deformation.
Force-responsive units, called mechanophores, can be incorporated into polymer
chains. The main goal of this work is the careful design of the host bulk
polymer material to control the activation of the embedded force-responsive
unit. This will be addressed by using coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations, where each polymer is represented by beads connected by springs.
Using simulations, the relevant time- and length-scales can be resolved. The
results can be used to guide materials design for high-performing, precisely
tuned materials. &lt;br/&gt; Outreach and education are integral to this CAREER
program and all activities are directly tied into the research by introducing
concepts important to the project. The PI will promote the participation and
retention of underrepresented groups in STEM, by establishing a summer school
program for underrepresented groups. Computational modules will be integrated
into teaching and will increase students' confidence and physical intuition when
dealing with complex concepts and equations. Training undergraduate and graduate
researchers from diverse backgrounds in interdisciplinary and transferable
skills will also actively support underrepresented groups and enable broad
participation in the soft matter and polymeric materials
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational research and education on force-responsive polymeric
materials. Force-responsive units in polymers are important for a wide range of
applications, from sensors, failure mechanics, self-healing materials, to
biological materials. The ability to design and build new stimuli responsive,
high-performing, and sustainable polymeric materials is essential for all these
applications. Critical to being able to apply these materials is a microscopic
understanding of what forces are present and how they propagate through the
material. This is a challenging fundamental question that is out of reach with
most experimental techniques. This project seeks to develop a framework to
identify the key parameters governing force transport through polymeric
materials; these parameters can then be used to inform experimental
design.&lt;br/&gt; The overarching premise of this work is that by careful
design of the host bulk material the activation of embedded force-responsive
units can be precisely controlled. The materials design challenge will be
tackled using coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations to study micro-phase
separated copolymer materials. Simulation models developed by the PI are ideally
suited to address these challenges by resolving the relevant length- and time-
scales. The outcomes will be fundamental insights into micro-scale force
transport, and testable design paradigms for chain architecture and physical
parameters. This work has the potential to be applied broadly to many other soft
materials, where insights gained into force transport from the macroscopic to
microscopic scale are essential. &lt;br/&gt; Outreach and education are integral
to this CAREER program and all activities are directly tied into the research by
introducing concepts like polymer conformations, phase separation, and network
formation, which are integral to the proposed research. The PI will promote the
participation and retention of underrepresented groups in STEM. A K-12 summer
school program for underrepresented groups will be established. Computational
modules will be integrated into teaching, where a powerful combination of guided
inquiry learning exercises with computational apps will increase students'
confidence and physical intuition when dealing with complex concepts and
equations. Training undergraduate and graduate researchers from diverse
backgrounds in interdisciplinary and transferable skills will also actively
support underrepresented groups and enable broad participation in the soft
matter community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.