* 2143286
* CAREER: Fast-Rate Manufacturing of Thermoplastic Polymer Composites with Tailored Microstructure and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Amir Asadi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2027
* USD 578,437.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research that
contributes to the development of fast-rate manufacturing of high-performance
thermoplastic composites with enhanced properties, promoting the US
manufacturing science and technology. High-performance thermoplastic composites
are emerging in industries to replace metals as these composites offer light
weighting, outstanding mechanical properties, chemical stability, and
manufacturability within few minutes via thermoforming. However, in fast-rate
processes with high cooling rates, there is not sufficient time for the polymer
to form long chain orders (crystals) that in turn reduces the crystallinity
level. High crystallinity is required for improved stiffness and strength;
however, lower crystallinity is desirable to improve toughness. These competing
properties can be optimized by control of the detailed structure of the polymer.
This grant supports fundamental research that fills the knowledge gap needed to
engineer the thermoplastic composite crystallinity during processing to achieve
concurrently high stiffness, strength and toughness. Nanomaterials (NMs) are
used to control the crystallinity without the use of hazardous solvents,
promoting the scalability. The research accelerates the manufacturing of next
generation of composites with reduced weight and increased strength and
toughness that benefits the US economy and national security by equipping U.S.
automotive, aerospace and marine industries with a scalable and fast-rate
manufacturing technique. The interdisciplinary nature of this research provides
unique opportunities to train the next generation of highly skilled engineers
and scientists in STEM fields especially from women and underrepresented
minority groups that further enhances the diversification of the US
manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimized composite mechanical
properties achieved during fast-rate manufacturing of semicrystalline polymer
composites require engineering the crystalline morphology. This research will
enable alternative capabilities in tailoring the microstructure of
semicrystalline composites at multiple length scales during composite
processing. Nanomaterials consisting of cellulose nanocrystals-graphene
nanoplatelets are used to synergistically reinforce and create a hierarchical
crystalline architecture. This project will generate new information by bridging
the knowledge gap in the evolution of crystalline-amorphous domains from
molecular bonds and forces, their translation to interfacial and interlaminar
properties, and their deformation under service load. The research uses in-
operando X-ray scattering and in-situ microscopy complemented by density
functional theory and molecular dynamics simulations to establish the molecular
interactions-semicrystalline microstructure-property relationship. The research
also addresses the damage transformation from molecular bonds dissociation to
delamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.