* 2143301
* CAREER: Targeted Catalytic Reduction of Persistent Organohalogens in Wastewater using a Novel V2C MXene-Imprinted Polymer Composite
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Jessica Ray, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2027
* USD 392,233.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organohalogens such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)
pose significant environmental and human health risks due to their toxicity,
chemical stability, and persistence in the environment. The effective removal
and destruction of organohologen pollutants by water treatment will require
novel and targeted approaches as these compounds are often present at very
dilute concentrations in drinking water sources. Treatment technologies which
generate reactive solvated electrons (SE) are promising approaches to degrade
organohalogens in aqueous solutions via chemical reduction. However, the
efficacy of a SE-based water treatment process is hindered by competing
reactions with co-occurring contaminants and interfering reactions between
solvated electrons and dissolved organic/inorganic species present in drinking
water sources. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to design,
synthesize, characterize, and evaluate new composite media capable of targeted
separation and catalytic reductive dehalogenation to address the limitations of
current SE-based water treatment processes. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of new water treatment media
and fundamental knowledge to advance the development and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective technologies to remove and destroy organohalogen
pollutants from drinking water sources. Further benefits to society will be
achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of a
graduate student and five undergraduate students at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organohalogens such as PCBs and PFAS are
extremely stable in natural and engineered aquatic systems. They are also
resistant to degradation using conventional biological and chemical water
treatment processes. The generation of solvated electrons in aqueous solutions
is a promising approach to cleave carbon-halide bonds and facilitate
organohalogen degradation/destruction in contaminated drinking water sources.
However, solvated electrons (SE) are easily scavenged and may not react with the
targeted organohalogen pollutants as they may be consumed by other co-
contaminants and dissolved organic/inorganic species which often exist in
drinking water sources. This CAREER project will address the critical
limitations of current SE-based water treatment processes for organohalogen
removal. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) will explore the
development of new composite media consisting of 1) molecularly imprinted
polymer shells that can selectively extract organohalogens and 2) vanadium
carbide catalytic cores with demonstrated potential to generate solvated
electrons and degrade organohalogens. The specific objectives of the research
include: (1) media design, synthesis, and characterization, (2) measurements of
media sorption capacity and selectivity, (3) experimental investigations of
media catalytic activity, (4) evaluation of media performance in complex water
matrices in the presence of competing dissolved organic/inorganic species; and
(5) evaluation of media reusability. The successful completion of this project
has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of
fundamental knowledge to advance the development and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective media to remove organohalogen contaminants from
drinking water sources. To implement the educational and training goals of this
CAREER project, the PI will lead a newly developed seminar course for senior-
level undergraduate and graduate students about organohalogen properties,
exposure, toxicity, and remediation. Additionally, the PI and her students plan
to partner with the Duwamish Valley Youth Corps to design a culturally
appropriate workshop outlining unique organohalogen exposure pathways and risks
closely associated with indigenous lifestyles including subsistence and dietary
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.