* 2143297
* CAREER: Electro-Mechanical Behaviors of Soft Conductive Composites Embedded with Liquid Metal Fiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Pu Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2027
* USD 565,337.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research on the electro-mechanical behaviors of liquid metal fiber network
composites. This new paradigm of soft conductive composites is super-
stretchable, highly conductive, lightweight, and low cost due to its unique
microstructural architectures. Therefore, such liquid metal fiber network
composites will greatly benefit the flexible electronics industry in the USA and
will have other important technological applications such as soft sensors and
actuators, soft robotics, energy harvesters, etc. This research will first
provide characterization and better understanding of the microstructural
evolution and electro-mechanical behaviors of liquid metal fiber network
composites under large deformation. Such new knowledge is critical to the
microstructural design, material processing, and engineering analysis of liquid
metal fiber network composites for future engineering applications. The
integration of research and education will focus on student training and
industry engagement to educate more engineers doing research and design for
liquid metal materials. The education and outreach program will offer
interactive and hands-on activities for K-12 and undergraduate students to
invent their own soft electronics. Other key education objectives involve
developing a new curriculum, hosting online webinars, and maintaining a webpage
for liquid metal materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the
research is to discover the influence of network geometry on electro-mechanical
behaviors of liquid metal fiber network composites. An integrated experimental-
theoretical-computational approach will be employed to uncover the network
geometry evolution under extremely large deformation, characterize electro-
mechanical behaviors across fiber and network scales, and establish a
multiphysics constitutive modeling framework considering material anisotropy and
non-affinity. The effects of microstructural architectures, fiber and junction
morphologies, and mechanical deformation on the network geometry evolution and
electro-mechanical behaviors of liquid metal fiber network composites will be
elucidated and modeled. The researched constitutive models and computational
micromechanics models will be verified by various experimental techniques
involving micro- and nano-computed tomography imaging, in-situ network geometry
tracking, and synchronized electro-mechanical testing. Liquid metal fiber
network composites with different microstructural architectures will be
fabricated and characterized using techniques uniquely developed by the PI. The
researched theoretical models, simulation tools, and experimental methodology
will be applicable to a broad class of soft conductive
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.