* 2143064
* CAREER: Engineering ex vivo Human Cardiogenesis with Optogenetics
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Xiaoping Bao, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2027
* USD 428,356.00

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are a special cell type that under
the right environment can transform into any type of cell, which provide an
unprecedented opportunity to study human tissue and organ development and
potentially be applied to treating disease. More narrowly, hiPSC-derived in
vitro organ models, termed organoids, have emerged as powerful tools to
construct elaborate tissue-like architectures that can accurately mimic the
morphology of numerous tissues or organs, such as the intestines, kidney, and
brain. More recently, cardiac organoids were created from hiPSCs, but the
spatial control of the specification and organization of multiple cardiac cells
remain challenging. This CAREER project seeks to control the formation of
organized cardiac organoids from hiPSCs using optogenetics, a biological
technique to control the activity of cells or tissues with light, and then use
these to study cardiac maturation and heart diseases. The educational mission
will be integrated into this research program by engaging students at different
levels into interdisciplinary stem cell research and community outreach
activities, including interactive coursework, seminars, workshops, research
experiences, and a public art exhibition at Purdue Galleries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigatorâ€™s long-term career goal is to create a
transformative, interdisciplinary research and education program that integrates
excellence in the science and engineering of stem cell- and gene-based precision
medicine with education of future scientists and engineers. Towards this goal,
this CAREER project will develop novel tools and standardized methodologies to
precisely engineer human organoid morphogenesis with optogenetics for
developmental studies and disease modeling. Engineering cardiogenesis in a
manner mimicking native heart development will result in superior structural and
functional properties of the cardiac organoids. The central hypothesis of this
research is that the paracrine and juxtacrine signals induced by heterotypic
cell-cell interactions within the three-dimensional (3D) cardiac organoids will
enhance cardiomyocyte (CM) maturation and function. To test this hypothesis,
three tasks are proposed: (1) establish a 3D optogenetic platform and validate
its function in signaling patterning for multicellular morphogenesis; (2)
generate cardiac organoids using optogenetics to facilitate and interrogate the
maturation of hiPSC-derived CMs in 3D; and (3) investigate the influence of
genetic defects on cellular composition, tissue structure and maturation of
cardiac organoids. The proposed research will reveal critical factors to achieve
maturation of the hiPSC-CMs and elucidate underlying mechanisms of progressive
muscle weakness and death in diseased CMs. Since cell maturation is a key
element of tissue engineering, this research will have broader ramifications in
engineering other hiPSC-derived tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.