* 2143740
* CAREER: Theory, Fieldwork, and Typology: A Semantic/Pragmatic Triad in Underrepresented Linguistic Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Diti Bhadra, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2027
* USD 50,982.00

This CAREER project investigates the interaction between the logical reasoning
machinery inside the human brain (semantics) and the linguistic context of
conversation (pragmatics). The project involves detailed fieldwork on four
diverse, understudied languages that will uncover theoretical and typological
universals in semantics and pragmatics and their interaction. The investigation
focuses on the usage and interpretation of "discourse particles," which are
linguistic units (often small function words in a sentence) that track and
convey various contextual aspects of interpersonal conversations. This is an
underexplored area of research with great potential to address fundamental
questions about how human languages express reasoning, inferences, beliefs, and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promotes a data-theory-typology
triad by studying the empirical, theoretical, and typological underpinnings of
discourse competence through the lens of discourse particles with a three-
pronged focus: modal discourse particles and their complements; interaction of
discourse particles with tense, aspect, mood; discourse particles and non-
canonical speech acts. In addition to research output, results will include the
creation of standardized open-source materials for theory-oriented
semantic/pragmatic fieldwork that can be used for any language; training of
graduate and undergraduate students in modern methodologies informed by
empirical and theoretical diversity in a fieldwork lab; and recruitment and
involvement of native speaker and community/heritage linguists from groups
historically minoritized in academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.