* 2143173
* CAREER: An Asset-based Longitudinal and Intersectional Analysis of Black Women’s Experiences within Informal and Formal Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Trina Fletcher, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/28/2027
* USD 318,529.00

As of 2017, Black women made up 7.2% of the college-age population but only 1%
of engineering degree recipients. These alarming percentages represent a
reversal of educational trends, which indicate that, for bachelor’s degree
attainment, across all disciplines and ethnic groups, Black women are the most
educated group compared to their male counterparts. From an asset-based
standpoint, Black women who persist in engineering: (1) had representation in
the form of mentors and role models, (2) had access to inclusive formal and/or
informal STEM education and, (3) were in supportive organizational and
institutional climates. Although research in these areas has increased, it has
primarily been within formal settings. With children spending about 81.5% of
their waking hours outside of formal education and underrepresented minorities
(URMs) representing 61% of those students (24% of whom are Black), it’s
imperative to further explore their experiences in these settings, especially
longitudinally and, specifically within informal engineering educational
settings. Given growing STEM workforce demands, national-level broadening
participation efforts and the need to further understand the formation of Black
women as engineers, this project will consist of the development of a
longitudinal database with profiles of Black women who have completed
engineering degrees and participated within an informal engineering program.
Throughout this five-year CAREER proposal, Black women’s participation within
the Summer Engineering Experience for Kids (SEEK) program, hosted by the
National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE), and other experiences related to
their educational journey, will be studied. Since 2017, over 5,000 mentor
teachers and 20,000 students across the U.S. cities have participated in SEEK.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with NSBE, a three phased approach will
be conducted. Phase I: development of a database with participant profiles using
longitudinal demographic and survey data results. Phase II: qualitative
interviews will be conducted with results added to participant profiles. Phase
III: data from previous phases will be examined and validated through the
support and guidance of external experts. Results will be shared with K-12,
higher education and industry stakeholders through the education professional
development. Using intersectionality, social and cultural capital, and anti-
deficit achievement as theoretical frameworks, the following research questions
will be answered: (RQ1) To what extent does participation within informal and
formal engineering education develop over time to impact Black women’s formation
as engineers towards degree completion? (RQ2) How do individual, institutional,
and cultural factors within the interchange of informal and formal engineering
education contribute to Black women’s formation as engineers and persistence in
engineering degree programs? This project is transformative in that it will
acknowledge the non-monolithic state of Black women (i.e. specific engineering
degree obtained, cultural differences, age at degree completion, institution
type attended, etc.) and experiences along their journeys. Second, in terms of
the methods, leveraging large data sets from coeducational and single-sex,
informal engineering sites to develop participant profiles within a single
database and analyzing them longitudinally is a strategy that has not been done.
Third, the theoretical framing with intersectionality as a base and with social
and cultural capital through an asset-based approach is novel and
transformative. Through the educational professional development, best practices
found will advance research efforts and provide K-12, university and industry
stakeholders with in-depth knowledge of tools that can be implemented through
their programmatic efforts. Results will impact efforts to increase interest in,
recruitment of and support for the persistence of Black women and girls in
engineering education. Four dissemination workshops will allow asset-based
results to be shared with an even broader, more diverse audience including
organizations such as ASEE, SHPE, SWE, ACA, WEPAN, ACLU and professional
engineering societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.