* 2143625
* CAREER: Efficient Uncertainty Quantification in Turbulent Combustion Simulations: Theory, Algorithms, and Computations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sili Deng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2027
* USD 504,618.00

Practical systems for energy conversion (such as internal combustion engines and
gas turbines) and hazardous phenomena (such as urban and wildland fires) are
governed by turbulent combustion. Building turbulent and chemical models that
make accurate predictions with known uncertainty are crucial to enable the
design of cleaner and better engines as well as the prediction of disastrous
fire risks to meet the urgent need for global sustainability. One of the biggest
challenges in quantifying the uncertainty for turbulent combustion simulations
is the computational cost associated with complex chemistry, where tens of
thousands of parameters are involved. Thus, it is currently impossible to
estimate the uncertainty for each parameter and to predict the effects on
turbulent combustion simulations. This project aims to establish a theoretical
foundation and develop a computational framework to address these challenges.
The development of the open-source packages in the project will engage a broad
community and provide educational opportunities to undergraduate students in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project aims at addressing two
technical questions: first, how to quantify the kinetic uncertainty in turbulent
combustion simulations to evaluate the soundness and guide the development of
turbulent combustion models; and second, how to leverage experiments not only to
validate but also inform the development of chemical models. The proposed work
will validate the hypothesis of universal kinetic sensitivity direction in
laminar and turbulent flames to build the theoretical foundation for reducing
the dimensionality of the uncertain kinetic parameter space via the active
subspace method. Furthermore, a computational framework and open-source packages
will be developed, combining physics-informed active subspace estimation, auto-
differentiable programming, and GPU acceleration, to enable the forward and
inverse uncertainty quantification in large-scale combustion simulations with
affordable computational cost. The framework will be adopted to demonstrate the
feasibility to 1) constrain kinetic uncertainties based on canonical combustion
measurements, and 2) quantify the effect of kinetic uncertainties on laminar and
turbulent flame responses. The success of the project will provide fundamental
insights on the impact of flow-chemistry interaction on the propagation of
kinetic uncertainty and enable efficient and tractable uncertainty
quantification in practical combustion systems and phenomena with real fuels.
More broadly, the framework developed in the project will provide essential
tools and insights for future integration of physical science and uncertainty
quantification techniques in energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.