* 2143007
* Developing a New Paleosalinity Proxy Based on Na/Ca Ratios in the Planktonic Foraminifera Trilobatus sacculifer and Globigerinoides ruber
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Matthew Schmidt, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 320,219.00

This project will develop a new method of estimating past ocean surface
salinity. Salinity is used to understand ocean and atmospheric conditions as
climate changes. It also allows scientists to predict how the climate will
change in the future. Preliminary studies in the Atlantic Ocean show that sodium
increases in the tiny shells of plankton as the salinity increases. This project
will expand the range of study to include the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
Oceans. To improve the accuracy of the calibration, this project will also study
how the shells lose sodium as they partially dissolved when sinking to bottom of
the ocean. The improved measurement will be tested on long sediment cores than
span the last ice age. This project will support the educational and
professional development of undergraduate and graduate students. The project
will also produce professional quality YouTube videos aimed at educating the
public on important climate change issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new upper ocean paleosalinity proxy based on Na/Ca ratios
in two species of planktic foraminifera, Trilobatus sacculifer and
Globigerinoides ruber, from a suite of sediment core tops spanning the
subtropical/tropical Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. Based on initial
results from nine Atlantic core tops, salinity is the dominant factor
controlling shell Na/Ca ratios in T. sacculifer. However, the initial
calibration needs to be expanded across a wider range of salinities and in other
ocean basins. Because T. sacculifer is not always abundant in faunal assemblage
at all locations, this project will also develop a calibration for G. ruber, a
species with an even shallower depth habitat than T. sacculifer that is commonly
utilized in studies reconstructing sea surface temperature (SST) and salinity.
The major goal of this project, therefore, is to develop species-specific global
calibrations that can be used at any location. This project will also
investigate and quantify the effects of dissolution on shell Na/Ca ratios in the
Atlantic and Indian Oceans, as a recently published study showed that
dissolution significantly impacts shell Na/Ca ratios in the tropical Pacific.
This will be achieved by measuring down-slope core tops from the tropical
Atlantic and the south Indian Ocean. Finally, the newly developed calibrations
will be used to generate a high-resolution record of Na/Ca-based salinity change
in the Gulf Stream during Marine Isotope Stage 3 and compare it to a previously
published salinity record based on the calculation of 18Oseawater using Mg/Ca-
SST combined with 18O values in G. ruber. This project will support the
educational and professional development of undergraduate and graduate students.
The project will also produce professional quality YouTube videos aimed at
educating the public on important climate change
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.