* 2143926
* CAREER: Understanding Microstructure Evolution and Mechanical Properties of High-rate Additively Deposited Nickel-based Superalloy to Enable Future Clean-energy Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jonah Klemm-Toole, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2027
* USD 641,328.00

Future clean power generation technologies will require advanced manufacturing
processes to produce high-performance components locally and swiftly as well as
by a diverse and effective workforce of both engineers and technicians. Additive
manufacturing based on automated metal arc welding is capable of large-scale and
high-rate depositions and has the potential to provide flexibility and
accelerated production needed to support the energy infrastructure. However, the
lack of a comprehensive understanding of how processing conditions affect the
material's microstructures and the high-temperature mechanical properties and if
post-processing is needed, hinders the adoption of such arc-welding based
additive manufacturing in the industry. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports an integrated experimental and modeling approach to
develop a mechanistic link between processing conditions, during additive
manufacturing and required post-processing, and crucial microstructural features
that dictate high-temperature creep and fatigue performance relevant to power
generation operations. The project will also involve a minority-serving 2-year
welding technology program and develop a module that teaches welding apprentices
with various forms of automation, plus a joint capstone project with engineering
students from the Colorado School of Mines, which provides a unique opportunity
of team working with mutual appreciation of complementary skills and expertise.
The automation module will then be shared with other paired 2-year and 4-year
educational institutes around the country to develop a cohesive workforce for
additive manufacturing. This educational endeavor will contribute to a more
diverse, agile, and effective workforce, thus promoting the energy security and
Nationâ€™s prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research objective is to
address the challenging knowledge gaps, in both process and materials
engineering, needed to realize emerging clean power generation technologies. To
overcome the complexity, the project team will develop a quantitative and
mechanistic understanding of the processing, microstructures, and high
temperature property relationships in wire arc additive manufacturing of a
nickel-based superalloy, i.e., Haynes 282. Experimental methods including
fabrications, in-situ thermal imaging, hot isostatic pressing, material
characterizations and various mechanical testing will be combined with
analytical and computational models to fundamentally investigate: (1) influence
of deposition conditions to as-build microstructures and morphology, (2)
potential of hot isostatic pressing to simultaneously reduce defects while
controlling the grain size and morphology, and (3) effects of microstructure
characteristics (controlled by deposition and hot isostatic pressing) on high-
temperature tensile, fatigue, and creep performance between 800 and 900 Celsius,
targeting demanding severe power plant environments. The successful completion
of this project will substantially advance the science of metal additive
manufacturing for extreme service conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.