* 2143763
* CAREER:  Fundamental properties of young and pre-main-sequence stars
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Andrew Mann, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 03/31/2027
* USD 411,815.00

Stars form the foundation upon which much of modern astronomy rests and directly
impact sub- fields as diverse as the cosmic distance scale, galaxy structure and
evolution, the synthesis of chemical elements, planet formation, and the origin
of life. Precise knowledge of basic stellar parameters such as mass, radius,
age, and luminosity are thus essential. However, substantial gaps in this
knowledge exist for young, low-mass stars due to the paucity of known eclipsing
and astrometric binary stars among this population that enable accurate
determinations of these quantities. The proposed research will derive accurate
luminosities, radii, ages, and masses for young, low-mass stars using binary
systems recently identified by Gaia, K2, and TESS surveys. This project will
also support research activities by a graduate and several undergraduate
students, as well as efforts by the principal investigator to develop
interactive activities for astronomy courses and an interactive/multimedia-based
exhibit based on this research for the Morehead Planetarium on the UNC Chapel
Hill campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will derive stellar parameters
to better than 5% accuracy for 5-500 million year old K &amp; M stars through
the analysis of light curves in a sample of low-mass eclipsing and astrometric
binary systems. This is a proven method that is routinely applied to older, more
massive stars. Using these systems as ``benchmarks’’ they will derive empirical
mass-luminosity-age relations, investigate the impact of magnetic activity on
the derived parameters, and determine empirical relations for stellar radii,
luminosity, and surface temperature from direct observables given an age. They
will further explore age distributions in star clusters using spectroscopically
determined lithium abundances and through explicit modeling of multiple
populations. A major motivation of this work is to provide improved parameters
for young planetary hosts, however the derived relations between direct
observables and fundamental properties will be applicable to a wide variety of
scientific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.