* 2143056
* CAREER: Electrochemical pumping with high-temperature ionomers for challenging gas separations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Christopher Arges, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2027
* USD 599,199.00

Hydrogen is an important energy vector and chemical feedstock and is expected to
see wide-spread adoption because of its ability to decarbonize difficult sectors
of the U.S. economy – e.g., fertilizer production, metal refining/steel
production, and powering heavy duty vehicle transportation. Furthermore,
hydrogen is a cost-effective energy storage solution for intermittent renewable
electricity generation and when long-term seasonal energy storage is required.
Meeting ambitious goals of greenhouse gas and carbon emission reduction
necessitates the maturation of electrochemical technologies that generate,
store, and distribute hydrogen. This project seeks to understand how electrode
polymeric binder materials in electrochemical hydrogen pumps (EHPs) affect the
efficiency performance for hydrogen purification from challenging gas mixtures
that contain low hydrogen concentrations (1% to 20%). This is important because
it is posited that U.S.’s existing natural gas pipelines may have the ability to
store and distribute hydrogen from centralized production facilities. Leveraging
existing infrastructure can reduce the cost of hydrogen to end users as hydrogen
storage and distribution make up a large portion of the cost of hydrogen today.
However, endpoint use applications necessitate pure hydrogen at high pressures.
Hence, EHPs are promising technology to separate hydrogen from gas mixtures
while simultaneously compressing it. Advancing materials’ performance and
durability for electrochemical hydrogen pumps, such as electrode binders, can
reduce capital costs for EHPs while also improving their energy efficiency.
Electrochemical processes are poised to decarbonize chemical processes and is
paramount to train future engineers proficient in electrochemical engineering
and electrochemical systems integration. This project will commission the first
electrochemical unit operation, an EHP, in Penn State’s Unit Operations
Laboratory to give students hands-on training with electrochemical systems.
Outreach activities for this project will engage and recruit individuals from
rural communities in central Pennsylvania to teach them about sustainable
chemical manufacturing using electrochemical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this fundamental research project aims to understand how
electrode ionomer binders’ composition and processing influence hydrogen
diffusivity and hydrogen oxidation/evolution reaction kinetics in high-
temperature polymer electrolyte membrane (HT-PEM) electrochemical hydrogen pumps
(EHPs). With the advent of ion-pair HT-PEMs and phosphonic acid ionomer
electrode binders, preliminary experiments demonstrated hydrogen separations
from syngas, and other reformed hydrocarbons with varying hydrogen and carbon
monoxide concentrations, to +99.3% hydrogen at 1 A cm-2. In these experiments,
it was observed that cell polarization was largely governed by hydrogen content
in the gas mixture feed because CO poisoning was minimized. Addressing EHP cell
polarization with gas feeds containing low hydrogen content requires new
electrode binders that promote hydrogen diffusivity and foster better
electrocatalyst utilization. This project will establish structure-property
relationships that correlate ionomer composition and processing to reaction
kinetics-transport properties. These ionomer electrochemical properties will be
probed as thin films on interdigitated electrode arrays decorated with nanoscale
electrocatalysts afforded from block copolymer templating. EHP studies with
membrane electrode assemblies containing the new ionomers will be used for
understanding cell polarization behavior for purifying hydrogen from gas
mixtures with low hydrogen content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.