* 2143150
* CAREER:Towards Causal Multi-Modal Understanding with Event Partonomy and Active Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Sathyanarayanan Aakur, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2027
* USD 514,186.00

Events are central to causal, visual understanding in complex, dynamic
environments. From collaborative robots that assist humans with complex tasks to
surveillance systems that detect anomalous behavior, there is a need to
understand events, their composition, and their interaction for effective
machine perception. This project will explore how events are structured in
multimodal data and how they can be leveraged to help design better, embodied
agents that can construct and leverage compositional event representations to
help function in complex, real-world environments. The developed algorithms
could have a broad impact in numerous fields including Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and education, such as the future of workforce training. In addition to
scientific impact, the project performs complementary educational and outreach
activities. Specifically, it engages the broader scientific community in the use
of AI and computer vision (CV) research to augment the future of workforce
training through workshops and seminars, introduces and enhances the AI and CV
education at Oklahoma State University, and develops and fosters an
entrepreneurial mindset in computer science education and research through
integrated educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on
the ideas of energy-based neuro-symbolic learning, using Grenander’s Pattern
Theory formalism, abductive reasoning, and active embodied vision for learning
and using temporal causality for richer, multimodal event understanding. The
specific research aims of the project are three-fold. First, it seeks to learn
the partonomy of common, everyday events by expressing the hierarchical
structure in the form of Bayesian Rose Trees, whose semantics are populated by
an energy-based pattern theory inference engine. Second, it will research ways
to leverage this event partonomy into understanding actions in videos beyond
recognition and perceive the current action in the context of the overall task
being performed. This inference mechanism will enable an embodied, intelligent
agent to recognize the current action and infer higher-level concepts such as
human intent and goals in a unified energy-based framework. Third, it will
realize the partonomy-based understanding framework in an embodied agent while
augmenting it with active multimodal feedback. It will allow the embodied agent
to perform active reasoning through feedback from the environment by controlling
its geometric parameters (such as position, orientation, and pose) to navigate
clutter and resolve any ambiguity in the perceived event structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Robust Intelligence (RI)
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.