* 2143363
* CAREER: Tracking on the Modern Web: Novel Attacks, Measurements, and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Jason Polakis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 192,908.00

The web has become integral to everyday life, revolutionizing how personal and
professional activities are conducted. At the heart of the web ecosystem lie
browsers, which have evolved into complex application platforms with an ever-
expanding set of capabilities. However, the deployment of new features also
introduces new avenues for invading users’ privacy. This project focuses on
enhancing the privacy protections available to users during their online
activities, by developing robust defenses and privacy-preserving mechanisms. The
underlying research necessitates designing and developing novel techniques and
systems for analyzing browsers’ capabilities, uncovering how they can be misused
for tracking or re-identifying users across first and third party contexts, and
detecting attacks in the wild. This includes implementing static and dynamic
analysis systems for orchestrating web browsers and applications, and developing
browser-agnostic techniques and modular frameworks that advance the state-of-
the-art in browser-feature and application-feature auditing and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate, evaluate, and
tackle the privacy threats affecting browsers through an in-depth and
comprehensive analysis of a wide range of browser features and functionalities.
This will enable the forecasting and prevention of privacy-invasive attacks,
resulting in tangible benefits for end users, as well as the private and
government sector. The main research problems that this project studies will
form the basis for the training of both undergraduate and graduate students. The
outcomes of this research will improve the research community's understanding of
user tracking and privacy invasion on the web, and will be widely disseminated
through academic publications, curriculum integration, and media
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.