* 2143981
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Engineering greenhouse gas-sequestering infrastructure materials through integrated life cycle and material performance analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sabbie Miller, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2027
* USD 407,440.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). A critical challenge facing society is reconciling the
growing demand for infrastructure materials, which cause significant greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions from manufacturing, with meeting goals to mitigate further
climate damage. Yet there is a substantial potential environmental benefit of
infrastructure materials: their long service lives can facilitate extended
storage of GHGs, in particular by sequestering carbon in their structures. Wood
is an example of a material of construction that sequesters atmospheric carbon
by incorporating it through photosynthesis. Concrete and other infrastructure
materials of construction are also able to sequester carbon. There remains a
need for a theoretical and empirical foundation from which to build and
capitalize on this opportunity. The goal of this research is to formulate new
understanding of driving mechanisms to engineer infrastructure materials to
sequester GHGs, while minimizing environmental impacts stemming from the
production of infrastructure materials. The focus will be on infrastructure
woods, concrete, and plastics, culminating in an understanding of the global
sequestration potential from these materials. This research will be integrated
into the educational goals of broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering and instilling an environmental sustainability perspective
for future engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be implemented
through a three-part methodology: (1) Deriving methods needed to understand the
effects of resource flows and process selection on the environmental impacts
from infrastructure materials. (2) Integrating material performance into
environmental impact comparisons to understand how new materials can be
engineered for GHG sequestration. (3) Elucidating mechanisms to drive GHG
sequestration in infrastructure materials. This research will investigate a
systematic approach to engineering GHG-sequestering infrastructure materials
through coupled probabilistic environmental impact assessment and material
performance modeling. Specifically, the research targets: (1) characterizing the
environmental impacts associated with unstudied resource flows; (2)
understanding the largest drivers in environmental impacts and impact
uncertainties from producing infrastructure materials, as well as mechanisms to
lower them; (3) formulating models to link material performance to GHG-fluxes
associated with material production, longevity, and disposal to determine
thresholds at which GHG-sequestration occurs and sequestration potential for new
materials; and (4) discovering the most effective strategies to manage material
resources to drive GHG-sequestration. This work will elucidate new opportunities
for material technologies, with potential to transfer to other classes of
materials and to chemicals. The educational goals will be achieved through three
tasks: (1) Constructing an interactive museum exhibit showing environmental
impacts from anthropogenic material demand to support environmental literacy in
K-12 students. (2) Initiating a community-engaged first-year undergraduate
course-based research experience with the aim of attracting and retaining
underrepresented groups in engineering. (3) Incorporating research findings into
a chapter for the new edition of “Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and
Materials,” a globally used graduate textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.