* 2143591
* CAREER: Backside Protection Against Contactless Optical Attacks on Integrated Circuits in Advanced Technology Nodes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Navid Asadi, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 92,771.00

Today, the explosive demand for modern Integrated Circuits (ICs) and in
particular the system-on-chips (SoCs) in different applications from automobiles
to military, and critical infrastructures makes their security of paramount
concern. With the advancements in packaging and the need for smaller and more
power efficient devices, heterogenous integration becomes more attractive but
makes the chip more vulnerable from backside. Existing research studies in this
area are limited to few attack surfaces with no comprehensive framework. Current
countermeasures are incompatible with the conventional IC and SoC design flow
and are expensive in terms of both manufacturing cost and design overhead. The
project's novelties are in (1) assessing the security vulnerabilities of modern
ICs against “contactless optical attacks from backside” with a holistic security
taxonomy and quantitative evaluation methods, and (2) providing a framework to
develop proper countermeasures against optical probing attacks at circuit-,
material- and packaging-levels. The project's broader importance is in different
disciplines from electronics to material science for chip designers and students
to better understand the correlation between data traffic in IC and the
resulting physical signatures that could be used by an attacker to extract
sensitive information through new education materials and advanced
instrumentations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project (1) investigates potential
security vulnerabilities of modern ICs to backside optical attacks and develop
security metrics to identify the vulnerable modules in a device; (2) develops
low area and power overhead circuit-based solutions to detect and/or prevent
optical probing, (3) develops material and packaging based countermeasures to
mitigate the backside attacks, and finally (4) evaluates the proposed
countermeasures against real attacks in silicon using commercial chips or
fabricated prototypes with state-of-the-art optical
setups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.