* 2143664
* CAREER: Multi-Scalar Transport and Similarity in the Urban Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Qi Li, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2027
* USD 207,863.00

More than half of the global population live in urban areas, which nontrivially
modify the atmosphere through two broad pathways: urban form (i.e., changes in
surface properties) and urban function (i.e., anthropogenic activities emitting
heat and mass). These two pathways occur via turbulent exchanges of momentum,
energy and mass in the atmospheric boundary layer and carry ‘distinct
fingerprints’ of a city’s form and function. For increasingly fine-scale climate
and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models, it is a persistent challenge to
reflect these ‘distinct fingerprints’ of different cities across the world, yet
in a manner that is generalizable and computationally tractable. Due to
incomplete understanding of multi-scalar transport, whether different scalars of
anthropogenic origins obey similarity relations in the urban surface layer
remains unclear. This is also one of the key stumbling blocks to generalize
urban land-atmosphere exchanges for multiple scalars. In particular,
incorporating the effect of urban function on surface-atmosphere exchanges into
climate and NWP models is almost completely missing. Therefore, the overarching
goal is to improve basic understanding of multi-scalar transport and inform
physically realistic, generalizable estimates of the surface-atmosphere
exchanges, especially for less explored scalars. The project will lead to
findings necessary for the next-generation urban climate modeling tools, which
can be implemented to develop more precise (i.e., city or neighborhood-specific)
mitigation and adaptation measures with changing climates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the overall project goal, the approach of this
project is motivated by a critical comparison between flow and transport in the
urban canopy versus vegetated one, which has been extensively studied. Such an
approach will generate new insight into the transferability of theories and
models between the two, informing development of urban-specific models for
surface-atmosphere exchanges based on the existing ones for vegetation
counterpart. To advance basic understanding of multi-scalar transport and
departure from similarity, the mechanisms responsible for scalar dissimilarity
will be separately investigated at the micro- and local scale of heterogeneities
in urban form and function. Understanding of multi-scalar transport at both the
micro- and local scales will be systematically studied by first deriving a ‘city
profile generation’ module to generalize urban form and function (Aim 1). Then,
hypotheses regarding multi-scalar transport and their similarity will be tested
to advance basic understanding (Aim 2). The new understanding will help improve
urban surface-atmosphere exchange modeling and interpretation of observations
that rely on scalar similarity theory (Aim 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.