* 2143381
* CAREER: We Dare Defend Our Rights: The Political Use of Law in the Enforcement of Voting Rights
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2022,07/31/2022
* Brandon Davis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2022
* USD 125,920.00

Recent elections have shown that political organizations still matter. The Civil
and Voting Rights Acts of the 1960â€™s made racially exclusionary practices
illegal; nevertheless, they did not automatically enforce rights. Whites
subsequently adapted and deployed new methods of political exclusion. The
contemporary social and political context is different, but the ambiguity and
indeterminacy of voting rights are not. State voter ID laws, limits on early
voting, restrictions on registration, voter roll purges, disenfranchisement, and
gerrymandering have become ordinary yet systemic barriers to minority
participation. Voting rights are again being challenged and new de jure and de
facto voter suppression techniques are again on the rise. Yet so too are the
number of political organizations attempting to build, sustain, and employ the
strategic capacity necessary for successful legal mobilization. Understanding
how the Alabama Democratic Conference developed, sustained, and employed
statewide strategic capacity and effectively capitalized on the support
structure for legal mobilization for over twenty years will inform our
understanding of social movement theory and provide insights that can be adapted
to fit the needs of rights advocacy groups across the United States and in other
western-style democracies. This research project will create a repository of
research materials on minority political organizations and their legal
campaigns. A short documentary will be created and disseminated to a wide
audience, from local to national civic and political organizations and from
secondary schools to graduate seminars. Lastly, this research project will
incorporate underrepresented students at all stages of the research, increasing
their sense of belonging, which is highly correlated with academic outcomes, and
imparting research and job readiness skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award focuses on collecting and analyzing data on how a minority political
organization sustained a statewide legal campaign for over twenty years
(1965-1989) culminating in the most successful political usage of law to enforce
voting rights in American history. To guide examination of the ADC, this project
relies on prior social movement research under two theoretical headings: the
support structure for legal mobilization and strategic capacity. This research
project will employ grounded theory, an interpretative analytic approach, and
snowball sampling as a complimentary research strategy. This project will
provide insight into unresolved questions about how different elements of the
support structure for legal mobilization are correlated with successful
insurgency at both the state and federal levels. This analysis will advance our
understanding of the mechanisms through which strategic capacity is created and
our understanding of leadership and organizational structures as sources of
strategic capacity. Finally, this research will advance our understanding of how
different aspects of strategic capacity interact with the different elements of
the support structure for legal mobilization at the state and federal level. In
truth, we do not know much about the legal campaigns of minority voting rights
organizations. This research project will fill this crucial gap in the socio-
legal research literature and answer key questions regarding the political use
of law for political purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.