* 2143808
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Modeling Deformation Twinning in Polycrystalline Materials Driven by Diffraction-Based Micromechanical Data
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Matthew Kasemer, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 250,273.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural components in modern automobiles and
aircraft are tasked with performing under increasingly strenuous conditions to
reduce weight and increase efficiency. This requires a higher confidence in
understanding the strength of materials, which is used directly by engineers to
design safe, long-lasting components. In metals, atoms are arranged in a
structured, periodic way. Changes in the arrangement of these atoms due to an
applied force influences the strength of metals. These regions of disruption
among atoms are known as defects. This study aims to develop a better
understanding of why and how these phenomena occur in order to better predict
how and when metal components will fail. This project pairs experimental
observations with high-fidelity simulations to formulate a predictive model.
This model forms the basis of a state-of-the-art simulation software to increase
fundamental understanding of metals at their microscopic levels, to better
predict their strength and ultimately design safer machines and new materials.
The software developed in this study is disseminated free and open-source, with
an interactive website devoted to teaching others how to use it and incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate-level coursework. Additional outreach activities
include yearly instructional workshops to guide users through the theory and
operation of the simulations to encourage a wider, more diverse community of
users. The workshops specifically recruit undergraduate students to foster on-
campus research experiences and provide a pipeline of students to graduate
school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern
engineering components are increasingly tasked with more strenuous performance
demands, including operating under conditions closer to their failure limits.
This necessitates a fundamental understanding of the various types of
micromechanical responses of metallic alloys. While deformation twinning has
been observed in many high-strength structural alloys, the mechanisms which
govern their behavior are not well understood compared to crystallographic slip.
Common models obscure the differences between twinning and crystallographic slip
by homogenizing their local deformation response, ignoring the discrete nature
of twinning; consequently, there is no universally accepted model describing
deformation twinning. This study aims to formulate a phenomenological model
governing the behavior of discrete deformation twinning at the grain scale to
provide for better predictive models for the deformation of polycrystalline
materials through a correlated experimental-theoretical approach. High energy
X-ray diffraction experiments are performed in situ to track the evolution of
plasticity (specifically the nucleation and evolution of deformation twins) at
the grain scale during deformation loading. The analysis of this experimental
data allows for formulating a phenomenological model governing the behavior of
twinning at the grain scale and implementing this model into a refined crystal
plasticity finite element framework that considers discrete deformation twin
regions. The software developed in this study is disseminated free and open-
source, with an interactive website devoted to operational instruction, and is
included in undergraduate and graduate-level coursework. Additional outreach
activities include yearly instructional workshops to guide users through the
theory and operation behind the simulations to encourage a broader, more diverse
community of users. The workshops specifically recruit undergraduate students to
foster on-campus research experiences and provide a pipeline of students to
graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.