* 2143719
* CAREER: Harmonic Analysis and the Stability of Singularities in the Calculus of Variations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Max Engelstein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2027
* USD 139,199.00

This project investigates singularities in several physically important models
arising in the calculus of variations and partial differential equations.
Developed initially in the context of mechanics, the calculus of variations is a
mathematical field of study, which investigates shapes or functions which
minimize energy. For example, a soap bubble takes its round shape because it
minimizes surface tension given a fixed enclosed volume. In some situations,
minimizers to these natural energies exhibit singularities â€“ places where the
solution is not smooth. This project investigates the formation and structure of
such singularities. The integrated educational component of the project supports
a mathematical summer program for high school students, a learning seminar
designed to increase access to local research seminars, and a new and
interdisciplinary graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies
singularity formation in three areas of the calculus of variations: (stationary)
free boundary problems, nodal sets of solutions to parabolic partial
differential equations, and energy critical evolution on manifolds. Each topic
represents a central question in the study of singularity formation. When do
singularities exist? When are they stable or generic? When can one precisely
describe the behavior of a solution in a space-time neighborhood of the
singularity formation? The project will develop techniques to distinguish
singularity formation in minimizers from singularity formation in stable
solutions. A second component of the project involves the perturbation of
singularities in flows without the use of monotonicity. The third component of
the project investigates the role of analyticity in the uniqueness of bubbling
and soliton resolution. The educational component of the project seeks to
increase the supply of trainees interested in analysis and differential
equations via new and more accessible content at the high school, undergraduate
and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.