* 2143623
* CAREER: Studies of Chalcogen Bonding-Mediated Assembly towards Porous Crystalline Frameworks, Hierarchical Assemblies, and Multicomponent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Christopher McGuirk, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2027
* USD 290,819.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:
Discoveries of new materials have led to seismic advances in our societies.
These advances typically occur through breakthroughs with one of two key
components of materials: the repeating individual molecular or atomic building
block or the way individual components are connected. Such materials can be
considered analogous to a brick wall, with the bricks as the repeating blocks,
and the mortar connecting them together. While an enormous diversity of building
blocks is known, only a handful of established modes of connectivity exist.
Generally, each different mode of connectivity allows the creation of an entire
new class of materials. Perhaps the best example for this is the field of
nanoporous frameworks, which are sponge-like materials containing voids slightly
larger than individual molecules. Nanoporous frameworks containing similar
bricks, but connected through different mortars, show vastly different
behaviors, each type exhibiting a unique combination of properties. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, the principal investigator and their research group develop
a new class of nanoporous frameworks enabled by a recently discovered mode of
connectivity. In doing so, the principal investigator advances our knowledge of
connectivity in materials, particularly by advancing the understanding of this
nascent connectivity, realizing unparalleled structural complexities in
materials, and developing a class of materials with a hitherto unseen set of
properties. To help teach the core concepts of how building blocks assemble into
materials, the investigators also develop and disseminate an inexpensive and
highly modular model kit exercise. This level-adaptable game uses multi-colored
modeling clay and toothpicks to teach students how the bricks and mortar work
together to form materials. To reduce inequalities in upper-division chemistry
offerings between research universities and URM-serving primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs), the principal investigator develops and offers a hybrid
upper-division Physical Organic course that is simultaneously taught face-to-
face at Colorado School of Mines and remotely to students at institutions across
Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The manner of bonding
between constituent atoms or molecules invariably influences the properties of
materials. Perhaps no material family is more emblematic of this than synthetic
porous frameworks, wherein the properties, and thus utility, of a given subclass
rely heavily on the directionality, dynamic reversibility, and net strength of
the intermolecular interactions used. Therefore, the discovery and
characterization of alternative modes of intermolecular assembly that may give
rise to complementary material classes are of great interest. The primary
objective of this project is to explore if chalcogen bonding, a recently defined
non-covalent interaction, can deliberately and reliably assemble molecular
tectons into low-density crystalline framework materials, towards the
realization of a new class of frameworks: Chalcogen-Bonded Organic Frameworks,
i.e. ChOFs. Empirical and computational studies of chalcogen bond-mediated
assembly in model systems establish a set of quantitative guidelines for the
rational design of permanently porous ChOFs with topologies predictively
assembled from the molecular tecton structure and crystallization conditions.
These insights lead to compositionally hierarchical and ordered multi-component
materials, elusive features in established framework classes. Solution-phase
association studies, such as NMR spectroscopy and ITC, and DFT-based
calculations are used to quantify chalcogen bonding between synthesized tectons;
the atomic structure of assembled frameworks is characterized by single-crystal
XRD. An inexpensive and highly modular model kit exercise using modeling clay
and toothpicks is developed and disseminated to students with the intent to
teach core concepts of molecular assembly and crystal engineering. To reduce
inequalities in upper-division chemistry offerings between research universities
and URM-serving PUIs, the principal investigator develops and offers a hybrid
upper-division Physical Organic course that is simultaneously taught face-to-
face at Colorado School of Mines and remotely to students at institutions across
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.