* 2143268
* CAREER: Machine Learning for Data-Driven Fault-Tolerant Control of Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Yuncheng Du, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2027
* USD 594,314.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will create new knowledge
about the dynamic behavior and control of complex systems; specifically, how to
predict rare deleterious events in complex systems, and how to control these
systems when faults occur to achieve a desired performance. Complex systems are
networks comprising many collaborating elements that continuously interact with
each other in a nonlinear and counterintuitive manner; examples include
cybersecurity, manufacturing processes, automated transportation infrastructure,
medical devices, and many others relevant to our well-being. Faults in these
systems are malfunctions, such as cyber-attack or sensor failure, that break
security, degrade system functionality, and cause safety concerns and economic
losses. Control of these systems is challenging because the dynamic behavior of
the ensemble is intrinsically difficult to predict. This award supports
fundamental research to build a “fault-aware” control framework to study how
interactions among individual elements produce the collective’s dynamics and how
to alleviate the effect of faults on complex systems. To develop and test the
control framework, a failing heart managed by a ventricular assist device will
be used as the foundation to (i) detect device faults such as thrombosis and
suction that jeopardize the survival of heart failure patients and (ii)
automatically adjust the operation of the device under faults to improve the
patient quality of life. The educational and outreach plan will focus on
promoting active and life-long learning and engaging and training students at
various levels, including veterans transitioning to civilian life, in emerging
industries and transdisciplinary skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using machine
learning as the backbone, the objective of this research is to create a data-
driven control strategy that regulates and maintains the system’s homeostasis
following the onset of faults, while ensuring the system continues to operate in
a seamless, continuous manner. This research will fill the knowledge gap for the
supervision and control of complex systems when the governing phenomena are
unknown and when first principle models are not readily attainable. The data-
driven strategy will also overcome design limitations. Designing complex
systems, such as ventricular assist devices, based on first principle models is
costly, time consuming, and requires extensive expert knowledge to build
application-specific models based on ubiquitous assumptions that are difficult
to satisfy in practice. This research project will integrate data analytics,
control theory, and machine learning into a unified framework with three
innovative aspects: developing machine learning methods to discover symptomatic
fingerprints of faults directly from data for real-time fault diagnosis;
building an online adaptive modeling paradigm to predict performance-related
variables that are not directly measurable due to economic considerations or
technical constraints; designing a fault-tolerant controller to improve the
system’s performance, while ensuring all operational constraints are met. In
addition to its application to ventricular assist devices, this framework can be
applied to protect computer systems from digital attacks, improve manufacturing
efficiency, and address safety issues in automated transportation infrastructure
and medical devices, leading to compelling societal and economic
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.