* 2143670
* CAREER: Programmable control of biomolecular condensate self-assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* William Jacobs, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2027
* USD 228,814.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The cytoplasm within a living cell consists of
thousands of different types of molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids
such as RNA. In order for many biological functions to occur, this complex
mixture must be organized, with specific types of biomolecules either
colocalizing or assembling into larger structures. This spatial organization is
often dynamic, in the sense that many structures assemble, disassemble, or
rearrange themselves in response to external stimuli. This CAREER award focuses
on a particular class of structures known as biomolecular condensates, which are
liquid-like structures composed of proteins and RNA. Using theoretical models
and computer simulations, the PI aims to understand the mechanisms by which
biomolecular condensates assemble and interface with one another, as well as how
these processes can be controlled. These theories will not only improve our
understanding of how biomolecules are organized inside of living cells, but also
help to guide the development of biomimetic "living materials" that can
similarly respond dynamically to specific stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes an integrated education plan that will train future scientists
working at the interface of computational materials research and theoretical
biophysics. This plan is motivated by the need to teach aspiring theorists both
fundamental concepts and state-of-the-art methods for performing practical
calculations. To unify the presentation of these topics, the PI will develop a
pair of graduate-level courses that cover modern theories of complex fluids in
parallel with related computer simulation techniques. These courses will
emphasize applications relevant to the research activities of this award, as
well as to current research at the interface of biology and soft condensed
matter physics more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research to elucidate the self-assembly dynamics of intracellular biomolecular
condensates, a recently discovered class of liquid-like protein and RNA-rich
structures. Although many condensates assemble spontaneously, the dynamics of
these intracellular self-assembly processes appear to be tightly controlled both
spatially and temporally. This project will establish the physical principles
underlying the assembly dynamics of multicomponent condensates by probing the
mechanisms that allow condensates to assemble rapidly and in response to
specific stimuli. Building on recent advances in the theory of multicomponent
phase behavior, this research will use coarse-grained molecular simulations and
rare-event sampling techniques to: 1) derive design rules for selectively
seeding the assembly of one condensate out of a large number of competing
structures, 2) investigate the relationship between the structure of protein/RNA
interaction networks and the emergent condensate morphology, and 3) develop a
molecular-level theory to describe how chemical reactions affect the nucleation
dynamics of self-assembled condensates. The results of these studies will be
used to guide future experimental efforts to manipulate biomolecular condensates
in vivo, construct synthetic biomimetic condensates, and engineer stimulus-
responsive soft materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan
addresses the need to unify the presentation of theoretical concepts, molecular-
scale simulations, and continuum-level numerical methods in modern graduate-
level coursework. The PI will develop a pair of graduate-level courses that
cover topics from equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics in
parallel with techniques for performing practical calculations. The first of
these courses will introduce students to modern molecular-level theories of
complex fluids and non-equilibrium systems alongside closely related
computational tools. The second course will cover the kinetics of phase
transformations, with a focus on numerical methods spanning both molecular
simulation and continuum-level approaches. Both courses will emphasize
applications relevant to current research at the interface of biology and soft
condensed matter physics by incorporating case studies from the current
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.