* 2144960
* CAREER: IIS: RI: Foundations of Deep Neural Network Robustness and Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Salimeh Yasaei Sekeh, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2027
* USD 314,798.00

Deep neural networks have led to significant advances in science and engineering
and play an important role in the success of modern machine learning in various
real-world applications including vision, speech, pattern recognition, and
biology to name a few. When developing deep-learning solutions, accuracy or
performance metrics are often a key point of emphasis. While performance is
critical, the computational load of the training process and security of the
final solution play an equally important role in a real-world setting. Recent
advances in adversarial learning models hold significant promise in improving
various learning methods and defending against threats, but the fundamental
aspects of these models are still poorly understood, which limits their
performance guarantees for efficient and robust decisions. With this in mind,
this project investigates simultaneously tackling three desirable properties
when developing deep networks: 1) performance, 2) efficiency, and 3) robustness.
This project also includes a comprehensive plan to integrate the research
results into inclusive, diverse, and cross-disciplinary educational multilevel
programs by funding graduate research assistants, summer research fellowship for
high-school students and teachers, and organizing a hybrid (online and in-
person) deep-learning boot camp. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research program is to develop a comprehensive and fundamental understanding of
the robustness and computational aspects of deep networks by leveraging tools
and concepts from probability, information theory, and statistics. This project
aims to make critical advances in 1) proper formulations of subnetwork
adversarial robustness, 2) characterizing transferability via curriculum
learning, and 3) developing efficient approaches for reducing computational
complexity involved in training, among others. The theoretical and
methodological outcomes of this cross-disciplinary project will broaden the
prior knowledge of deep learning and will improve prediction, exploration, and
detection applications of machine-learning models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.