* 2144196
* CAREER: Asymmetrical Fracture of Two-Dimensional High Entropy Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Yingchao Yang, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 03/31/2027
* USD 527,235.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
investigate fracture of two-dimensional atoms-thick high entropy materials
containing at least five elements. Two-dimensional materials, such as graphene,
generally favor a brittle behavior, which reduces mechanical stability of the
electronics, photonics, and energy storage devices built with them. Two-
dimensional high entropy materials are expected to possess substantially better
fracture toughness owing to a greater asymmetry at the atomic level. Thus, this
project supports fundamental research to synthesize monolayer and multiplayer
two-dimensional high entropy materials, conduct experiments in electron
microscopes to visualize fracture, and theoretically reproduce the
experimentally observed behaviors. Insights from this study will broaden the
family of two-dimensional materials and advance the understanding of the effect
of defects and other factors on their mechanical properties and behaviors. With
higher fracture toughness, two-dimensional high entropy materials could
potentially replace or be integrated with existing materials to produce high
lifecycle nanoscale devices. As part of the project, an integrated research and
education program will strive for societal impacts through classroom/online
education, knowledge dissemination, engineering training, and outreach
activities. Research opportunities will be afforded to both graduate and
undergraduate students, specially underrepresented minority students. Outreach
activities will target K-12 students and, uniquely, homeschoolers to motivate
them towards STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confined to two-dimensional
geometry, cracks generally lead to brittle behavior with minimum plasticity at
room temperature, which forms the basis of the dilemma of mutually exclusive
fracture toughness and mechanical strength performance in bulk materials. This
research aims to investigate asymmetrical fracture of two-dimensional high
entropy materials, where bifurcations, branches, and deflections emerge due to
asymmetric edge elastic properties at the crack tip and edge swapping during
crack propagation, thus, significantly increasing the fracture resistance.
Various two-dimensional high entropy materials will be synthesized via solid
state reaction and chemical vapor deposition methods. In situ tensile tests in
SEM and TEM will be conducted to visualize the deformation and fracture
evolution amid various microstructural defects and features, such as the
competing ternary and quaternary phases. A multiscale modeling framework based
on DFT calculations, data-driven MD simulations, and phase field modeling will
be used to simulate fracture behavior with focus on crack initiation and
propagation. Ultimately, the project will advance the understanding of the
effect of lattice distortion, defects, strain rate, and crack geometry as well
as composition on the mechanical behavior of two-dimensional high entropy
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.