* 2144299
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Understanding Thermal Transport Processes in Atmospheric Boundary Layer with Utility-Scale Solar Photovoltaic Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ahmad Vaselbehagh, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 403,542.00

To achieve complete renewable-based electrification from the current level of
less than 20% globally presents great challenges for the energy science
community. This requires hundreds of trillions of kilowatt-hours of renewable
energy, mainly generated through wind and solar power. One neglected but crucial
question is whether extracting such huge amount of energy from the atmosphere's
surface layer would alter the atmosphere's physics, leading to new climate
change challenges. This CAREER project will focus on addressing whether large-
scale solar photovoltaic plants alter the local climate. The research will
parameterize the atmospheric response carried out by transport processes to
facilitate the inclusion of solar plants in climate models. This project will
pave the way for undergraduate and graduate students in middle Tennessee to
become engaged in climate change education and discussion. The results of this
research will enable a new "Atmospheric Transport" course at Tennessee
Technological University, a textbook titled Atmospheric Transport to increase
scientific literacy, and an educational mobile app
ATMOSPort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to study the interactions
between the near-ground atmosphere and an artificial canopy of millions of solar
photovoltaic panels. A two-stage field campaign and computational fluid dynamics
simulations are proposed to provide an understanding of thermal transport
dynamics within the atmospheric boundary layer above thousands of acres of dark,
hot, tall, and rough Photovoltaic panels of utility-scale solar plants. The
knowledge gained will clarify whether such giant canopies alter the local
climate and will lead to the creation of equations that accurately describe the
affected atmospheric characteristics. The proposed research quantifies the
significance of these impacts for various background surface conditions and
parameterizes the thermal and mechanical effects of the plant to allow
meteorologists and environmental engineers to incorporate them into their models
efficiently. This achievement would increase the accuracy of atmospheric
simulations within regions where utility-scale photovoltaic plants
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.