* 2144174
* CAREER: Cation and Nanoparticle Interconversion in Metal-Exchanged Zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Chris Paolucci, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2027
* USD 597,273.00

Small pore, microcrystalline zeolite materials are widely used in the chemicals
and fuels industries for processes where molecular-scale capture, separation, or
catalytic reaction is needed. In the case of catalysis, zeolites are often used
in conjunction with extremely small particles of catalytic metals – or even
individual atoms – dispersed throughout the nanoscale pores and voids in the
zeolite structure. The resulting catalysts are highly effective for promoting
specific catalytic reactions, while efficiently utilizing small amounts of
expensive metals such as platinum or palladium. Nevertheless, the harsh
conditions associated with many catalytic reactions results in metal particle
agglomeration and concomitant loss of catalyst efficiency. The project develops
computational molecular models and theory predicting the dynamics of
agglomeration and redispersion of metals supported by zeolites. In addition, the
models include design and synthesis features that deter the agglomeration of
metal atoms and particles under reaction conditions, thus improving the energy
efficiency of catalysts widely used for petrochemical and emissions related
applications. The project is integrated with efforts that address retention of
underrepresented communities at multiple points in the STEM pipeline, through
collaboration with local organizations that emphasize coding for girls in K-12,
and by organizing events that address social and professional development
challenges faced by both international and domestic undergraduate and graduate
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops atomistic
models that describe how zeolite composition, gas conditions, and nanoparticle
size and distribution affect the thermodynamics and kinetics of cation and
nanoparticle interconversion in zeolites. The main objectives are to 1) model
the thermodynamics of zeolite-supported platinum and palladium cation and
nanoparticle interconversion, 2) predict how catalytically relevant reactant
gases promote or impede interconversion, 3) determine how zeolite encapsulation
modulates the structure and energy of nanoparticles, and 4) determine the
fundamental processes that govern the kinetics of interconversion between
cations and nanoparticles. These objectives will be fulfilled by using molecular
modeling tools that include density functional theory, wave function theory,
classical forcefields, and Monte Carlo simulations. This project will provide
guidance on the engineering of deactivation resistant zeolites, a challenge at
the frontiers of catalysis and zeolite synthesis. Further, the project will
enable transformative predictions of zeolite compositions and synthetic
strategies that stabilize catalyst performance in the reaction
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.