* 2144064
* CAREER: Establishing Swimming Sperm as a Model Active Matter System
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Chih-Kuan Tung, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 01/31/2027
* USD 307,135.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Swimming sperm actively consume energy and
propel themselves. Meanwhile, they interact with neighboring sperm and form
different phases, similar to a large number of water molecules forming either
vapor or liquid phases. Under different conditions, sperm may swim individually
(like molecules in a gas) or form dense, collective motion, which is called the
flocking phase (think of a flock of birds but replacing birds with sperm). The
research field that focuses on the behaviors of a large number of self-
propelling objects is referred to as active matter. In this project, the
research group aims to produce experimental data to rigorously test the existing
theoretical models, and establish swimming sperm as an experimental model system
for active matter. Fundamental questions answered in this project can be applied
to help biologists understand how sperm pass through the mammalian female
reproductive tract. Engineers can also use the information to utilize sperm as
carriers or develop mechanical switches for the self-propelled objects. Success
of a research project in an academic setting depends on the contribution of
talented students, and the principal investigator utilizes tutoring activities
to send undergraduate students to tutor students in the surrounding school
systems. This education plan aims to boost both the performance of existing
undergraduate students, as well as strengthening the pipeline for future
students. Combined with the interdisciplinary research project that involves
physics, biology, and information theory, the project aims to create an
intellectually stimulating environment for students at North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University, one of the Historically Black
Universities and Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical models that consider momentum conservation
between the microswimmers and the surrounding fluids suggest that the flocking
phase should not be seen among low-Reynolds-number swimmers such as sperm.
However, given the appropriate viscoelastic fluid and initial conditions, the
principal investigator has observed flocking of sperm. These exhibit critical
exponents similar to those predicted in the dry active matter theoretical model,
which does not consider momentum conservation between swimmers and fluid. This
project first addresses this by tracing the fluid flow generated by individual
sperm swimming to test the momentum conservation proposition, which will also
help us better understand sperm propulsion mechanism in viscoelastic fluid,
which simulates the rheology of mucus that they need to swim through in the
female tract. Sperm-sperm and sperm-sidewall interactions are mediated by the
surrounding fluid and direct collisions. Thus, the research team next examines
the interaction rules between sperm along with mechanical pressure generated on
the sidewalls by swimming sperm colliding into them through the flow and cell
tracing. These studies may lead to understanding how the female reproductive
tract, particularly the uterotubal junction, regulates the movement of sperm, as
well as the development of mechanical actuators for self-propelled objects in
microfluidic systems. Finally, this project employs information theory
approaches to analyze sperm behaviors. Specifically, it examines information
transfer and the information/entropy of different phases, trying to identify
organizational principles underlying living active matter systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Condensed Matter Physics
program in the Division of Material Research and the Historically Black Colleges
and Universities â€“ Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) in the Division of Human
Resource Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.