* 2144396
* CAREER: Dynamics of Computationally Designed Fluorescent Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Colin Smith, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2026
* USD 385,231.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of proteins with novel
activity, behavior, or purpose has been an important area of research. The field
of computational protein design is becoming increasingly sophisticated, enabling
not only the redesign of existing proteins but also the creation of proteins
entirely from scratch. The goal of this project is to study and optimize the
movement of microscopic, computationally designed proteins that use light to
track the locations of biological molecules and reveal the inner working of
living organisms. This will enable the creation of even more advanced versions
of these and other protein machines that can also help in the manufacture and
recycling of materials at the chemical level. The project will employ several
graduate and undergraduate students in full-time research, preparing them for
careers where computational and experimental methods are increasingly integrated
to solve the next set of major scientific challenges. This work will support a
suite of new class-based research projects, empowering undergraduates in
scientific discovery and advancing knowledge. Students from backgrounds
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics will be
reached through established programs assisting the transition to college and
preparation for graduate school. American Rescue Plan funding is used to support
this early career investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the structure of a protein is almost always
necessary for function, it is often not sufficient. This project focuses on the
critical but often neglected role of protein motion in enabling absorbance and
reemission of light, a process known as fluorescence. We will first determine
which protein shapes either enhance or inhibit fluorescence through detailed
analysis of computer simulations and extensive experimental structural
characterization. Second, we will test our models through redesign and
experimental examination of brighter fluorescent protein variants. As part of
these efforts, we will develop a general-purpose computer algorithm that enables
rapid evaluation of how thousands of potential mutations affect the shape of the
protein. Third, we will investigate the structural determinants of other
important properties like the ability of the protein to prevent or facilitate
switching fluorescence on and off. Ultimately, this project aims to develop a
detailed understanding of how these fluorescent proteins and others can be
redesigned to make them truly useful tools for biological research and
industrial processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.