* 2144513
* CAREER: PARP: Mislead Physical-Disruption Attacks by Preemptive Anti-Reconnaissance for Power Grids Cyber-Physical Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Hui Lin, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2027
* USD 249,998.00

Cyberattacks targeting industrial control systems like power grids present
unique features compared to attacks in general computing environments. Because
physical processes operate under complicated physical models, adversaries
perform in-depth reconnaissance on both cyber and physical infrastructures after
penetrating internal control networks. The comprehensive reconnaissance enables
them to cause rapid and possibly irreversible damage like power outages,
economic losses, and even human casualties. This CAREER project aims to design
and quantify preemptive anti-reconnaissance techniques that will mislead
adversaries about power gridsâ€™ cyber-physical infrastructures. Toward the
objective of preventing physical damage, this project will introduce clear
benefits. First, it will mislead attacks before malicious activities are
launched, removing potential threats in advance and thus preventing damage.
Second, preventing reconnaissance on a critical set of physical data can protect
against a wide spectrum of attacks, including unknown ones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this objective, this project will advance
existing anti-reconnaissance approaches with two critical research thrusts. The
first research thrust aims to mislead adversaries about cyber infrastructures by
an original control function virtualization. Leveraging network programmability
enabled by software-defined networking, this technique virtualizes network
communications that deliver control functions in power grids without building
virtual machines for each physical device. While preserving the performance of
control functions, virtualization neutralizes communication patterns from
various physical devices and spoof nodes based on the neutralized patterns. This
consequently removes device-specific features from communication channels and
delivers misleading information by the spoofed nodes, preventing adversaries
from pinpointing vulnerable devices to target. The second research thrust seeks
to mislead adversaries about physical infrastructure by creating an electrical-
model-guided generative adversarial network. Specifically, this method advances
the current design of generative adversarial networks by integrating electrical
models into their internal structures and crafting power grids that generate
real and decoy data. The combination of real and decoy data will conform to
electrical models but present a different picture from the actual power grid.
Consequently, decoys mislead adversaries into designing ineffective attack
strategies that avert damage to the actual grid, while real data continues to
serve legitimate control applications. The research thrusts will be evaluated in
a hardware-in-the-loop power system testbed, which can integrate real-time
operations of physical devices with high-fidelity simulators to quantify power
system runtime reactions to external events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.