* 2144889
* CAREER: Nonlinear Factor Analysis for Sensing and Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Xiao Fu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Factor analysis (FA) tools, e.g., nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) and
independent component analysis (ICA), are the cornerstones of many sensing and
learning applications, e.g., document analytics, hyperspectral imaging, brain
signal processing, and representation learning. FA tools are designed to
discover meaningful latent information from data (e.g., prominent topics in a
collection of documents) in an unsupervised manner. However, classic FA models
do not consider unknown nonlinear distortions that often happen in data
acquisition/generation, and thus frequently fail to produce sensible results in
critical scenarios. This project will develop a suite of nonlinear factor
analysis (NFA) tools that will transform existing FA paradigms by effectively
and provably handling unknown nonlinearities. Results from this project will
significantly advance the understanding of fundamental properties and
computational aspects of various NFA models, including model identifiability,
sample complexity, noise robustness and algorithm convergence---which are
largely uncharted research territories. The products will boost the performance
of a broad spectrum of sensing and learning tasks in science and engineering
where unknown nonlinear distortions often arise, e.g., remote sensing, brain-
computer interface, vision/image/text data analytics, bioinformatics,
geoscience, biology, and ecology. The integrated education plan of developing
visually appealing FA and NFA-based course modules and software will alleviate
“math anxiety” in K-12 and college. The precollege outreach programs and
undergraduate research plans will effectively foster early interest in
mathematics and enhance underrepresented students’ participation in STEM
disciplines. These education activities will lead to a diversified and
mathematically competitive future workforce for signal and machine
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a unified
analytical and computational framework for learning various challenging and
realistic NFA models. Specifically, Thrust I will develop a unified functional
equation-based framework for provable unsupervised nonlinear model
identification under various NFA settings. Thrust II will make important
advances towards understanding NFA under realistic conditions (e.g., finite
sample and noisy cases), and will offer effective NFA optimization algorithms
with performance guarantees. Thrust III will carefully evaluate the proposed
approaches over timely and important sensing and learning tasks including
hyperspectral imaging, biosensor signal processing, and unsupervised machine
learning. These thrusts will produce fundamental results in both theory and
algorithms addressing critical challenges in NFA. The new functional equation-
based analytical framework offers a theoretical underpinning for various NFA
model identification problems that are beyond the reach of existing tools. The
new NFA performance characterization tools under realistic settings (e.g.,
finite data) will be a substantial leap forward from existing works that all use
overly ideal assumptions (e.g., unlimited data). The computational framework
through an integration of statistical analysis, neural network learning, and
nonlinear programming will offer provable and flexible algorithms for NFA
problems, which all currently lack guaranteed
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.