* 2144438
* CAREER: Purposeful Tissue-Engineered Skeletal Muscle: Advancing Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Chris Rathbone, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2027
* USD 412,044.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The skeletal muscles of patients
with diseases like Type 2 diabetes are characterized by an increase in the
abundance of fat cells, known as adipocytes. White, brown, and beige adipocytes
can exist within tissues, with each type influencing tissue function in distinct
ways. The research completed with this Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) project will advance the understanding of the different types of
adipocytes in diabetic skeletal muscle, and during muscle repair and
regeneration. A tissue-engineered model of skeletal muscle will be used to
explore the role of adipocytes in skeletal muscle using conditions that mimic
diabetes and muscle injury. Research objectives will be integrated with
education and outreach to broadly impact STEM students, with more targeted
directives to influence Veterans and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this CAREER project is to
develop a comprehensive understanding of adipocyte-dependent effects in skeletal
muscle during the progression of Type 2 diabetes and during repair and
regeneration after injury. The goal of the first objective is to determine the
effects of Type 2 diabetes, adipocyte type, and adipocyte differentiation
capacity on skeletal muscle properties. The tissue-engineered skeletal muscle
model will be used to examine how adipocyte type and diabetes influence
metabolism; the ability to change adipocyte phenotype (inducing a white to brown
or beige transition) within muscle, and the role of sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) in
mediating these changes. The goal of the second objective is to elucidate the
role of skeletal muscle adipocytes in skeletal muscle regeneration. The role of
adipocyte type in recovery of functional outcomes in skeletal muscle will be
interrogated. The use of injury will identify conditions in which adipocyte-
dependent effects may be altered. The use of an engineered model where both
injury and Type 2 diabetes are implemented provides an opportunity to better
understand these facets as they relate to adipocytes in diabetic skeletal
muscle. This knowledge will lead to new avenues for investigation, supporting
the development of platforms to develop personalized approaches for targeting
skeletal muscle complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.