* 2144831
* CAREER: The coevolution of an eavesdropper sensory system in response to an ever evolving communication system
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Norman Lee, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2027
* USD 670,183.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Signals in animal communication
can evolve in response to actions from intended and unintended receivers. When
signals change, it is unclear how sensory systems adapt, and respond to
modification in signal features. The parasitoid fly Ormia ochracea eavesdrops on
cricket calling songs to locate suitable host crickets to lay eggs on or near
and parasitism results in cricket death. This pressure has driven the rapid
development of novel calling songs among several populations of the Pacific
field cricket in Hawaii, but not among other host cricket species in the
continental United States. This creates a unique opportunity to track changes in
the auditory system of an eavesdropper that may be attributed to differences in
acoustic experience, behavioral plasticity, and the propensity to learn novel
signals in response to signal evolution. The researcher will elucidate song
features that O. ochracea evaluate to recognize cricket calling songs, track
changes in the auditory system in response to signal change, and determine the
role of auditory experience and learning in exploiting novel songs across
populations over time. This research will be used to develop course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) that will broaden access to genuine
research in the classroom. Research findings will also be applied to develop a
portable pop-up museum exhibit on animal communication through a collaborative
multidisciplinary effort between students in biology and art. Both educational
aims seek to increase interest in STEM fields, and to reduce systemic barriers
that have historically excluded underrepresented groups from entering and
thriving in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the conceptualization
of the ‘receiver psychology’ framework, it has been recognized that the
‘psychology of receivers’ plays a significant role in shaping the evolution of
communication signals. As signals evolve between senders and intended receivers,
eavesdroppers must also adapt to changing signals. How this occurs in
eavesdroppers, and its impacts on shaping the sensory systems underlying
behavioral decisions is poorly known. Addressing these unresolved questions
requires a better understanding of the eavesdropper’s receiver psychology, which
includes the detectability, discriminability, and memorability of ancestral and
novel signals. The researcher will determine signal detection and recognition
thresholds from Ormia ochracea while performing walking phonotaxis on a high-
speed treadmill system. To quantify the sensory basis of signal detection at the
biomechanical level of analysis, laser Doppler vibrometry will be applied to
characterize the frequency response of the tympanum and to determine its ability
to detect ancestral and novel songs. At the neural level of analysis, neural
signal detection thresholds will be quantified using extracellular recordings of
auditory evoked potentials from the ascending auditory pathway. Across its
geographic range in North America, Ormia ochracea are known to parasitize
different host cricket species that produce different species-specific calling
songs. Behavioral, biomechanical, and neural levels of analyses will be applied
to characterize population level differences in the detection and recognition of
ancestral cricket songs, and the role of auditory experience in learning to
exploit novel song types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.