* 2144912
* CAREER: Uncovering Mechanisms of Filopodia-Based Synaptogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Karen Litwa, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2027
* USD 466,664.00

The brain supports complex cognitive processes, such as learning and memory.
These complex processes require information transfer within the brain. Synapses
mediate this information transfer. Yet, important details about the exact ways
that synapses form in brain development are still unknown. To address this
critical knowledge gap, this project examines synapse formation in rodent and
human brain development using cutting-edge techniques for growing developing
brain circuits in tissue culture preparations, which allow us unrivalled
experimental access to developing synapses. Using these tools to uncover the
detailed mechanisms of synapse formation will enable us to gain new insights
into the emergence of complex cognitive processes. Since this project studies
both rodent and human synapse formation, it will lead to the identification of
shared and unique mechanisms underlying synapse formation in these two. By
integrating this research with scientific outreach and educational activities,
this project will also increase research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students. Students will be exposed to diverse
scientific disciplines, including neuroscience and stem cell biology. Through
the use of human brain models, students will develop skills in tissue
engineering. This project will develop a microscopy course for undergraduates to
learn advanced microscopy techniques. Furthermore, the use of microscopy in this
research will result in both informative and beautiful images. This project will
share the beauty of scientific discovery with the community by publicly
displaying microscopy images in the community. Art will also be used as a medium
to explore scientific concepts with K-12 students. Thus, this project will
cultivate student and community science appreciation and interest, while also
equipping a future generation of scientists with the knowledge and technical
skills to tackle difficult biological questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excitatory
synapses are an important basis of information transfer in neural circuits which
give rise to complex cognitive functions. However, the mechanisms that initiate
excitatory synapse formation in developing neural circuits are unclear. To
address this gap, this research focuses on two fundamental questions: 1) what
are the requirements for pre- and post- synaptic compartments to initially
adhere? and 2) what determines whether this association persists and matures?
The set of experiments will test the hypothesis that post-synaptic dendritic
filopodia promote synapse formation in developing neural circuits. These
experiments are designed to test the molecular requirements for filopodia to
participate in distinct stages of excitatory synapse formation: axon
association, contact stabilization, and morphological maturation. Neurons will
be co-cultured in microfluidic systems to isolate the contributions of pre- and
post-synaptic compartments to synaptogenesis. CRISPR interference will be used
to alter the expression of specific molecules either separately or in
combination and assess the resulting impact to synapse formation with confocal
and STORM microscopy. Fluorescent biosensors will be used to perturb and monitor
filopodia-mediated signaling events. Synapse formation will be observed in live
neuron cultures and fixed brain tissue from both mice and humans. This research
will also compare regional differences between synapse formation in the
hippocampus and cortex. Successful completion of this research will result in
the identification of conserved mechanisms of filopodia-mediated synaptogenesis,
while also uncovering regional and species-specific differences in filopodial
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.