* 2144042
* CAREER: Graph Structural Theorems, Asymptotic Dimension, and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Chun-Hung Liu, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 155,149.00

This project aims to develop structural theorems for graphs and apply them to
questions in mathematics and computer science inspired by notions related to
geometry. Graphs are combinatorial objects that have been extensively studied in
mathematics and used for modeling systems in engineering, statistics, biology,
economics, and many other disciplines. Graphs can be used to represent spaces or
networks and to encode distance between points in spaces or machines in
networks. Asymptotic dimension is a notion that concerns large-scale behaviors
of such spaces or networks studied in metric geometry, geometric group theory,
and distributed computing. The PI and his collaborators recently used tools from
structural graph theory, a central research area in combinatorics, to establish
results about asymptotic dimension, showing possibilities for attacking open
questions in different areas in mathematics. This project aims to further
explore this direction by developing novel structural theorems about graphs
motivated by their potential applications to computer science and metric
geometry, including but not limited to questions about asymptotic dimension.
This project contains an education component, including student mentoring,
research opportunities for graduate students and advanced undergraduate
students, and course development, with outreach activities designed for K-12
students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to develop novel graph structural theorems and apply them to solve open
questions in combinatorics, theoretical computer science, and other areas in
mathematics. The first direction is to study metric spaces supported by minor-
closed families of graphs. Embedding problems and related applications in
computer science for such metrics have attracted wide attention. One goal of
this project is to develop new structural theorems for minor-closed families to
attack those problems. The second direction is to study graph classes with
polynomial expansion. Such graph classes have been extensively studied in
computer science and geometric graph theory due to its tight connection to
separator theory. A goal of this project is to develop decomposition theorems
for such classes without involving separator theory to pave a novel way for
studying those classes. A potential application is to determine the sparsity
hierarchy for graph classes with finite asymptotic dimension. The third
direction addresses the emerging induced graph minor theory, which combines
graph minor theory and induced subgraph theory, two major directions in
structural graph theory. An objective of this project is to study this area by
extending the existing graph minor theory for sparse graphs to theory for dense
graphs via notions inspired from asymptotic dimension and metric
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.