* 2144523
* CAREER: HeteroTime: Accelerating Static Timing Analysis with Intelligent Heterogeneous Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Tsung-Wei Huang, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2026
* USD 162,678.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As design complexity continues to
grow exponentially, the need to efficiently analyze the timing of large hardware
designs has become the major bottleneck to the design closure flow. To reduce
long analysis runtimes, recent years have seen many parallel static timing
analysis (STA) solutions. Despite improved performance, a key fundamental
challenge remains unsolved: Almost all existing parallel STA solutions are
architecturally constrained by central processing unit (CPU) parallelism, and
their scalability results largely plateaued at 8 to 16 CPU cores. Next-
generation process technologies will feature more complex scenarios to analyze,
resulting in order-of-magnitude higher computational complexity that far exceeds
what existing CPU-parallel STA solutions can scale to. Speeding up STA
algorithms is thus a high research priority for electronic design automation
(EDA) tools to boost the performance of design closure flows. This CAREER
project creates a novel open-source STA engine that 1) delivers transformational
performance breakthroughs by harnessing the power of heterogeneous computing and
machine learning and 2) establishes an open platform for researchers to
contribute to design automation research and education. The proposed research
and education activities will facilitate technology transfers and enable diverse
industry-academia collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
researches novel STA algorithms that deliver order-of-magnitude performance
breakthroughs by harnessing the power of heterogeneous parallelism and machine
learning. It will research novel graphics processing unit (GPU) kernel
algorithms and heterogeneous task decomposition strategies to accelerate
critical STA problems, including graph-based analysis and path-based analysis,
from a novel computing perspective. Furthermore, it will establish a learning-
based task execution environment to achieve adaptive performance optimization to
different STA workloads under real operating conditions. The research outcomes
will enable ultra-fast analysis and optimization algorithms over the current
state-of-the-art and substantially improve both turnaround time and quality of
results (QoR) for design closure flows. Technical contributions of this project
will span a multidisciplinary research community, including EDA, parallel
computing, machine learning, and graph algorithms. Results of the project will
be made open-source to encourage a wide range of EDA researchers and developers
to contribute to the project by sharing new findings, ideas, and educational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.