* 2144905
* CAREER: Resonant Hartree-Fock Inspired Descriptions of Excited State Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Lee Thompson, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Lee M. Thompson of University of Louisville is
developing computational approaches to simulate excited state processes of
relevance to metallo-photocatalysis. Metallo-photocatalysis combines transition
metal catalysis and photoredox catalysis to enable new molecular synthesis
approaches. However, several competing mechanisms for catalyst activation can
potentially lead to different reaction products, and so computational modelling
is beneficial to establish the rates of excited state processes and design
catalytic systems that enhance the desired reactivity. For this, modeling
challenges exist, including: (i) the size of the systems involved, (ii) the
nature of the electronic structure of these systems as these are often not
amenable to current approximations embodied in reduced-CPU (central processing
unit) time methods, and (iii) theoretical formalisms requiring computation of
terms that are difficult to extract from simulation. To resolve these
difficulties, Dr. Thompson is developing computational methods that couple
together low-cost approximations that each capture different features of the
electronic structure. The aim is to develop a general computational platform of
more accurate approaches that takes advantage of partitioning of the electronic
interactions to reduce computational efforts. This project also includes the
development of an integrated education plan focusing on programming literacy and
sustainable software development that aims to provide students with a deeper
understanding of physical chemistry and computational science. The principal
investigator is also working to build a forum to engage stakeholders in the
chemistry enterprise in Louisville, KY through the Derby lecture series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project on Resonant Hartree-Fock inspired
descriptions of excited state processes consists of two main scientific goals.
First, the Thompson research team is developing algorithms that explore self-
consistent field (SCF) solution space to understand how the SCF function
landscape encodes different correlation mechanisms. The methods permit
enumeration of SCF solutions from which a short determinant expansion can be
chosen that spans relevant correlation mechanisms present in molecular systems.
Additionally, the SCF solutions can be used as references for post-SCF methods.
Second, models that optimize a different-orbitals-for-different-configurations
wavefunction to account for interactions between the different correlation
mechanisms are being designed and implemented. The resulting wavefunction is
being used as a platform to recover remaining correlation energy at reduced
computational cost. The new methods will be applied to the study of photo-
induced electron transfer and excitation energy transfer rates in metallo-
photocatalytic systems. These tools, if successful, could have a significant
impact on the design of new photoredox catalyst systems and processes, an area
of great current interest in reaction development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.