* 2144679
* CAREER: The Nature of Interdomain Coupling in the Farnesoid X Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Chiamaka Okafor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 01/31/2027
* USD 355,193.00

Many hormones and other signaling molecules exert their potent effects by
regulating which genes are turned “on” by a process known as transcription. A
large family of so-called transcription factors with a similar architecture that
includes separate domains for ligand (the hormone/signaling molecule) and DNA
binding are known as nuclear hormone receptors. When these proteins bind their
ligands, they interact with a specific DNA sequence and allow the machinery
necessary to “read” the gene to assemble and proceed. The transcription factors
are flexible and the relative positions of the domains can vary dramatically.
The PI proposes to understand how the individual domains communicate with each
other, so that the DNA-recognition segment can sense that the ligand binding
domain is occupied, or how the DNA binding domain might impact the ligand
binding domain. Their highly flexible nature is thought to allow for precise
biological control of transcription, given that a single member of this family
can have distinct responses to very similar ligands. These studies will reveal
the key molecular details that drive crucial physiological processes.
Additionally, this work will achieve broader impacts by providing educational
materials and research training. Curricular materials will be generated to
promote teaching and learning of protein dynamics in K-12 and undergraduate
courses, while research training will be provided for high school teachers,
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
generate a molecular understanding of how the ligand binding (LBD) and DNA
binding (DBD) domains of the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) interact to regulate
transcription. The mechanisms of crosstalk between these two domains are
uncharacterized in FXR and other nuclear receptors (NR). Thus novel, creative
approaches are required to understand how interdomain communication influences
transcription. This work will combine molecular experiments with biophysical
approaches and computational modeling. This integrative approach will allow
molecular-level perturbations of FXR to be linked to structure and dynamic
motions, subsequently revealing how FXR function is uniquely regulated and
modulated by ligand and/or DNA binding. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to
model interdomain interactions in various ligand- and DNA-bound states will be
followed by hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to experimentally
reveal interaction surfaces between the two domains. Small angle X-ray
scattering will be used to generate low resolution models of the quaternary
structure of FXR. Luciferase reporters of transactivation and nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) will be used to determine how perturbations of the
LBD modulate function in the DBD. Finally, NMR, MD simulations and binding
assays will be performed to characterize bidirectional allostery in FXR. By
carefully determining how the functions of the NR domains are coupled, this work
will provide new insights into how ligands dictate transcriptional outcomes.
Importantly, because of the highly conserved functional mechanisms that govern
NRs, these studies with FXR will be informative with respect to allosteric
mechanisms common to the NR family.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded
by the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.