* 2144180
* CAREER: An integrated study of wave-particle interaction on liquid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Pedro Saenz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2027
* USD 396,909.00

This CAREER project will investigate how millimeter-size particles move and
interact on the surface of a vibrating fluid. Understanding the interplay
between small particles and liquid surfaces is a broad area of research with
many applications, including the transport and removal of floating litter and
aerosol generation from rain drops merging with the sea surface. Most of the
studies available in the literature focus on situations involving either a
single particle impacting on a liquid surface or multiple floating particles.
However, an interesting regime, which has received much less attention, emerges
when the underlying liquid bath is vibrated vertically. In this case, small
droplets may bounce and even “walk” along the liquid interface as they interact
with surface waves caused by rebounds. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate new dynamics that characterize this intermediate regime. The
investigators will combine experiments and theory to study new bouncing and
walking modes, behaviors of groups of interacting particles, and new transport
effects emerging from the interaction between bouncing particles and submerged
features. This project will provide new multidisciplinary research experiences
and educational modules for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.
The investigators will develop a new course that interweaves rigorous
mathematical training with direct exposure to realistic research settings. This
project will also develop specific initiatives to instill strong communication
skills in the trainees, including a dedicated bootcamp for students to develop
expertise in the art of scientific visualization. The communication and
visualization efforts will be leveraged to promote diversity in STEM through a
range of outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new
experimental techniques and mathematical models to generate a fundamental
understanding of the interaction between capillary-size particles and a
vibrating liquid interface. In 2005, Yves Courder and co-workers discovered that
a millimetric liquid drop can spontaneously walk along the surface of a
vibrating fluid bath, self-propelled through a resonant interaction with the
waves created when it strikes the fluid surface. By virtue of the coupling with
their wave fields, these walking droplets, or “walkers”, exhibit surprisingly
rich dynamics, including complex bouncing modes, bound states, and dual wave-
particle behaviors. This project will extend and exploit the remarkable walker
dynamics for fundamental research relevant to practical settings involving
granular materials on liquid interfaces. The investigator will first focus on
broadening the current parameter regime of bouncing and walking dynamics to
include new combinations of fluids and solid particles of different shapes. The
second aim will be to investigate new self-assembly and collective dynamics with
large ensembles of walkers coupled by wave-mediated forces. The final aim will
be to examine the interaction between walking droplets and submerged features at
the bottom of the liquid bath, including periodic and disordered bottom
topographies. This class of problems will lead to a better understanding of the
interplay between particles and liquid interfaces, and offer design principles
for the development of new methods of self-assembly, particle sorting, and
transport of granular materials on liquid interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.