* 2144646
* CAREER: Toward Hierarchical Game Theory and Hybrid Learning Framework for Safe, Efficient Large-scale Multi-agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Hao Xu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2027
* USD 504,751.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large scale multi-agent systems
(LS-MAS), such as wide area power management systems, smart transportation,
ultra-dense network in 5G/6G, and so on, are transforming our world rapidly.
Before harvesting the benefits from those LS-MAS, it is necessary to develop a
feasible methodology that can enhance the efficiency and resiliency of LS-MAS in
real-time even under uncertainties and disturbances. Although existing game
theory, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) achievement in
multi-agent systems optimization are exciting, there is still a gap for applying
those theories and techniques to LS-MAS since a large number of agents will
cause the intractable computational complexity in both optimization and
learning, well-known as “curse-of-dimensionality”. This project aims to
investigate the new theory along with efficient and feasible AI/ML approaches
that cannot only balance the LS-MAS optimality efficiency and computational
complexity theoretically but also learn the LS-MAS optimal solution in real-time
with resilience guaranteed. The research is complemented by the integration of
research and education plan including a two-way education/research pipeline
between UNR and PVAMU (a renowned HBCU). Through the annual summer camp and
graduate student joint-research program, UNR and PVAMU can exchange students and
faculties especially from underrepresented groups to increase diversity. Through
industrial-university interaction, this project also plans to translate outcomes
to practice and boost Nevada’s (EPSCoR state) economy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance foundational knowledge of game
theory and scientific methodologies of data-enabled learning for enhancing the
resiliency and efficiency in large scale multi-agent systems (LS-MAS). Due to
ultra large number of agents, it is very challenging to balance the
computational complexity and optimal efficiency in LS-MAS. To overcome this
challenge, this project will provide several novel contributions, including i) A
novel hierarchical game theory (HGT) that can maintain the LS-MAS optimal
efficiency while simultaneously balancing computational complexity, ii) A new
type of backward stochastic differential equation based actor-critic
reinforcement learning to solve the high-dimensional HGT-based LS-MAS
optimization problem, and iii) A quality-of-performance driven reliable,
efficient, safe hybrid reinforcement learning framework that can balance
learning efficiency and computational complexity with safety guaranteed and
further pave the way to real-time learning-based LS-MAS optimization even with
uncertainties from harsh environments. This project will lead a new direction in
machine learning, optimal control, and game theory in real-time LS-MAS
optimization, and also contribute to a variety of emerging LS-MAS, e.g. smart
transportation, wide area power management systems, etc., which are of national
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.