* 2144338
* CAREER: Accelerating Spatial Network Design: An Uncertainty-Driven Predict-and-Optimize Learning Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Chao Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2027
* USD 172,174.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial networks are ubiquitous in
nature and human society, examples include traffic networks, power grids, food
supply networks, and molecular systems. The structures and configurations of
spatial networks determine important properties of the respective spatial
systems. Spatial network design, the problem of designing spatial network
structures and configurations for desired outcomes, is thus in pressing need
across many domains. This project will develop a data-driven framework that can
achieve fast and resilient spatial network design. The uniqueness of the project
is that it tightly integrates predictive models into optimization algorithms for
fast spatial network design, while accounting for the inherent system
uncertainty. The project will help address many pressing societal challenges,
such as optimizing a traffic network to mitigate congestion, distributing
vaccines over the human mobility network to contain disease spread, and
synthesizing new molecules that lead to environment-friendly
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project will develop a
"predict-and-optimize" learning framework to achieve fast and resilient spatial
network design. It will address three key challenges to this end. First, it will
develop uncertainty-aware deep predictive models for spatial networks by
modeling complex spatiotemporal dependencies while capturing the inherent
uncertainty of the system. Second, it will integrate uncertainty-aware
predictive models into optimization and generation algorithms, to effectively
search the vast design space. Third, it will address the data scarcity issue in
spatial network design by leveraging uncertainty for interactive data collection
and label-efficient learning. The developed tools will be open-sourced and
disseminated for spatial network design problems in various domains. Finally,
this project will train the next generation of students and workforce and also
promote diversity in data science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.