* 2144197
* CAREER: Lakes on a Changing Landscape: A Disturbance Phenology for Phytoplankton Communities and Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ana Morales-Williams, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2027
* USD 598,695.00

Algae in freshwater lakes are sentinels of environmental change because they
respond rapidly to disturbances. As they respond to disturbance, algae alter
their surrounding environment through fluctuations in their growth, the
processing of carbon and nutrients, and biotic interactions. This makes algae
important mediators of lake ecosystem functions such as nutrient cycles and gas
exchange. In the past, the regular seasonality of lake ecosystem processes made
it possible to predict the composition of algal communities and the traits that
influence lake ecosystem function. Lake ecosystems, however, are changing
rapidly in response to multiple interacting environmental change disturbances,
making previously predictable seasonal processes such as ice cover, evaporation,
and run-off increasingly uncertain and chaotic. This project will identify algal
traits that confer persistence across a gradient of disturbance intensity over
short and long timescales. This project seeks to understand how algal
communities form and influence ecosystem function, not as a disruption to
expected stable conditions, but as a fluctuating, dynamic process. As part of
this CAREER proposal, the research will be integrated into undergraduate
curriculum and will train undergraduates, a graduate student, and a postdoctoral
researcher using collaborative team science approaches. Through a partnership
with lake managers and professional workshops, findings will be communicated
with stakeholders and translated into management action.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award aims to describe a disturbance phenology
framework for phytoplankton community assembly that is scalable across space and
time in order to predict feedbacks and threshold shifts for lake ecosystem
function. First, the project will seek to understand the heterogeneity of algal
responses to stressors across nearshore benthic and open water pelagic vertical
zones to better predict ecosystem scale response to stochastic events. Across
lake zones, synchronous fluctuations of phytoplankton communities are expected
to amplify and destabilize ecosystem function, measured as lake metabolism,
carbon dioxide, and methane flux. Second, the project will investigate
phytoplankton traits that confer persistence across time scales, and will test
the hypothesis that traits which confer persistence in response to short term,
stochastic disturbance such as dormancy or alternative metabolic strategies will
be recruited to communities over multi-decadal time scales. Hypotheses will be
tested across scales in laboratory microcosms, outdoor mesocosms, and using
modern and paleolimnological approaches across a trophic gradient in five lakes.
Experimental mesocosms, high-frequency sensor arrays, and microscopy facilities
will be integrated into undergraduate limnology, phycology, and ecosystem
ecology curriculum aimed at training students in team science, experimental
design, and ecological theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Population and Community Ecology Cluster and Ecosystem Science
Clusters in the Division of Environmental Biology and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.