* 2144732
* CAREER: The Foundations of Ellipsoid Synthesis Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Mark Plecnik, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2026
* USD 539,986.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to create a new methodology for the
geometric design of mechanical mechanisms that have multiple inputs and outputs.
Engineers and mathematicians have previously noted that the relationship between
forces (or motion) applied at the inputs and forces (or motion) generated at the
outputs can be conceptualized by ellipses and related shapes. This project
transforms these shapes into the central objects of a new design methodology.
This is accomplished by mathematically formulating ellipses as constraints that
form the geometric design space of mechanism dimensions. Critical to the success
of this approach is to create and benchmark new computational techniques for
exploring these constrained design spaces. Because this project advances
foundational design science research, it has broad applicability wherever
mechanisms with multiple inputs and output are found. This includes many
applications in robotics (rehabilitation robots, industrial robots,
positioners), exoskeletons, passive assistive devices, actuated prosthetics, and
mechanisms used for force sensing during laparoscopic surgery. It is through
such applicability that this project promotes the health, prosperity, and
welfare of our nation. The spirit of this project is to enhance the capabilities
of our nationâ€™s mechanical design engineers by contributing a core methodology
and its related computational techniques. Planned project activities include the
origination of student design projects, new course curricula, and a STEM robot
design competition. Such efforts are bent on enhancing design education and
research experiences for students, and broadening participation of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ellipses (or hyper-ellipsoids, for
the general case) are used to visualize the directional force and velocity
characteristics of multi-degree-of-freedom manipulators. This project converts
such ellipsoids into geometric constraints that form the design space of a
mechanism. The new theory will demonstrate how a variety of design
specifications can be funneled into the geometric synthesis of Jacobian
ellipsoid mappings, including not only specifications on force and velocity, but
also on backdrivability, stiffness, sensitivity, and actuator power
requirements. However, it is unclear how to formulate ellipsoid constraints to
facilitate downstream design space searches. Leveraging classical matrix
factorizations to unearth ellipsoid mapping information from Jacobians (which
are defined in terms of unknown design parameters) inhibits the usage of
symbolic manipulation to form the synthesis equations needed to implement key
computational search techniques. Instead, randomly selected points from a sphere
can be mapped to specified ellipsoids in order to obtain algebraic equations
with design parameters in symbolic form. A range of computational search
strategies will be investigated, pulling from algebraic geometry, optimization
theory, and including graphical interfaces. Comparative metrics will be
evaluated by applying the new design methodology to case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.