* 2144413
* CAREER: Robust Fairness in Matching Markets
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Hadi Hosseini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 122,873.00

Resource allocation presents significant decision-making challenges across
multiple critical applications in society. Matching markets establish a
principled framework for distributing goods, services, and information among
interested parties---humans, institutions, nations, or autonomous agents---in a
robust and efficient manner. In many matching and resource allocation settings
such as school choice, refugee placement, food donation, and ridesharing the use
of monetary transfers is prohibited, or simply infeasible, due to ethical,
societal, or legal concerns. The broad objective of this project is developing a
theoretically grounded approach for robust fairness in practical and large-scale
allocation markets through the integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI),
economics, and computation. In particular, this research addresses fairness
issues that arise due to uncertain or incomplete information, dynamic nature of
markets, complex constraints, and strategic behavior of participating entities
that influence the outcome. This project will lead to the creation of novel fair
and efficient AI systems across practical domains such as federated healthcare
and gig economies. This project will also lay the foundation for implementing
fair systems for matching students to advisors, assigning mentors to mentees,
and conference scheduling in a principled and robust manner. It will integrate
allocation solutions through a publicly accessible software platform to foster
the adoption of sound fair solutions in everyday decision-making, and will
curate a valuable learning resource to reach the public and practitioners beyond
academia and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes a systematic
effort in designing novel fair AI systems by bridging the gap between the fields
of matching theory and fair division and enabling the creation of new
approximate algorithms. It aims at making advances in the following
interconnected directions: (i) Matching and allocation under uncertain/noisy
preferences, that aims at devising fair solutions that are robust to uncertainty
or noise in preference information, (ii) Fairness and diversity in dynamic
matching, that combines techniques from online matching and fair division to
develop solutions that provide robust fairness and diversity guarantees in
dynamic markets, and (iii) Incentives and fairness in two-sided markets, that
provides a systematic approach to blend techniques from stable matching markets
with recent advances in fair division to design robust solutions in the presence
of strategic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.