* 2144796
* CAREER: Towards Learning-Based Storage Systems with Hardware-Software Co-Design
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jian Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2027
* USD 237,923.00

Storage systems today have been built into a complicated ecosystem, which
involves the development and deployment of storage devices, storage software,
and application-level data stores. To rapidly meet the ever-increasing storage
performance and efficiency requirements, the entire storage hardware and
software stack need to adapt instantly in a coordinated fashion. However, it is
challenging to achieve this with current human-driven systems-building
approaches. Recent advancements in machine learning techniques show that the
learning-based approach is a promising method to solve system optimization
problems. However, it remains unclear how the storage ecosystem should be
advanced to embrace the learning techniques to facilitate its development,
deployment, and optimizations across the full stack. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to develop systems and architecture techniques to build a
learning-based storage ecosystem. It has four major thrusts. First, the project
proposes to enable the development of customized storage devices for specific
application types with automated tuning of hardware specifications, therefore,
we can enable developers to identify optimal device specifications with much
less time and effort. Second, the project plans to develop elastic storage
management for multi-tenant applications using reinforcement learning, thus, we
can achieve both improved resource utilization and performance isolation. Third,
the project proposes to integrate the storage hardware knowledge into the
learning procedure to facilitate the development of learning-based storage
software. Finally, the project will revisit the storage hardware architecture
for building learning-based storage drives to further enhance the learning-based
storage ecosystem. The project will facilitate the development of a new course
that centers around memory and storage technologies. The project will also
promote computer systems and architecture education to underrepresented and high
school students through various research workshops and summer
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.