* 2144075
* CAREER: Chemical Probes to Interrogate Real-Time Cellular Activity of Lysine-based Post-translational Modification Erasers
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Rongsheng Wang, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 11/30/2026
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Rongsheng (Ross) Wang from Temple University will
investigate post-translational modification (PTM) erasers using chemical probes.
PTM erasers are a class of important cellular enzymes that are pivotal to cell
signaling. Yet, the functional characterization of these PTM erasers and their
relationship to various cellular events have not been fully explored. A lack of
suitable tools to study the real-time activity of lysine-based PTM erasers
largely limits research progress in this direction. This project seeks to
address this problem by inventing an innovative chemical sensing platform that
is generally applicable to studying activities of lysine-based PTM erasers in
cells. This new experimental approach will combine interdisciplinary techniques
in chemical synthesis, biochemistry, and cell biology to answer the biologically
important questions of PTM signaling. This work is directed at achieving a
deeper understanding of the spatial and temporal distribution of PTM erasers in
human cells and the identification of related, location-specific, protein
targets; this is all critical information to decipher the processes of human
cell migration and activation. As part of this CAREER award, the proposed
project integrates research into teaching, training, and community outreach and
outlines a plan to address the clear social need for increased scientific
literacy and investment in STEM education. A student-based peer mentorship team
will be established and led by the principal investigator to (1) promote STEM
interest through middle/high school outreach, (2) create research opportunities
through the establishment of a summer research program for students from local
high schools who have diverse backgrounds, and (3) improve sponsorship
opportunities for STEM students by organizing an annual Temple chemical biology
symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PTMs of proteins modulate protein function,
thereby affecting cellular homeostasis and regulating diverse cellular signaling
processes related to cell activation, proliferation, and migration. Current
efforts have focused on the study of PTM substrates and writers; however, the
characterization of lysine-based PTM eraser enzymes, their dynamic activities in
living cells, and their relationships with specific cellular signaling are yet
to be elucidated. This project aims to invent a molecular imaging toolkit and
utilize it to track lysine PTM eraser activities in living cells with
spatiotemporal resolution. Specifically, lysine analogues that consist of varied
chemical functionalities are being developed to mimic the natural substrates of
PTM erasers and to serve as fluorogenic chemical probes. Over the proposed
project period, multiple interdisciplinary research techniques that range from
chemical synthesis and molecular cloning to biochemical assays, cell biology
experiments, and fluorescence molecular imaging will be employed. These
techniques will be used to optimize the structure and activities of probes and
to showcase their utility in interrogating the roles (dynamic subcellular
locations and organelle-associated protein substrates) of PTM erasers in
cellular events such as migration and immune responses. These research efforts
will help develop a mechanistic understanding of how various PTMs are controlled
by erasers and how the modifications affect cell
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.