* 2144325
* CAREER: Integrating Genomic, Paleoclimatic, and Morphological Approaches to Unravel the Evolutionary History of Fossil and Extant Marine Fishes Over Time
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Dahiana Arcila, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2026
* USD 508,832.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary
history of life on earth requires comprehensive documentation of both living and
fossil species. For example, our understanding of the effects of ancient events
on morphological diversity is stymied by the limited inclusion of fossils,
paleoclimatic data layers, and understanding of genome size evolution over time.
To address this knowledge gap, this project will analyze morphological evolution
using extant and fossil pufferfishes, boxfishes, ocean sunfishes, and allies
(Order Tetraodontiformes), as well as its links to changes in paleoclimate, body
size, and genome size. By investigating the complex interplay between ancient
climatic events, rates of morphological evolution, and convergence at the
phenotypic and molecular levels, this project will yield a new comparative
synthesis of the tempo and mode of diversification in this group and, more
generally, advance our understanding of vertebrate diversification. An
integrated education plan extends the impact of this research by training the
next generation of evolutionary biologists. Educational activities include
workshops at the University of Oklahoma and the University of Puerto Rico, the
creation of museum exhibitions, and research training for undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on an integrative
macroevolutionary investigation of morphological diversity using whole-genome
sequencing data coupled with state-of-the-art approaches for the study of
morphological, paleoclimatic, and paleontological data to elucidate the drivers
of phenotypic diversification in a mostly marine fish clade (tetraodontiforms).
The project will address three main questions: (i) Are ancient climatic events
associated with an increase in rates of morphological evolution? (ii) Is genome
size evolution correlated with higher rates of morphological and lineage
diversification? (iii) Is phenotypic convergence in body size correlated with
patterns of molecular convergence? Results will establish new research
directions for understanding how other marine groups have evolved and adapted to
abrupt climatic changes. They will also enhance our understanding of the
relationships between phenotypic and genotypic predictability using whole-genome
sequencing and morphological data in a macroevolutionary context, and create new
ways of exploring evolution through novel comparative analyses based on a
variety of rich layers of data. The educational plan of this proposal includes a
new ichthyology course, coding summer workshops, and a variety of museum
exhibitions and outreach activities, presenting fishes as an excellent system to
understand morphological evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.