* 2144184
* Career: Understanding Radiative Transport in Flowing and Reactive Participating Media with Integrated Models and Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Rohini Bala Chandran, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2027
* USD 459,342.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From sunrise and sunset hues in
the sky, to solar cells, to night vision cameras, energy transported as
radiation is pervasive around us. Predicting and controlling thermal radiation
interactions with matter is crucial for the success of thermal and solar reactor
technologies. However, evaluation of radiative transport in dynamic systems with
flowing and reactive particles is a fundamental challenge in the thermal
sciences community. Challenges in model development stem from the necessity to
track interactions of radiation with ensembles of particles that are continually
evolving. Flow can affect spatial distributions of particles, and chemical
reactions can influence size, shape, and particle concentration, and material
properties. Experimentally, isolating underlying dependencies of measured
outcomes due to compounded physical effects also poses complexities. The
overarching vision of this project is to establish a more holistic understanding
of this flow-radiation-reaction coupling using computational modeling with
complementary measurements. An integrated education and outreach plan has been
developed, in partnership with the University of Michigan Museum, aimed at
increasing literacy and excitement for solar energy technologies, especially
amongst women and underrepresented middle- and high-school students in Michigan.
This will be accomplished through training in scientific communication for
graduate students, community outreach with interactive demonstrations, and
curriculum development for middle schoolers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
research goal is to advance the fundamental and mechanistic understanding of
radiative transport in flowing and reactive particles with applications to high-
temperature thermal systems, and thermochemical and photocatalytic reactors for
fuels production. The approach is to perform direct numerical simulations of
radiation using probabilistic and deterministic techniques for selected
materials, flow configurations and reacting systems. These rigorous, yet
computationally intensive models will be connected to more tractable data-driven
models and experimental measurements to deduce generalized radiative- and heat-
transfer correlations. New experimental techniques are developed to measure
particle temperatures, while in motion, using high-speed thermal imaging and
fiber-optic pyrometry. Measurements will be used to establish new knowledge on
how ensembles of particles can be functionalized to achieve improved radiative
and overall energy transport. In addition to developing powerful computational
analyses and experimental diagnostic tools, a deep level of understanding will
be cultivated by mapping the influence of several key dimensionless parameters
on a systemâ€™s heat-transfer performance, energy conversion efficiencies and the
rates of fuel production. By establishing this currently missing link, the
project will help fast-track materials development and inform design and
operation for a host of energy systems to boost their overall
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.