* 2144324
* CAREER:  Particle Acceleration and Transport in the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Haihong Che, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2027
* USD 361,404.00

Observations have established that magnetic reconnection (MR) is the principal
driver of eruptive phenomena on the Sun. How MR accelerates charged particles in
solar flares is a long-standing unsolved problem in solar physics. It is
important to understand this process in order to predict how solar flares impact
space weather near the Earth. This work will investigate particle acceleration
driven by MR using a combination of theoretical modeling, numerical simulations,
and spacecraft observations. The educational component involves mentoring of
graduate students and postdocs, support for an existing summer school on space
science and collaboration in an international graduate student exchange program.
The work also supports an early career faculty member from an under-represented
group in the field. This project is jointly funded by the Solar-Terrestrial
Research, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and the Plasma Physics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is a
comprehensive study aimed at substantially improving understanding of the
nonlinear kinetic processes underlying particle acceleration in solar flares.
This project advances the state of knowledge of particle acceleration and
kinetic theory regarding (1) a novel 2nd-order Fermi-acceleration mechanism; (2)
new knowledge on electron Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities (EKHI) and kinetic
turbulence including the inverse energy cascade and the expanding and merging of
magnetic vortices; (3) innovative analytical treatment of particle transport in
the stochastic electric field that results in the correct prediction of the
electron energy spectrum in simulations given the spatial scales of turbulent
fields and guide field; (4) new knowledge on ion acceleration by the resonance
of EKHI and Alfven wave turbulence; (5) a new model for the “big number” problem
in electron acceleration in solar flares, extending the scope from the PIC
simulation scale to the size of real flares; and (6) new knowledge on particle
beam development in the solar corona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.