* 2144086
* CAREER: Magnetic topological phases in dissipative systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Benedetta Flebus, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2027
* USD 199,491.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education to advance the
fundamental understanding of topological phases in magnetic materials. Topology
is a branch of mathematics that addresses properties that cannot be altered by
distorting a system. The application of topology to condensed matter systems has
led to the discovery of many new phenomena and topological materials, for
example topological insulators. The bulk of these materials are insulators, and
so, do not conduct electricity. However, they are conducting on their surfaces
and corners. Topology requires that these "edge states" are present no matter
how disordered the material might be. While past research efforts have been
focused on topological phases in which the system’s energy is conserved, recent
years have witnessed a burst of research on systems where, owing to significant
interactions with the environment, energy may be gained or lost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to expand this newly established theoretical
framework to address the topological properties of magnetic systems. Topological
magnetic materials have been proposed as building blocks for numerous
technological applications and might serve as solid-state platforms for
observing novel dissipative topological phenomena. However, harnessing their
potential requires a better understanding of the interplay between their
topology and their ubiquitous dissipative interactions with the surrounding
crystalline environment. The PI will explore realistic potential platforms of
dissipative topological magnetic phenomena and will develop new theoretical
techniques to provide predictions that can guide current and future experimental
explorations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to mentoring and training
graduate and undergraduate students participating in this research, the PI plans
to develop a pedagogical course on the recent developments in the field of
spintronics. As co-founder of the Women in Physics Society at Boston College,
the PI will continue to create new networking opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate women. Furthermore, the PI aims to develop a workshop for junior
researchers from underdeveloped
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education to advance the
fundamental understanding of magnetic topological phases in dissipative systems.
This project is aimed to investigate magnetic topological phases within the
framework of non-Hermitian topological theories and to explore spin-independent
mechanisms for the generation of topologically nontrivial magnon bands.
Specifically, the project consists of three closely related research efforts: 1)
investigating the fundamental properties of topologically-protected non-
Hermitian magnon edge states and exploring experimentally feasible platforms to
realize and probe topological magnon transport unhindered by nonlinear spin bulk
dynamics; 2) identifying the essential ingredients for the breakdown of the
bulk-edge correspondence in magnetic systems and developing new analytical
techniques to predict experimental observables of the magnetic skin effect; 3)
exploring the emergence and the transport properties of topologically-protected
non-Hermitian magnon-polaron edge states in ionic crystals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to mentoring and training graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this research, the PI plans to develop a
pedagogical course at the graduate level on the recent developments in the field
of spintronics. As co-founder of the Women in Physics Society at Boston College,
the PI will continue to create new networking opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate women. Furthermore, the PI aims to develop a workshop for junior
researchers from underdeveloped countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.