* 2144118
* CAREER: Uncountable topological dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Dana Bartosova, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2027
* USD 152,086.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics has its origins in
physics: it studies motion in space, typically in discrete or continuous time.
Its abstractions find numerous applications throughout mathematics. For example,
objects can be understood or classified by their groups of symmetries and their
actions (such as crystals or systems of differential equations), or they can be
enclosed into a space and studied via its motions in it (such as flow of water
on Earth and in its atmosphere). This project is in the realm of abstract
topological dynamics, which extends the notion of time to any topological group
and restricts spaces to compact Hausdorff. Its applications lie mostly in
combinatorics, number theory, and measure theory. A priori, there is no bound on
the size of the groups or spaces, however the majority of results have
countability restrictions on both. The purpose of this project is to relax the
countability conditions and to lay the foundations of uncountable topological
dynamics. There are two major motives to do so: first, generalizations often
bring clarification and simplification of a theory by revealing its true core
and requires novel ideas that lead to new discoveries. Second, the uncountable
is unavoidable as soon as we accept existence of countable infinity and even
very natural dynamical systems of the discrete group of integers have complexity
beyond any notion of countability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core objects of
abstract topological dynamics are minimal dynamical systems that can be thought
of as building blocks of dynamical systems. In particular, the universal minimal
flow captures the complexity of minimal dynamics of a given group since it
quotients onto every minimal dynamical system. It is known that for infinite
locally compact, non-compact groups, the universal minimal flow is non-
metrizable. Yet, even the universal minimal flow of the discrete group of
integers is poorly understood, in contrast to an extensively developed theory of
its metrizable minimal flows. The aim of this project is to fill this gap and to
provide explicit descriptions of universal minimal flows of foundational groups
such as the integers, the integer lattice, or the general linear group. More
generally, the PI will continue recently initiated investigation of interactions
between universal minimal flows and operations on groups (such as products,
short exact sequences, or inverse limits). On the other side of the spectrum,
remarkable discoveries from the verge of the century of connections between
finite combinatorics (Ramsey theory) and topological dynamics showed that
universal minimal flows of non-locally compact (called infinite dimensional)
groups that are essentially countable can be metrizable or even trivial. The PI
proved analogous results for infinite dimensional groups with the countability
assumption removed and will build further upon these results. The ultimate goal
is to find a unifying theory for these two seemingly orthogonal dynamical
behaviors of locally compact and infinite dimensional groups in the joint
framework of ultrafilter dynamics established in discrete dynamics and extended
to topological dynamics by the PI. The project lies on the boundary of set
theory, topology, model theory, combinatorics, and algebra and offers ample
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and even talented high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.