* 2144453
* CAREER: Investigation of Sol-gel-derived Hybrid Colloids for New Silica-Germania Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Joel Destino, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2027
* USD 252,733.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Inorganic glass optical materials play a critical role in many
technologies that improve everyday life. Nevertheless, conventional glass
processing methods (i.e., melt quench fabrication) fundamentally limit many
glass systems and hinder research development of novel applications. This
research project, supported by the Ceramics and the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry programs in the Division of Materials Research, investigates nanoscale
germania and germania-silica particles (i.e., colloids) and their use as
building blocks for fabricating non-crystalline (i.e., glass) materials by
unconventional chemical methods, amenable to 3D printing. The principal
investigator explores new routes for preparing non-crystalline mixed oxide
materials by synthetically controlling colloid composition and morphology. This
provides new design rules for tailored fabrication of glass materials by the
method, with broad implications in glass science and optical material design. An
integrated educational plan offers a seamless learning community by bringing
modern materials science and discovery into the classroom and providing research
training opportunities. Undergraduate students at a primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI) and local high school student researchers from diverse
backgrounds learn essential research skills, use state-of-the-art equipment, and
gain exposure to a broader community of researchers through collaboration and
research-relevant travel. High school science teachers are recruited from Omaha
public schools to participate in a summer program. The program connects teachers
with local faculty mentors, provides hands-on materials and chemistry research
experiences, and results in classroom activities to engage high school students
in research concepts and increase awareness of STEM
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;While the melt-quench approach typifies the traditional
understanding of disordered, non-crystalline solids, it limits glass design.
Hybrid colloids are attractive precursors for preparing non-crystalline
materials with compositions and properties unachievable by conventional
processes. By synthetically tuning colloid chemistry and morphology, novel, sol-
gel-derived glasses can be made from the bottom up using cutting-edge
technologies, such as additive manufacturing. With support from the Ceramics and
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry programs in the Division of Materials
Research, the principal investigator studies the fundamental chemistry and
materials science driving colloid growth and subsequent glass network formation
in silica-germania glasses. The two aims of this research plan are to explore
the (1) chemical mechanisms that drive amorphous sol-gel germania colloid growth
and (2) the relationships between hybrid germania-silica colloid structure and
resulting glass-forming properties. The underlying central hypotheses are that
(1) by probing sol-gel hydrolysis, synthetic chemical mechanisms leading to
stable amorphous germania colloid growth can be discovered, mitigating
subsequent in-solution crystallization kinetics, and (2) that hybrid colloid
design can be used to form silica-germania glasses in new binary compositions.
Bulk/ensemble and microscale time- and temperature-dependent analyses in
solution and solid-state utilizing NMR, FTIR, and Raman spectroscopies, TGA/DSC,
and XRD enable chemical and structural determination, and electron and scanning
probe microscopies are used to elucidate complementary physical information
including colloid size and structure, as well as morphological changes from the
nano- to micro-scales. Systematic mapping of the kinetic and thermodynamic
processes that govern germania colloid growth, the formation of silica-germania
glass from hybrid colloids, silica-germania glass network structure, and its
impact on glass optical properties are potential outcomes of the research.
Additionally, this project provides high school and undergraduate researchers
with training opportunities in modern materials research, and they learn methods
and techniques related to the synthesis, fabrication, and analysis of glass and
ceramic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.