* 2144209
* CAREER: Toward A Knowledge-Guided Framework for Personalized Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jundong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2027
* USD 124,549.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning causality from data is a
vital stepping stone toward building human-level intelligent systems that can
make appropriate decisions. In seeking to make an optimal decision for each
individual (i.e., personalized decision making), we need to understand the
causal relationship between a decision and its consequent outcome. Causal
inference provides a principled way to achieve personalized decision making by
learning individual-level causal effects from observational data. Its impacts
are seen in a broad spectrum of application domains. However, existing causal
inference frameworks are mostly data-driven and face multifaceted challenges (at
the assumption-, data-, and application-level) when applied in real-world
observational studies. Despite that, a vast amount of prior human knowledge
manifests itself in different ways and could be leveraged to tackle these
challenges. Although abundant human knowledge provides great opportunities, its
complex nature coupled with observational data also imposes tremendous hurdles.
This project aims to bridge the gap between what can be accessed (i.e., a large
amount of observational data across different domains and human knowledge in
different formats) and what is desired (i.e., more effective causal inference to
advance personalized decision making).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a suite of novel causal inference models and algorithms to
analyze observational data by harnessing the power of human knowledge and
gaining deeper insights to advance personalized decision making. First, it
leverages relational knowledge that describes the relations among data instances
in observational data, investigates its role in relaxing overly optimistic
assumptions for causal inference. Second, it explores meta knowledge that
depicts distinct properties of observational data and develops principled causal
inference models and algorithms to incorporate such knowledge. Third, it aims to
improve the utility of existing data-driven causal inference frameworks by
harnessing application knowledge, which characterizes the unique needs of real-
world applications. The outcomes of this project will enable researchers and
practitioners to assimilate massive amounts of observational data, across
numerous application domains, and leverage abundant human knowledge, to benefit
scientific discovery and informed decision making. Outcomes of this project will
be integrated into the existing curricula and new courses. This project will
also provide research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students,
especially female and underrepresented minorities. Customized research and
teaching components will be designed and implemented to attract K-12 students in
STEM education and engage them in causal inference and data science research.
Last but not least, this project will improve student success and retention via
a unique educational decision making component. This approach will optimize
current education systems, for the benefit of generations of students to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.