* 2144539
* CAREER: A Synthetic Biology Platform to Map and Engineer the Diverse Epigenetic Space
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Albert Keung, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 01/31/2027
* USD 317,224.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new
technological platforms and educational innovations that will unlock our
understanding of and ability to control the expression of genes in higher order
organisms from yeast and plants to humans, with broad applications in
biotechnology. Chromatin is the layer of hundreds of proteins bound on top of
the genome. It confers regulatory handles over diverse cellular and organismal
processes including aging and cancer, and it could be leveraged in
biotechnological applications including bioremediation, environmental sensing,
and bio-based production of commodity chemicals. Chromatin also provides a
strong topic for pedagogical innovation and enrichment. This project will
develop hands-on experiments for middle and high school students that connect
molecular changes in chromatin to effects observable by eye, in this case the
binding of yeast cells to the surface of an agar plate. Furthermore, the
numerical and biochemical diversity of chromatin advocates for new pedagogical
approaches at the collegiate and PhD levels. Specifically, this project will
develop new coursework modules that train the next generation of scientists in
how to handle and analyze large data sets. American Rescue Plan funding of this
project will support the investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromatin is incredibly diverse at the molecular
level. There are more than 80 different amino acid residues on five histone
proteins known to undergo over 20 distinct post-translational modifications.
Hundreds of proteins, often containing domains referred to as writers and
readers, both regulate and interact with this complex biochemical palette.
Through the development of high content technologies paired with biochemical and
genetic approaches it has become clear that much of this diversity is
functional. However, unlike many methods that can characterize chromatin at high
throughput, functional assays remain substantially more limited in scale. In
particular, characterizing and engineering the enzymatic activities and
specificities of epigenetic writers still rely largely on low throughput
biochemical assays that require recombinant protein production and purification
that are challenging to scale even with robotic liquid handling. This proposal
seeks to build upon recent synthetic biology platforms the investigator and his
team have developed using yeast surface display and epigenome editors to unlock
access to the diversity of chromatin. With a focus on histone acetyltransferases
(HAT), they will establish proof-of-principle demonstrations that these systems
can 1) map the residue specificities of all known human HATs; 2) connect
sequence to function by accessing the very large enzyme and substrate sequence
space by directed evolution approaches; and 3) probe the impact of molecular
context on function. While the investigations focus on HATs, the investigator
and his team seek to motivate the future expansion and application of this
experimental platform to the diverse biochemistry of
chromatin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.