* 2144007
* CAREER: Vitrimer gels as a platform for homogenous and meso/nanostructured networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Ralm Ricarte, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2027
* USD 250,875.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vitrimer is a relatively new type of polymer
that is insoluble yet still flows at high temperatures. These paradoxical traits
– not found in any other type of polymer – enable vitrimers to be mechanically
robust, chemically resistant, and also recyclable. While vitrimer research has
mostly focused on dry bulk materials, vitrimer gels (where the material is
swollen with a liquid solvent) are also predicted to have unique properties.
Unlike conventional polymer gels, vitrimer gels are expected to have minimal
structural defects. Increasing the interaction strength between the vitrimer and
solvent is anticipated to induce the gel to assemble into a complex
nanostructure. Such behavior invites the development of adaptable materials that
switch properties on command, which are needed for creating safer batteries, and
more efficient separations membranes and catalyst scaffolds. To that end, this
work will determine the molecular design principles of vitrimer gels. Through
tuning the interactions between vitrimer and solvent, gels with either uniform
or complex nanostructures will be realized. Success in this research will unlock
a new generation of temperature responsive polymer materials with adaptable
nanostructures. Augmenting the research objectives, the education plan will
encourage underrepresented minority (URM) high school students to pursue STEM
PhD degrees. To achieve this goal, students from a local Tallahassee high school
will be introduced to STEM role models and research opportunities through in-
class science experiments and summer research internships in the PI’s
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vitrimer is a dynamic polymer network that has
associative cross-links (XLs), which maintain network connectivity but undergo
exchange reactions. Vitrimers express unique structural and thermodynamic traits
that will open new pathways towards temperature responsive materials with
adaptable meso- and nanostructures. Specifically, the proposed work will
investigate vitrimer gels, where the network is swollen by solvent. Theory and
simulations predict that associative XLs cause vitrimer gels to have minimal
network defects, and induce phase separation into vitrimer-rich and solvent-rich
domains. To address the knowledge gap between theory and experiment, the PI and
his students will elucidate how associative XLs affect vitrimer gel network
topology and self-assembly. The specific aims are to (I) develop synthetic
routes to prepare model vitrimer gels, (II) investigate the network structure of
homogeneous single-phase gels, and (III) examine the phase behavior and dynamics
of meso- and nanostructured gels. The proposed approach will establish vitrimer
gels as adaptable materials whose morphologies actuate in response to a
stimulus, thereby satisfying urgent technological needs in energy storage,
separations, and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main educational objective
is to create an outreach program to encourage underrepresented minority (URM)
high school students to pursue a PhD in STEM. Collaborating with a local high
school, the program will introduce URM high school students to STEM role models
and research opportunities by (I) guiding them through in-class polymer-related
experiments and (II) placing rising URM high school seniors in summer research
internships to work on vitrimer gel projects – thereby integrating the research
and educational thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.