* 2144293
* CAS-Climate: CAREER: Analytical methods for understanding and predicting agricultural flash droughts in a changing climate
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Di Tian, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 04/30/2027
* USD 251,747.00

Flash drought is an extreme hydro-climate event characterized by sudden onset,
rapid intensification, and devastating impact on communities. It rapidly
depletes soil moisture, posing significant water and heat stresses for plant
growth and agricultural productions over non-irrigated lands. Flash drought is
challenging to predict because of its fast onset and development, and complex
land-ocean-atmosphere factors that contribute to or affect their formation. This
project of interlinked activities study the causes and predictability of flash
droughts, improve their forecasts and projections, assess their impact on
climate change, and promote education and outreach. The proposed research and
educational programs will benefit society, especially agricultural communities
vulnerable to droughts, and pave the way towards better-informed drought
management, climate adaptation and improved resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will disentangle underlying drivers of agricultural flash droughts
using machine learning-based causal inference analysis, develop and evaluate
agricultural flash drought forecasts at the sub-seasonal timescale using deep
learning approaches, and assess changes in agricultural flash drought under
contemporary and future climate, based on coupled general circulation models
large ensembles. These research objectives will be integrated with an education
plan focusing on developing and implementing innovative lessons on drought
through the 4-H (“head, heart, hands, and health”) program, conducting workshops
on sub-seasonal forecasts and decision making with agricultural stakeholders
through the climate learning network, mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students, and involving graduate students in educational activities besides
research. Deliverables from this project will contribute to an improved
understanding and predictions of droughts at the regional scale and will provide
a framework for analyses of a broader class of extreme climate events, which
will be broadly applicable at different locations around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and
Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.