* 2144481
* CAREER: Dissecting the Mechanism of Replication Initiation in Vertebrates via Single Molecule Imaging
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Gheorghe Chistol, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2027
* USD 342,979.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ a
cutting-edge microscopy approach to investigate the earliest stage in DNA
replication at a molecular level. Several proteins act in concert to copy DNA
bidirectionally from sites called “replication origins”. How this process
initiates bidirectionally from thousands of origins remains one of the most
mysterious aspects of DNA biology. This research will advance basic
understanding of DNA replication mechanisms that safeguard the integrity of
genetic information. The educational goals of this project are: (1) to
collaborate with teachers from a local underserved high school to develop a
hands-on biotechnology curriculum, (2) to provide professional training
opportunities for high-school science teachers and research opportunities for
high-school students, and (3) to develop skills training courses for graduate
students. American Rescue Plan funding provides support for this researcher at a
critical stage in his career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Replication initiation
involves short-lived interactions between DNA and numerous proteins, which are
challenging to monitor and measure using current approaches. Although the
process of replication initiation has been studied in detail in yeast, key
proteins are poorly conserved between yeast and vertebrates and their exact
functions remain unclear. This project will systematically dissect replication
initiation in the Xenopus egg extract model system using novel single-molecule
imaging methodology developed by the principal investigator. This effort will be
complemented by biochemical, genomic, and proteomic approaches. The research has
the potential to advance the field by (1) providing a quantitative view of
replication initiation in higher eukaryotes, (2) identifying and characterizing
unknown regulators of replication initiation, and (3) elucidating why key
replication proteins have dramatically increased in complexity from yeast to
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.