* 2144403
* CAREER: Enabling Progressive Data Analytics for High Performance Computing: Algorithms and System Support
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Qing Liu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2027
* USD 308,773.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly extracting new knowledge
from simulation output is critical to the computational sciences at high
performance computing (HPC) facilities across the country. However, this has
become increasingly challenging due to the growing disparity between the volume
of data produced by simulations and the ability to post process the data at the
rate it is produced. This project aims to explore reduced representations of
data with the overarching goal of achieving science aware and highly adaptable
data analytics for HPC applications. The project will create new algorithms and
software systems, and benefit the current and future cyberinfrastructure in the
U.S. as well as numerous data intensive scientific applications, such as nuclear
fusion, astrophysics, combustion, earth science, and others, thus reinforcing
the competitiveness and leadership of the United States in this area. Success in
the project goals will greatly reduce the time to new knowledge from scientific
simulations across various science and engineering disciplines at HPC centers
and significantly enhance HPC research and education. The project will
contribute to society through engaging underrepresented groups and a set of
integrated research and education activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop algorithms and system support centered on the idea of leveraging
multilevel data representations to enable progressive data analytics on HPC
systems. The proposed work fundamentally differs from conventional lossy data
compression in that it can guarantee and enforce scientific constraints and
augment accuracy based upon applications needs and system state. The project has
integrated research and educational activities in algorithms, systems, and
applications, taking into account application requirements and architecture
trends in large-scale storage to advance the field of scientific data
management. More specifically, the project will make contributions in several
areas: 1) constraint-based data decomposition; 2) exploiting error-controlled
multilevel representations for performance optimization on HPC storage systems;
3) providing a cross-layer solution to mitigate performance variation in
containerized environments, with multiprocessor and multi-application
coordination achieved through a probabilistic method for selecting the number of
levels to retrieve; and 4) integration and evaluation on production science
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.