* 2144349
* CAREER: Investigation Of How Proto-Gene Expression Impacts Growth In Budding Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Anne-Ruxandra Carvunis, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2026
* USD 546,716.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how
species evolve unique characteristics at the molecular level. Genomes consist of
genes and non-genic sequences. Gene sequences encode the information necessary
to build proteins, which are the workhorses of our cells. Genes tend to be
highly conserved across species because mutations that change their sequences
can cause disease or other adverse outcomes. In contrast, non-genic sequences do
not encode proteins and are very different across species. Surprisingly, the PI
and others discovered that thousands of rapidly evolving sequences previously
thought to be non-genic instead do seem to encode small proteins. These
sequences, which are neither genes (because they are not conserved across
species) nor non-genes (because they encode proteins), have been named “proto-
genes.” This research aims to understand how proto-genes contribute to species-
specific biology using budding yeast as a model organism. The research will be
performed with undergraduate students at primarily undergraduate institutions
who will “adopt a proto-gene” and characterize it in their home institutions. A
collaborative educational initiative will develop novel teaching modules,
virtual workshops and networking tools for educators. This project will
diversify the STEM workforce by providing historically underserved
undergraduates with cutting-edge computational skills for sequence analyses,
with paid summer research opportunities in the PI’s laboratory, and with the
empowering experience of having made the very first discovery about a novel
proto-gene. The findings from the synergistic research and education activities
will improve our understanding of the genome and shed light on what makes a
species unique and how entirely novel genes arise in evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this project is that
evolutionarily novel proto-genes can mediate beneficial phenotypes by modulating
established cellular processes in a species-specific manner. The project
combines gain- and loss-of-function approaches with integrative systems-level
approaches to identify cellular processes that are modulated by proto-genes. The
data generated during the course of this project may also reveal whether and how
genomic context influences the functional potential of proto-genes as they
emerge de novo in non-genic sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.