* 2144285
* CAREER: Enabling Combinatorial Decision Making in Stochastic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Guangmo Tong, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 08/31/2027
* USD 419,636.00

Decision-making, a central human activity fundamental to individual,
organizational, and societal life, is the study of identifying and choosing
alternatives based on values and preferences. The need for AI-enhanced decision-
making pipelines will only grow, as innovative technologies and their
applications are introduced speedily on a broad scale. In addressing the
inherent uncertainties in real-world decision-making applications, this project
seeks to provide a comprehensive understanding of the utility of sampling
methods in different stages of a decision-making pipeline, from model design, to
training methods, to model explaining. This project sharply focuses on decision-
making problems that involve queries and decisions drawn from discrete spaces
with intrinsic symmetries, such as graphs and set structures, and emphasizes
scenarios where the environment covariates are governed by unknown
distributions. This investigation will enable new data-driven decision-making
methodologies that are not only mathematically principled but also applicable to
various application sectors, including social network analysis, real-time and
embedded systems, and sensor-based planetary exploration. This research will
also result in explainability techniques that are projected to offer insights
that are complementary to domain knowledge towards a better understanding of the
decisions made by AI-enabled machines. Furthermore, educational efforts will be
devoted to the curriculum design of various courses, with the emphasis on
algorithmic and learning foundations; the involved outreach activities will
continue to encourage the participation of underrepresented groups as well as
K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are
grouped into three thrusts. The initial exploration seeks to theoretically
understand the feasibility and performance of decision-making pipelines that are
enhanced by combinatorial and randomized kernels; this will be achieved through
a joint effort of function approximation analysis and generalization analysis.
Second, having combinatorial processes being involved in the decision-making
pipeline inevitably brings about challenges in model training due to their
indifferentiability and NP-hardness; this project will first explore the concept
of discrete convexity for solving the inference problem under general settings,
and then design training schemes that can resolve the min-max approximation
hardness through adaptive sampling. Finally, by developing new concepts for
measuring model equivalence in terms of the combinatorial dependence between the
environment variables, this project will develop methodologies for inferring the
principal components of the learned decision-making model, which can be used to
explain the role of environment variables in determining decision qualities. The
practical utility of the pursued framework will be supplemented by empirical
studies on real-world datasets and testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.