* 2144542
* CAREER: Integrative modeling of intercellular interactions in the tumor microenvironment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Elham Azizi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2027
* USD 392,263.00

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among women overall
and the leading cause of cancer deaths among African American and Hispanic women
in the United States. The goal of this project is to study interactions between
cells inside and around breast cancer tumors to better understand how aggressive
tumors evade the body’s immune defenses. New computational methods will be
developed to analyze the interactions between immune cells and breast cancer.
This new framework will reveal how cell organization in breast tumors impacts
immune response and will inform approaches for improving anti-tumor immunity.
The developed tools will be made publicly available to benefit the broader
scientific community for use in exploring other biological systems and cancers.
The research program will be closely coupled with an educational mission of
bridging the gap between computational sciences and biomedical engineering.
Underrepresented high school and undergraduate students will be engaged through
partnerships with the AI4ALL and Hypothekids Bioforce programs. Graduate
students will also learn about computational techniques for analyzing high-
dimensional data through a new course in machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop novel machine learning
methods in the form of deep generative frameworks for analyzing high-resolution
and high-dimensional spatial transcriptomic data to uncover heterogeneous and
interacting cell states in the context of the breast tumor microenvironment. The
scalable models will provide interpretability for interactions between diverse
cell states, in particular between tumor-associated fibroblasts and immune
cells. Semi-supervised models will be constructed for inferring the composition
of cell states from spatial transcriptomic data through incorporating prior
biological knowledge. This model will then be extended to systematically infer
cell-cell interaction networks by integrating transcriptional data with
histology imaging of the tissue in the aggressive subtype of triple-negative
breast cancer. Additionally, multivariate models will be developed to learn
gene-gene regulatory interactions and master regulators underlying spatially
dynamic immune cell populations by integrating single-cell epigenetic data. The
findings of this project will advance our understanding of immune evasion
mechanisms and will guide strategies for modulating immune response to breast
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.