* 2144687
* CAREER: Mechanics of Active Polymers and Morphing Structures: Determine the Role of Molecular Interactions and Stiffness Heterogeneity in Reversible Shape Morphing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Xueju Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 546,813.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will support research on fundamental studies of the
mechanics of innovative active polymers and morphing structures. Soft morphing
polymers that can change their shapes and therefore functionalities upon
exposure to external stimuli are important for many applications, including soft
robotics, artificial muscles, and tissue repair. Despite advancement in this
exciting and ever-growing field, the rational design, manufacturing, and
applications of innovative morphing materials and structures have been
significantly limited by the lack of fundamental mechanics understanding of
novel active polymers like liquid crystal elastomers. This research project will
establish the missing complicated correlations across the molecular, material,
and structural levels of novel active materials by using liquid crystal
elastomers as a model material system. The educational objective of this work is
to engage students at different levels and the general public to research
frontiers in morphing materials and structures. An overarching program “Morphing
Beyond Imagination” will be started, where simple and entertaining
demonstrations of morphing flowers, spiders, and octopuses will be provided to
elementary students and will be used to help develop curricula for high school
students to promote their pursuit of STEM related studies. Research experiences
to undergraduate students especially female and low-income students through a
summer intern and a McNair scholar program will be provided.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to uncover the
complicated relationships among molecular interactions, heterogeneous material
properties, and the shape morphing behavior of structures, and establish an
integrated experimental and computational framework for the rational design of
morphing materials and structures by using liquid crystal elastomers as an
example. To achieve this objective, the specific tasks of this project include:
(1) establish the correlations between molecular interactions (crosslinking
density, chain alignment, and chain length) and material properties (stiffness
and actuation strain in two-way shape changes), (2) build an integrated
experimental and computational framework to study the shape morphing of liquid
crystal elastomer structures under molecular-material interactions, and (3)
investigate shape morphing and reprogramming under complicated spatial mesogen
alignment and stiffness heterogeneities. The research outcomes of this work will
help understand and optimize the design of novel active polymers and morphing
structures with tailored chain alignment, stiffness heterogeneity, and shape
morphing properties under complicated loading conditions and external stimuli.
In addition, the project will generate broad impacts on a variety of other
disciplines, including chemistry, physics, materials science, and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.