* 2144806
* CAREER: Computational Infrastructures for Simulating Hygiene-Related Fluid Phenomena
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Bo Zhu, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2027
* USD 195,849.00

Every pathogen must survive its transmission by suspending in a specific form of
fluid. These fluid forms can be bulk liquids, thin sheets, filaments, bubbles,
foams, droplets, and aerosols, all of which exhibit mixed-dimensional geometric
features, highly nonlinear evolution, and vastly contrasting scales. Because
these fluid manifestations constitute the diverse, complex, and in many cases
invisible pathways for disease transmission in the physical world, the ability
to simulate them with high fidelity, and the accessibility of these simulations
to the public, would not only help families, schools, and small businesses solve
their different problems but would also pave the way for fundamental advances in
hygiene-related science. This research will develop the computational
infrastructure to simulate fluid phenomena such as sneezing mucus, splash
plumes, and hand-washing foam, which have been out of reach for visual and
scientific computing due to their interleaving dynamic and geometric
complexities. Project outcomes will have broad impact by making it possible to
create novel scientific animations, educational illustrations, and interactive
design tools, which jointly support an inclusive and accessible platform that
allows scientists, engineers, healthcare professionals and STEM students to
investigate these complex flow processes in highly individualized
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the state of the art
in computer graphics and scientific computing by establishing a novel set of
computational methods to tackle flow phenomena that were previously understudied
or intractable. These fluid systems consist of different substances such as
mucus, saliva, or biosurfactants, that exhibit intricate geometries such as thin
films, filaments, foam, and extremely small droplets, and that encompass multi-
physics processes such as thin sheet fragmentation, vortex-capillary
interaction, and fluid contact. The project aims to enable the accurate
simulations of complex interfacial fluid phenomena characterized by these thin,
dynamic, and non-manifold flow features on the mesoscopic length scale between
0.1 micrometer and 1 millimeter. At this intermediate length scale, fluids
exhibit complicated flow dynamics and geometric forms due to the interaction
between surface tension and other physical ingredients which are remarkably
different from their macroscopic or microscopic counterparts (for instance,
fluid can bounce, walk, glide, contact, or form non-manifold foam structures
which are difficult for conventional approaches to simulate). The work will
bridge this scientific gap by leading multifaceted efforts to develop novel
geometric data structures, non-manifold interface tracking algorithms,
structure-preserving PDE gauge formulations, multiphase coupling schemes and
parallel numerical solvers, all of which will be integrated into a unified
simulation framework to boost a broad range of hygiene-related applications
centered around these flow processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.