* 2144316
* CAREER: Lyapunov Drift Methods for Stochastic Recursions: Applications in Cloud Computing and Reinforcement Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Siva Theja Maguluri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2027
* USD 560,000.00

Part I:&lt;br/&gt;The ongoing Artificial Intelligence revolution is possible due
to progresses in two distinct areas. The first is the development of novel
algorithms in machine learning paradigms such as Reinforcement Learning, that
overcome long-standing challenges; the second is the breakthroughs in cloud
computing infrastructure based on large data centers that enables one to
collect, store and process large amounts of data very easily and at a short
notice. In spite of tremendous success stories in both these areas, fundamental
trade-offs and optimal performance is not understand and theory lags far behind
practice. In spite of seeming to be very distinct problems, both Reinforcement
Learning and Cloud computing can be studied using stochastic recursions. The
goal of this CAREER project is to take a unified theoretical viewpoint of both
these seemingly distinct areas first developing a general theory of stochastic
recursions, and then to use it to study both Reinforcement Learning and Cloud
computing. In particular, we will use the theory to develop novel learning
algorithms with provably optimal sample complexity across various paradigms such
as off-policy learning and actor-critic framework. The theory of stochastic
recursions as well as the novel learning algorithms will also be used to develop
optimal scheduling algorithms for cloud computing data centers that minimize the
tail of delay experienced by the users. &lt;br/&gt;The novel algorithms
developed during the course of this project will be implemented through
collaborations with partners in industry as well as at Georgia Tech’s internal
cloud. A Jupyter based open source RL simulation platform will be developed, and
the novel algorithms developed during the course of this project will be
included in this platform. The platform is used not only in dissemination of the
outcome of this project, but also for undergraduate research projects, course
projects for a new course on Reinforcement learning, and for STEM outreach
activities to K-12 education. In addition to dissemination of research results
through conferences and journal publications, we will develop a novel special
topics course, and bring out a monograph on the unified Lyapunov framework for
stochastic recursions. In addition, training of graduate and undergraduate
students forms a core part of the project with special emphasis on mentoring
future faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is organized into three interdependent
thrusts. &lt;br/&gt;Thrust I builds a Lyapunov theory of stochastic recursions,
where we obtain finite-time mean square error and exponential tail bounds, as
well as characterize the steady-state limiting distribution for a broad class of
stochastic recursions. This thrust forms the foundation for the next two
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;Thrust II studies the finite-time mean-square bounds, tail
probability bounds (aka PAC bounds), sample complexity, and steady-state
behavior of RL algorithms under three paradigms, viz., off-policy RL, two time-
scale policy space algorithms (such as actor-critic) and average reward RL, and
develops novel, fast, RL algorithms with near optimal sample efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;Thrust-III studies scheduling problems in data center networks, with
the goal of minimizing mean delay and delay tails. Using the Lyapunov theory
from Thrust I, we develop novel low complexity algorithms with provable
guarantees on steady-state delay in the heavy-traffic asymptotic regime. With
these as initial policies, we will deploy RL algorithms from Thrust II to learn
new scheduling policies that are optimal even in the preasymptotic regime, which
is of practical interest. All the proposed algorithms will be evaluated using
real world traffic traces through our collaborations with industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work, and the PI’s ongoing
industry collaborations have potential for significant societal impact by making
RL and cloud computing more efficient. The proposed Lyapunov theory for
Stochastic Recursions is applicable in many other disciplines. And so, the PI
will disseminate it widely through a special topics course, a monograph, and
tutorials, in addition to conference and journal publications. &lt;br/&gt;The
project integrates research with educational activities at every level. A
Jupyter based RL simulation platform and a library of notebooks that we will
build, will serve as an extensive pedagogical resource for these activities. The
PI will continue his ongoing involvement in undergraduate research through the
REU program and the VIP program at Georgia Tech. In order to fulfill a growing
demand, the PI will develop a new interdisciplinary undergraduate level RL
course and extensively use the RL simulation platform. To promote STEM
activities, the PI will take part in outreach activities to local high schools
working with an academic professional in ISyE and will mentor high school
teachers through the GIFT program. To support Ph.D. students interested in
academic career, the PI runs a future faculty mentorship program. The PI is
committed to broadening participation, and currently advises a female Hispanic
student, and has advised several URM undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.