* 2144708
* CAREER: Fast-Charging Energy Storage Devices Enabled by Modulating Internal Electric Field of Heterostructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Yue Zhou, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 09/30/2022
* USD 396,608.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fast-
charging capability, as one of the key features of energy storage devices, has
drawn extensive interest. It holds great promise to expand or accelerate their
applications in many areas, especially for fast-charging electric vehicles to
replace internal combustion engine vehicles, as well as stabilizing energy
storage from renewable energy sources that are inherently intermittent such as
wind and wave energy. However, common energy storage devices, such as batteries,
have exhibited severe degradation under fast charging conditions. This Career
project is to develop a practical method to develop fast-charging energy storage
devices by introducing an internal electric field in the electrode to improve
the electrode kinetics and the device performance. The project will host
Bootcamp to train rural middle and high school teachers in developing science
curricula, equipping them to deliver enriching classroom activities and
lectures. Moreover, the project will involve underrepresented students
performing science and engineering related projects, especially Native
Americans, women, and first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this Career
project aims to develop a novel heterostructure in the electrode to improve the
fast-charging capability of energy storage devices by more than 10 times
compared with state-of-the-art research studies. Based on the preliminary
studies, the central hypothesis is that an internal electric field, generated on
the heterointerfaces can accelerate ion transport, enhance electrode kinetics by
lowering the energy of activation, and hence improve the performance under fast-
charging conditions. It is expected to address this challenge and fundamentally
advance the correlation between the electric field of the heterostructure, and
the resulting fast-charging performance at the energy storage device level. The
major contributions to those multidisciplinary fields lie in several aspects.
First, a fundamental understanding will be generated on the effect of the local
electric field of the heterostructure on the diffusion coefficient and electrode
kinetics. A simulation model will also be created to be integrated with
experimental efforts. Second, a knowledge gap will be filled from the material
properties of the electrode to the fast-charging functionality of the devices.
Third, distinct from conventional nanostructure engineering approaches in state-
of-the-art research studies, which have a complex and high-cost fabrication
process, introducing a heterostructure in the electrode provides an effective,
safe, facile, and transformative approach that remarkably enhances the charge
transfer and holds great promise to resolve one of the biggest issues, “long
charging time,” of existing energy storage devices. The fundamental study will
also open a new door to resolving issues in other energy devices by modulating
the electronic structures in the devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.