* 2144216
* CAREER: Compact digital biosensing system enabled by localized acoustic streaming
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Peng Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Rapid, portable, and accurate diagnostic testing is of great importance to
improve the quality and accessibility of healthcare. However, the performance of
existing rapid and portable testing methods is often not sufficient for complex
diseases such as infectious diseases, cancer, and cardiovascular diseases. The
major goal of this CAREER project is to develop a new digital testing platform
that offers high detection sensitivity and quantification accuracy without
sacrificing the simplicity and the portability. The new testing platform is
enabled by the unique fluid phenomenon induced by a vibrating capillary and 3D
printed microdevices. Upon the successful completion of this project, integrated
devices that can detect low abundance nucleic acid and protein biomarkers
without the need of dedicated instrument and laboratory space will be developed.
Such devices will have great potential to deliver high quality medical testing
to a broad population including underserved communities and resource limited
regions. This project is highly multidisciplinary and will produce low cost, and
compact instrumentation. It therefore creates unique educational opportunities
for students with diverse backgrounds. The proposal will enable 1) improved
learning outcomes for students in quantitative chemical analysis lab through
implementing project- and problem-based learning concepts to the curriculum; 2)
novel microscale analytical chemistry experiments for undergraduate students,
e.g., vibrating sharp-tip powered microfluidic enzymatic assay; 3) a research
program that trains students to solve research problems using multidisciplinary
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop an integrated
solution to perform complete digital bioassays under a point-of-care (POC)
setting thereby addressing the unmet need of developing high performance POC
tests. The proposed method is enabled by controlling the vibration of sharp
tips, which can generate localized and individually addressable acoustic
streaming in microchannels for fluid control and droplet generation. To achieve
the proposed impact, three aims will be pursued: 1) Elucidate the sharp-tip
droplet generation process through numerical modeling and streaming analysis and
demonstrate a POC nucleic acids detection system; 2) Develop a simple dual flow
droplet generation system for performing digital ELISA; 3) Demonstrate an
integrated the sample processing system enabled by vibrating sharp-tip and
composable microfluidic plates. This project will lead to a flexible biosensing
platform that can be easily adapted to measure either low abundance nucleic
acids or protein biomarkers. It will also advance the fundamental understanding
of the acoustic streaming in immiscible fluids and expand the utility of
acoustic streaming for complex fluid, droplet, and particle
manipulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.