* 2144881
* CAREER: Metalinguistic Natural Language Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Nathan Schneider, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2027
* USD 549,917.00

How people use language is a topic of study in a variety of fields, including
linguistics, literature, law, and&lt;br/&gt;language education. Extensive
descriptions about many languages already exist in natural language
itself&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., grammar textbooks, writing advice, and linguistics
articles). Descriptions in (for example) English&lt;br/&gt;may include example
sentences supplemented with technical terminology and formal notation.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will develop natural language processing (NLP) algorithms
to process and mine these textual&lt;br/&gt;resources so that language analysts
can better detect and synthesize patterns of interest. First,
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;will be developed to recognize where a piece of text is
commenting on the meaning of a word, or giving&lt;br/&gt;an example of how it
could be used. Second, algorithms for enriching text with technical descriptions
will&lt;br/&gt;be improved to report better estimates of their own strengths and
weaknesses. Finally, capabilities for&lt;br/&gt;retrieving specific uses of an
ambiguous word in a large text collection will be developed to aid
analysts.&lt;br/&gt;The algorithmic contributions in this project are expected
to have direct application to technologies in&lt;br/&gt;various fields where
close analysis of language in text collections is crucial, including law and
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;On a wider scale, these capabilities have the potential
to be transformative for artificial intelligence (AI),&lt;br/&gt;allowing humans
and machines to teach each other explicitly about how language works, to deftly
access&lt;br/&gt;scholarly work about language, and to give and interpret
language advice (e.g., writing assistance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops algorithms and tasks with an eye toward technologies that would enable
humans to&lt;br/&gt;more efficiently and accurately conduct metalinguistic
inquiries about text. Key challenges to be&lt;br/&gt;addressed are: (1)
Detecting textual metalanguage: This project will formulate tasks and algorithms
to&lt;br/&gt;recognize metalinguistic descriptions (such as the use/mention
distinction, definitions, linguistic&lt;br/&gt;examples) in text, focusing on
three genres where they are abundant: law, language discussion
forums,&lt;br/&gt;and linguistics. A new benchmark dataset and shared task will
be developed to compare metalinguistic&lt;br/&gt;taggers. (2) Improving model
confidence calibration, focusing on taggers with long-tail tagsets.
Better&lt;br/&gt;probability estimates will enable analysts to make informed
decisions about how to balance automatic and&lt;br/&gt;manual processing and can
anticipate rates of different types of errors. (3) Query-by-example
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;will be developed for retrieving specific usages of an
ambiguous word or phrase from a large text&lt;br/&gt;collection. Tools
leveraging such algorithms would open the way to new kinds of corpus-
based&lt;br/&gt;investigations by linguists, lexicographers, language teachers,
and literary scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.