* 2144668
* CAREER: Wide Area Wireless Sensing: Theories and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Jie Xiong, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2027
* USD 242,612.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensors are omnipresent in our
everyday lives. They are embedded in a diverse range of systems such as
smartphones, wearables, gaming devices, medical equipment and automobiles.
Wireless sensing is an exciting new research area which utilizes existing
wireless signals instead of conventional sensors for sensing human beings and
the surrounding environment, benefiting a large spectrum of disciplines
including elderly care, humanâ€“computer interaction, environment monitoring, and
disaster response. The contact-free and sensor-free nature of wireless sensing
makes it particularly appealing in challenging scenarios such as pandemic and
disaster survivor search. This project aims to lay the theoretical foundations
for long-range wide-area wireless sensing and to use LoRa signals to realize new
applications such as disaster survivor sensing, humidity sensing and gas leakage
detection.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project will build the
theoretical foundations to uncover the underlying principles of long-range
wireless sensing and to guide the design of wireless sensing systems. This
project also aims at pushing the performance boundaries of wide-area wireless
sensing in terms of range, accuracy, and robustness to enable new applications
which were not possible previously. The project comprises several major research
thrusts: (i) Develop a general model to quantify the performance of long-range
sensing, analyze factors affecting the performance, and propose signal
processing schemes to improve sensing performance and deal with interference;
(ii) Study the effect of strong secondary reflection in LoRa sensing and
leverage the mobility of drones to further increase the sensing coverage; (iii)
Enable detection of survivors even in a coma through long-range through-wall
respiration sensing; and (iv) Achieve long-range humidity sensing and gas
leakage detection by deploying just one LoRa transceiver pair without any
additional sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.