* 2144985
* CAREER: Foundations of Scalable Nonconvex Min-Max Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Meisam Razaviyayn, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2027
* USD 214,768.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the fields of
Machine Learning and Data Science have been profoundly influenced by the
development of powerful computational tools and efficient algorithms. However,
training the latest Machine Learning models continuously necessitates that new
algorithms and techniques be developed to solve increasingly complex problems at
much larger scales. This project is concerned with particular classes of min-max
optimization problems as they arise in many important applications of modern
Data Science, e.g, training fair ML models that are not biased against
individuals with certain sensitive attributes, designing AI systems that
reliably perform against changes in the input data, and training ML models for
generating artificial music. The research agenda focuses on developing new
algorithms to solve various computational issues associated with such min-max
problems; it will provide a natural vehicle to create educational content, and
foster mentoring opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. A
central component is outreach to high school students via the USC Neighborhood
Academic Initiative (NAI) and the USC Viterbi K-12 STEM Center; these programs
serve K-12 schools and teachers in Southern California that face systemic
inequities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical aim is to develop both
theoretical foundations and scalable algorithms for (stochastic) non-convex min-
max optimization problems. The efforts will address several longstanding open
questions related to the robust operation of these non-convex models. Special
attention will be given to designing provably efficient algorithms for computing
first-order stationary solutions of certain structured non-convex (stochastic)
min-max problems for which currently no algorithm with polynomial iteration
complexity is known to exist. The envisioned algorithms exploit the structure of
the objective function and of the constraint sets, leverage recent advances in
the field of numerical differentiation, and explore tradeoffs in memory and
processing capabilities offered by computational platforms. The fundamental
minimum computational efforts required for finding stationary solutions will be
studied under different scenarios motivated by a wide range of applications such
as robust machine learning, fair statistical inference, and training generative
models, and the research outcomes are expected to have an impact on these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.