* 2144348
* CAREER: Advancing Autonomy for Soft Tissue Robotic Surgery and Interventions
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Axel Krieger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2027
* USD 607,936.00

The research supported by this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant
will make contributions to our fundamental knowledge in robotics and autonomy
related to healthcare. Autonomous robotic surgery systems have the potential to
significantly improve efficiency, safety, and consistency over current tele-
operated robotically assisted surgery. Complication rates of soft tissue surgery
such as kidney tumor resections and bowel surgery reach up to 18 and 30 percent,
respectively. There is a significant learning curve in robotic surgery, surgical
outcomes vary greatly between hospitals, and postoperative complications differ
significantly by surgeon. This project will enable the development of a new
generation of surgical robots with increasing levels of autonomy that reduce
complication rates and improve outcomes independent of surgeonâ€™s experience.
This research has the potential to democratize access to the highest level of
healthcare by providing consistent expert-level results, mitigate the rising
healthcare costs by increasing efficiency, and help in future pandemics by
protecting healthcare workers. Thus, results from this research will benefit the
US society welfare and economy. The multi-disciplinary research and education
activities in robotics and autonomy and related diverse set of intellectual
communities ranging from computer vision, sensing, artificial intelligence, to
healthcare will help to inspire a diverse set of students from groups that have
been traditionally underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and to substantially increase participation in robotics
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Present day approaches to automated manipulation
are unable to emulate highly trained humans in the performance of complex
manipulation tasks in varying, unstructured, and deformable environments. These
research and experiments on deformable tissue tracking will yield new techniques
for identifying and tracking subtle tissue targets in unstructured environments.
The research on deformation prediction will produce methodologies for
understanding tissue behavior and how to compensate for deformations. The
control-design activities of this project will address shortfalls in autonomous
robot controllers by providing new strategies maximizing autonomy, while
providing fail-safe operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly
managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.