* 2144249
* CAREER: Physical Representations of Programming Concepts
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Colleen Lewis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2027
* USD 304,082.00

The University of Illinois seeks to improve the teaching and learning of
computer science (CS) and contribute to our understanding of representation use
across disciplines. Physical (3D) and written (2D) representations are essential
tools for building students’ conceptual understanding and are supported by a
rich body of research outside of CS education. The inattention to
representations in CS education research limits opportunities for effective and
equitable CS education. This project addresses whether and how high school and
college students learn from physical versus written representations of
programming concepts. Throughout the project, the researchers will collaborate
with and provide direct support to teachers in Los Angeles and Chicago. This
project will support other efforts to broaden participation in computing by
preparing high school and college teachers to better support students’
conceptual understanding of CS. Increasing understanding and use of physical
representations of programming concepts can transform the teaching of CS and its
learnability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes six mixed-methods
studies in which students are randomly assigned to an instructional sequence
with physical representations, written representations, or only code. The
instructional sequence and physical representations will be refined through
classroom practice, and publications will provide examples of practice and
document high school teachers’ insights. These studies will contribute
theoretical and empirical evidence for the use of physical representations as a
tool to build conceptual knowledge in CS while both drawing on and contributing
to related work in other disciplines. To guide the development of new
representations in CS, this project will create principles for designing and
using representations to teach programming concepts. Building upon a previously
funded NSF project, CSTeachingTips.org, this project will develop a taxonomy of
methods for teaching specific CS topics to inspire and guide later
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.