* 2144862
* CAREER: Manipulating Polarity to Enhance Hydrothermal Liquefaction of Biomass for Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jillian Goldfarb, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2027
* USD 440,704.00

Cost-effective waste-to-energy technologies are critical components of a future
green economy powered by renewable fuels. Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL)
transforms organic wastes into liquid biofuels by processing the waste in water
at high temperature and pressure. One advantage of HTL over other biomass
conversion techniques is that it directly treats wet wastes without an energy-
intensive pre-drying step. To date, the majority of HTL research has explored
the impact of process conditions on products generated from a range of biomass
feedstocks. However, this research approach cannot overcome the primary
challenges to widespread application of HTL for biofuels, namely that (1)
product distributions cannot be accurately controlled or predicted, resulting in
the need for significant downstream upgrading of the biocrude, and (2) the
byproduct process water requires considerable treatment. These two challenges
combine to make current large-scale HTL economically infeasible. The new
approach to process design proposed in this project, however, could enable
widespread implementation of HTL for wet waste to biofuel conversion. The
production of such renewable fuels could help transform the U.S. into a green
energy exporter and job opportunity creator. To fill such high-tech positions, a
diverse workforce is needed. The Principal Investigator (PI) of this proposal
has a strong track record training students from under-represented groups; at
least one graduate student, one post-doctoral associate, and two undergraduate
students will be trained as part of this work. The PI will develop a new course
on Sustainable Engineering Design specifically aimed at encouraging and
retaining women engineers. Garnering widespread public acceptance and support
for policy initiatives promoting biofuels is critical to widespread deployment.
To do this, the PI will conduct original survey research to benchmark public
knowledge and opinion on biomass-based renewable fuels. Then, by incorporating
results from the research into a first-of-its kind survey, the PI will uncover
how scientists can best frame messages to increase public support for green
energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) is a
reactive and multiphase biomass conversion process producing supersaturated
solutions of aqueous-organic mixtures and a separate organic biocrude phase. HTL
process water (PW) contains organic molecules that are either insoluble or
beyond their solubility limits, suggesting that as the dielectric constant of
the HTL aqueous reaction media changes, it can create a supersaturated solution
where sparingly soluble organics remain even after the PW is cooled. It is
hypothesized that the selectivity and yields of HTL reactions are a function of
this supersaturation degree, which is controlled by the dielectric constant and
reaction enthalpies. To confirm and develop this concept, a new apparatus will
be constructed to measure the dielectric constant of model molecules and
mixtures at HTL-relevant conditions and solubilities of HTL intermediates and
products. Using a Design of Experiments approach, the statistically significant
relationships between dielectric constant and solubility parameter, and the
selectivity and yields of HTL reactions will be explored. The accuracy of
thermodynamic models used to predict the solubility of the organics in the
aqueous phase and partitioning between the biocrude and organics phase will be
improved by incorporating the dielectric constant and solubility measurements.
Finally, the research team will investigate how organic compounds in the PW
produced in the HTL process can be recovered through a combination of
kosmotropic salting out and liquid-liquid extraction using a variety of salts
with varying kosmotropic strength. Model HTL products will be examined
individually at their solubility limits to estimate the maximum recoveries of
each product as a first step towards estimating the separation selectivity in
mixtures of these products. This work will lead naturally to the investigation
of mixtures of model compounds to determine the degree to which these organics
can form their own phase separate from the PW, and the abilities of kosmotropes
to salt-out the organic products in a selective manner. This fundamental
thermodynamic approach to HTL and product recovery could accelerate the
transition to a renewable energy future by facilitating the design of more
efficient and selective HTL processes. In addition to the advances made in terms
of HTL, the Educational Component of this CAREER proposal will advance the way
Introductory Environmental Engineering courses are taught to retain women and
minorities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.