* 2144239
* CAREER: Spectroscopic Studies of Functionally Significant Interactions in Iron-dependent Proteins and Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Katlyn Meier, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2027
* USD 670,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Katlyn Meier from the University of Miami to investigate
protein-protein interactions in iron-containing metalloproteins and
metalloenzymes using a metal-centric spectroscopy approach. Protein-protein
interactions define how proteins bind to and interact with each other to affect
their structures and how they function. Dr. Meier’s research will study the
interactions involving two different proteins that contain iron by using methods
that follow specifically the chemical properties of this metal at the protein-
protein interaction surface. These spectroscopic methods, when coupled with
computation, will provide information on interaction interfaces among proteins
under conditions that are less artificial and more similar to those found in
cells. One of these iron containing proteins interacts with other similar
proteins to control the synthesis of important molecules, including vitamins and
hormones, or inhibit metabolism of drugs. The second iron protein being studied
assembles into a complex composed of four identical copies of itself. This
tetramer protein is a catalyst that helps produce compounds that reduce effects
of oxidants in cells. The project will provide training to graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced biochemical, biophysical, and computational
methods. Finally, the project includes an integrated outreach program aimed at
introducing middle and high school students to the basics of spectroscopy that
includes a mentorship program aimed at increasing retention of future scientists
from underserved populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) interface and the role of the metals requires
an interdisciplinary approach that employs several spectroscopic techniques. Low
temperature electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy will be used to
selectively interrogate the structural and electronic properties of the iron
sites and to provide feedback on the paramagnetic species in each sample.
Variable temperature, variable field Mössbauer spectroscopy will be used to
conclusively determine iron or heme oxidation state and to measure coupling
between iron centers. Changes in secondary and quaternary structures that occur
as the result of protein conformational changes induced by the PPI will be
monitored by far-UV circular dichroism (CD), while CD in the visible and near-
infrared regions will report on changes in charge transfer bands and d-d
centered transitions relevant to perturbations in the metal-protein complex.
Finally, fluorescence measurements will provide additional feedback about the
interaction surface via intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence quenching, among other
methods. The combination of these techniques is expected to provide for greater
understanding of global and local electronic and structural changes associated
with PPIs by spanning a wide range of energy scales that, in turn, probe
conformational changes at various distance scales. Insight gained from this work
will be used to calibrate computational models of PPIs. It is anticipated that
the proposed studies will provide spectroscopically informed insight that is
currently lacking in the field, but yet is required for “bottom-up” design of
peptidomimetics to modulate and report on PPIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.