* 2144588
* CAREER: Optimizing Cloud-Native Databases for Storage Disaggregation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Xiangyao Yu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2027
* USD 229,233.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Databases are critical software
systems that manage the ever-growing volumes of data. While conventional
databases run in user-controlled hardware, modern database systems are migrating
to the cloud due to reduced complexity and cost in hardware and software
management. Such cloud-native databases have unique architectural features
compared to conventional on-premises databases, such as high scalability,
elasticity, and availability. These new architectural features bring new
challenges and opportunities for performance optimizations. This project will
investigate new algorithms and system designs that better leverage the unique
architectures in the cloud, and improve performance, cost-effectiveness, and
reliability. The project will advance the understanding of cloud-native
databases and add significant value to society at large. The project will build
open-source prototypes of developed techniques to enable future research. The
project will also modernize database courses to include hands-on exercises on
cloud-native databases to resolve the severe shortage of talent in the field and
promote STEM education to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern cloud-native
databases adopt a unique storage-disaggregation architecture, where the
computation and storage are decoupled as two separate layers of services and
then connected through the data center network. Disaggregation enables the
storage layer to scale independently from computation, which allows for flexible
resource allocation and cost reduction, but causes the network connecting the
two layers to be a new performance bottleneck due to its high latency and low
bandwidth. This project aims to resolve the network bottleneck by pushing
certain database functions (such as filtering, aggregation, atomic compare and
swap, etc.) down into the storage layer to reduce the amount of interaction
between computation and storage, while still fully leveraging the benefits of
disaggregation. The project revisits the conventional wisdom of database design
and focuses on optimizing the building blocks that are the most susceptible to
the disaggregation bottleneck, including query execution, query optimization,
distributed transaction, and real-time data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.