* 2144298
* CAREER: Learning Algorithms with Robustness and Efficiency Guarantees
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Christos Tzamos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2027
* USD 242,375.00

From achieving super-human performance in image classification to beating human
champions in complex games, machine learning has &lt;br/&gt;seen enormous
success in recent years. To unravel the full potential of machine learning and
extend its reach, computer scientists seek to develop a comprehensive theory
that explains the power and limitations of existing methods and offers avenues
for improvement. This project aims to contribute in this direction by tackling
two pressing challenges that limit the broader applicability of machine
learning: (i) solving more complex tasks with multiple actions and decisions
over time and (ii) learning from corrupted data. The goal is to study the
performance and potential shortcomings of existing approaches through a unified
framework and develop novel algorithms that are provably robust and efficient.
In tandem with its research goals, the project incorporates the development of
undergraduate and graduate courses at UW Madison, the training of graduate
students, and research opportunities for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
more detail, the project focuses on the themes of learning under noisy data and
learning combinatorial algorithms from data.&lt;br/&gt;In the first theme, the
investigator will build upon recent advances in dealing with noisy labels
extending the results to more complex settings like multi-class classification,
and will design more efficient methods that perform well in many practical
situations. In the second theme, the investigator will study the use of Machine
Learning to automatically develop efficient algorithms tailored to a specific
application by bridging the areas of data-driven algorithm design and
reinforcement learning. The focus in both themes will be on the statistical and
computational complexity of the proposed methods. The project has the potential
to offer a new paradigm of algorithm design through learning and to robustify
machine learning systems enabling new application domains that involve large
amounts of noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.