* 2144910
* CAREER: Taming Entanglement in Open Quantum Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Guido Pagano, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 12/31/2026
* USD 335,108.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entanglement is the fundamental
feature of quantum mechanics that allows quantum processors to tackle specific
tasks faster than their classical counterparts. The main challenge in creating
and protecting entanglement is posed by decoherence: a quantum system “measured”
by the environment loses its quantum correlations and is projected into
classical states. Errors caused by environmental noise can be modeled as non-
unitary operations acting on the qubits (basic units of quantum information) and
can be overcome with quantum error correction. Therefore, understanding how
entanglement propagates in quantum systems in the presence of local
measurements, and which tools can be employed to govern its dynamics, are not
only fundamental questions, but represent crucial steps towards building
reliable and scalable quantum processors. This CAREER award supports basic
research into the non-equilibrium dynamics of interacting quantum systems
leading to the development of new tools for quantum information processing that
will be stepping stones towards fault-tolerant quantum processors. A particular
focus of this project will be the establishment of summer internship and
research programs aimed at helping undergraduate students gain hands-on early
research experience and at increasing the representation of women and
underrepresented minorities in the quantum smart
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, quantum simulation has emerged as a
new tool that can provide insight into natural phenomena in regimes where
numerical treatments fail. To date, quantum simulation experiments have focused
predominantly on the dynamics of isolated systems described by unitary
evolution. Conversely, this project aims to investigate non-equilibrium dynamics
of interacting quantum systems subjected to well-controlled non-unitary
operations, by employing the trapped-ion system’s unique features, such as
pristine, individually controlled qubits. In particular, this will entail (i)
the study of a symmetry-breaking dissipative phase transitions in Hamiltonian
systems stemming from the competition between non-unitary (dissipative)
operations and unitary evolution. (ii) The investigation of a volume law-area
law entanglement phase transition, where entanglement growth changes
dramatically as a function of the strength of the coupling with the environment
(iii) The use of multiple qubits encodings to store and retrieve quantum
information to enable a fault-tolerant trapped-ion quantum architecture. This
project will lead to the development of unitary and non-unitary local operations
as a powerful new tool to harness entanglement for quantum information
processing. The tools developed in this project to achieve low cross-talk
measurements of ancilla qubits will be stepping stones towards quantum error
correction and, ultimately, fault-tolerant quantum
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.