* 2144303
* CAREER: Concurrent Security Against Quantum Adversaries
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Omkant Pandey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2027
* USD 145,871.00

The prospects of quantum computers have had a significant impact on recent
developments in cryptography. Quantum computers provide new types of
capabilities that enable exciting new cryptosystems. At the same time, they give
rise to a range of new and significantly more powerful attacks. A major current
focus in cryptography is on the development of foundational techniques for
constructing and analyzing cryptosystems in the presence of quantum attackers.
This project develops secure computation protocols that maintain their security
against quantum attackers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
achieving security in the concurrent setting where coordinated attacks from
several adversarially controlled sessions can be launched. As part of this main
goal, the project investigates a number of foundational tools and techniques
that are necessary for concurrent security but currently unknown to exist
against quantum attackers. Some core examples include non-malleable protocols
for commitments and zero-knowledge to protect against man-in-the-middle attacks,
concurrent zero-knowledge, super-polynomial simulation under polynomial
hardness, and universally composable security. The project helps answer many of
the open questions in post-quantum secure-computation, which could lead to the
development of post-quantum secure building blocks and secure computation
protocols of general interest. The project is actively engaged in training and
outreach activities that contribute to building a skilled and diverse national
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.