* 2144138
* CAREER: Developing a compact wireless multi-modal detector array for remote sensing and imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Chunqi Qian, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless and batteryless sensors are particularly useful for long-term
monitoring of physiological parameters inside confined body cavities.
Traditionally, a batteryless sensor is implemented as a passive resonator whose
resonance frequency is responsive to physiological variation. When the embedded
sensor is sufficiently close to the body surface, its resonance frequency can be
directly estimated from radio frequency signals backscattered from the sensor.
However, when the penetration depth is much larger than the passive sensor’s own
dimension, backscattered signals can be too small to detect. In addition, a
passive sensor has limited temporal resolution because repetitive averaging of
backscattered signals is required to achieve a reasonable measurement accuracy.
To overcome these limitations, this CAREER project will develop a generally
applicable circuit that can significantly improve the remote detectability and
temporal resolution of batteryless sensors. Using a very compact circuit design,
this Self-oscillation Encoding Telemeter (SET) can utilize wireless power to
self-oscillate and encode input signals over a wide frequency range. When the
SET is utilized to simultaneously encode neuronal voltages and magnetic
resonance images (MRI), it can provide correlated information between
electrophysiology and imaging, revealing novel insights into the neuronal origin
of MRI signal dynamics. Besides its immediate impact on neuroscience research,
the SET can improve the sensing capability for many other types of input signals
including pH, pressure, humidity, temperature, and strain. Owing to its novel
concept, concise design, and broad impacts, the SET sensor will be used as an
excellent vehicle to inspire scientific interest of K-12 students, and to
educate STEM students (including those from underrepresented groups). It will
also serve the national interest with potential transformation of this wireless
sensing technology into many advanced sensor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
significantly improve the remote detectability of batteryless sensors, Self-
oscillation Encoding Telemeters (SETs) will be developed to encode various types
of input signals over a wide frequency range. This project features three novel
methods to retrieve multiplexed input signals. (1) When input signals with
distinct frequency characteristics are encoded by the same SET sensor, they can
be resolved by their different separations from the carrier wave. (2) When
multiple SETs are concatenated into an array, each sensor will be wirelessly
activated to have a unique oscillation frequency, so that input signals encoded
by individual SETs can be identified by their sideband patterns. (3) When input
signals of similar frequency characteristics are encoded by the same SET, they
can be consecutively encoded by cyclically switching the pumping frequency at a
faster speed, enabling selective activation of each encoding mode. These three
novel methods will be implemented towards four research goals. Based on the
sideband separation technique described in method #1, aim 1 will decode
electrophysiology (slow) and MRI (fast) signals that are simultaneously encoded
and broadcasted by the SET sensor. Based on the frequency-division multiplexing
concept described in method #2, aim 2 will develop a planar SETs array and
signal processing algorithms to retrieve encoded images from individual sensors,
enabling high-resolution mapping of micro vessel distribution along the brain
surface. Meanwhile, aim 3 will develop an insertion catheter aligned with a
linear SETs array, revealing the underlying correlation between MRI and neuronal
signals across multiple brain layers. Utilizing the time-division multiplexing
concept described in method #3, aim 4 will consecutively encode multiple
quasistatic sensing signals while continuously encoding high-frequency imaging
signals at the same time. Collectively, advances from these endeavors will make
the batteryless sensors useful for a range of applications from biomedicine to
structural monitoring and environmental sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.