* 2144568
* CAREER: Scalable Integrated Nanophotonics with Subwavelength Gratings
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Sangsik Kim, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic integrated circuits
(PICs), the counterpart of traditional electronic integrated circuits that use
photons instead of electrons for computing or signal processing, have innovated
a wide range of optical applications, including quantum processing, biochemical
sensing, and light detection and ranging (LiDAR). As electronic integrated
circuits have been advanced by increasing the chip integration density, dense-
PIC is extremely important. It adds more building blocks for more
functionalities, improves modular power efficiency, and decreases unit costs.
However, unlike electronics, increasing the photonic chip density is extremely
difficult due to the wave nature of light. When two photonic components are
close together, large optical crosstalk emerges, introducing noise in the
system. This project will explore various subwavelength grating (SWG)
metamaterials to push the boundaries of photonic integration density. SWGs have
engineering capabilities for index contrast and anisotropic nature, and various
next-generation SWG schemes will be investigated for reducing optical crosstalk.
Diverse SWG photonic components, including in-plane metalens, will also be
developed, and they will be integrated together to hybridize photonic and
microfluidic systems. This project will also develop a rich hands-on laboratory
course on Integrated Nanophotonics, allowing the students to develop their own
photonic chips. Students will explore their ideas of using SWGs for advancing
photonic components, integrating research and educational goals of this project.
The outcomes of this project will be disseminated to local K-12 students and
parents, stimulating the local community’s interest in photonics and
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to push the limits
of scaling issues in integrated nanophotonics, i.e., chip integration density
and extreme modal conversion, by exploring the fundamentals of subwavelength
gratings (SWGs) and innovating PIC components and chip architecture. The SWGs
form effectively anisotropic metamaterials, and their anisotropic properties
will be engineered via next-generation SWGs with different directions, angles,
and filling fractions. Fundamentals of these SWGs will help increase the overall
chip density and advance various PIC components. Different types of in-plane SWG
metalenses will also be developed, manipulating the amplitude and phase of the
generated beams and achieving diverse beam conversions at sub-mm scale. Such an
in-plane metalens system will be co-integrated with a microfluidic chip,
realizing a highly stable and efficient on-chip optofluidic system targeting
species at hundreds of micron-scale. The proposed research will be integrated
with educational and outreach activities via the newly developed hands-on
experimental course on Integrated Nanophotonics, helping students in West Texas
and increasing the community’s interest in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.