* 2144662
* CAREER: Enabling Light-Driven Thermodynamic Cycles
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Andrej Lenert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 03/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an
alternative to conventional mechanical systems, the process of light (photon)
emission and absorption can be used for refrigeration and conversion of heat
into electricity. This is a solid-state approach that can offer significant
advantages in applications where size, cost, speed, and reliability are
important, such as renewable energy, solid-state refrigeration, and distributed
power generation. Though promising, the approach requires exceptional control
over light emission and absorption processes to achieve high performance. The
goal of this project is to address this technological gap by developing an
innovative device, consisting of Inter-Digitated Emitters and Absorbers of Light
(IDEAL), that virtually eliminates photon loss and thus bridges the gap relative
to theoretical limits. Such devices can leapfrog the limitations of current
mechanical processes and enable a societal transition to a clean and sustainable
energy system. This project will also introduce the principles of optical
thermodynamics to under-resourced schools in metro Detroit and offer workshops
that demystify graduate school, thus expanding STEM opportunities to under-
represented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
advances in manufacturing enabling high-quality photovoltaic materials, the key
barrier to high performance in thermo-photonic devices has become the ability to
selectively absorb above-bandgap photons, suppress parasitic absorption of
luminescent photons, and maintain efficiency at elevated power densities. These
shortcomings have resulted in significant efficiency losses relative to
thermodynamic limits. This project will address this gap by developing an
innovative device concept, named IDEAL, that features interdigitated
photovoltaic absorbers and thermal/luminescent emitters. The novelty of the
IDEAL approach is that it (1) creates lines of symmetry that act as perfect
broadband reflectors and (2) enhances the power density while preserving
efficiency. The project will implement the concept in two model material systems
to test its generality and map out the coupling between thermal and
optoelectronic properties to provide design rules for high performance. The
expected result is almost an order of magnitude reduction in photon loss
probabilities compared to current performance in photovoltaics and light-
emitting diodes, which will yield large gains in the thermodynamic efficiency of
thermophotovoltaic power generation and electroluminescent refrigeration. The
IDEAL geometry has the added benefit of potentially enabling power densities
that are only accessible to near-field approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.