* 2144792
* CAREER: Explore and Regulate Thermodynamics of f-block High Entropy Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Xiaofeng Guo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2027
* USD 235,829.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramics are high melting temperature materials
used in many applications from pottery to energy technology. A new class of
ceramics are high entropy ceramics (HECs), which are multicomponent materials
containing more than five principal elements. When those elements are heavy
atoms, HECs can show unique physical properties and high thermal stability,
making them promising materials as a protective coating for a range of
technologies such as sustainable energy and national security. This Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project pursues fundamental research
to provide the needed knowledge for the technical development of HECs. An
outstanding scientific problem in HECs is how do the randomness of elements in
the structure (related to entropy) and their bonding (related to energy) control
the mixing of these different elements and thereby affect their high-temperature
performance? To address this challenge, this research focuses on determining
thermodynamic descriptions of HECs to understand and predict their behavior in
real-world applications. Specialized instrumentations are used to measure the
stability and strength of chemical bonds as well as probe the arrangement of
atoms in these solids. The predictive models generated from this project should
accelerate materials discovery of new HECs. This CAREER project also aims to
educate and inspire younger people in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields, from high school to undergraduate and graduate
students. The education activities include engaging students in advanced
experimental and modeling methods that prepares them for future professions in
STEM fields. Outreach activities include summer schools for high school students
to increase their scientific interests in ceramic and thermodynamic sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The f-block HECs
are gaining increased attention for their enhanced stabilities, tunable
functions, and unique chemical and physical properties. However, the lack of
structural and thermodynamic models that describe the mixing of multiple
elements significantly impedes the development and design of HECs. Principal
elements are often assumed to follow a random distribution (ideal mixing). Due
to the differences in size, charge, and covalency, non-ideal mixing can enhance
enthalpic interactions but attenuate entropic contributions. Misinterpretation
of thermodynamics of mixing can lead to an inaccurate prediction of material
formation, order-disorder transition, and phase stability. This CAREER project
focuses on developing a structural and thermodynamic understanding of the mixing
effects of various 4f and 5f elements in HECs and their impacts on thermodynamic
stability under high temperatures. This research project addresses three
knowledge gaps to achieve accurate thermodynamic descriptions of HECs: i) the
limited understanding of non-ideal enthalpic interaction, ii) the inaccurate
estimation of configurational entropy, and iii) their unknown temperature-
dependencies under high temperatures. To close these gaps, this research begins
with f-block HECs and pursues two synergistic objectives: i) to measure the
enthalpic effects of mixing and determine the origins and controlling factors of
any non-ideal thermodynamic effects, and ii) to determine and correlate entropic
terms with enthalpy for a complete thermodynamic description of f-block HECs.
These results will reveal the thermodynamic drivers for phase formation and
transformation at elevated temperatures. The outreach activities feature a
summer research opportunity for high school students to deepen their scientific
interests in ceramic and thermodynamic sciences. The educational component
includes advanced X-ray spectroscopy to undergraduate and graduate students
using a lab-based light source instead of a synchrotron and the integration of
advanced ceramic thermodynamics modeling into the graduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.