* 2144790
* CAREER: Harnessing continuous growth mechanism to synthesize water-soluble magnetic nanoparticles for magnetic particle imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Yongfeng Zhao, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2027
* USD 254,286.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supported by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research aims to understand
the continuous growth mechanism of water-soluble magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs)
and harness the growth mechanism to synthesize MNPs for magnetic particles
imaging (MPI) application. The project serves the national interest by promoting
the progress of science and advancing public health. The MPI is a promising and
novel imaging modality because it can generate positive contrast signals
directly from MNPs without using harmful ionizing radiation. The MPI has
unlimited tissue penetration depth, low background signals, and high
sensitivity. Nevertheless, the MPI is currently not available for clinical
applications. One major obstacle is a lack of MPI-specific MNPs as tracers.
High-performance MNPs are critical to materialize the potential of MPI in
clinical translation. This project is inspired by Professor Yongfeng Zhao’s
pilot study demonstrating that water-soluble MNPs can be synthesized in a
continuous growth manner. The resulting MNPs show high MPI performance. However,
the mechanism of the continuous growth is still unknown, and the correlation
between water-soluble MNPs and MPI performance is not established. Addressing
these questions will accelerate the design, synthesis, and manufacturing of
high-performance MNPs for MPI. The knowledge obtained from this project will
stimulate the controlled synthesis of water-soluble MNPs and clear the roadblock
for the application of MPI in healthcare. This project will integrate the
proposed research activities with education plans to train underrepresented
students for advanced degrees. The outreach plan is to disseminate the research
findings to the general public during the annual Science Maker event in the
Mississippi Museum of National Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to obtain a holistic
molecule-level understanding of the continuous growth mechanism of water-soluble
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) in polyols, aimed to enhance magnetic particles
imaging (MPI) performance of MNPs. The research project is meaningful because
MPI is an emerging tracer imaging modality that can overcome many limitations of
existing imaging techniques. The properties of MNPs dictate their sensitivity
and resolution, which are essential for the further application of MPI. To
achieve this overarching goal, this project is designed to 1) explore the
continuous growth mechanism for controlled synthesis of water-soluble MNPs; 2)
unravel a living growth profile of MNPs in polyols; 3) manipulate the reaction
parameters for the synthesis of water-soluble MNPs; 4) expand the mechanism to
synthesize water-soluble MNPs with dopants; and 5) study the MPI properties of
MNPs synthesized in polyols. This project will accelerate the selection,
synthesis, and manufacturing of high-performance MNPs for MPI. The education
plan is to integrate this research project with an education initiative that is
designed to systematically train minority undergraduate students in the STEM
area at Jackson State University (JSU) to obtain advanced degrees. The project
will be integrated with a course offered at JSU through the Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL). JSU students will interact with research scientists from BNL
and learn state-of-the-art technologies on materials characterization. This
research will be presented as part of the “You Be The Chemist” competition and
help foster and enhance the passion for STEM among middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biomaterials program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.