* 2144367
* CAREER: Towards Scalable and Robust Inference of Phylogenetic Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Claudia Solis-Lemus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 01/31/2027
* USD 685,473.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists world-wide are engaged
in efforts to understand how all planetary biodiversity evolved. This
diversification process is represented through the Tree of Life. Achieving the
goal of a complete estimate of the Tree of Life would allow us to fully
understand the development and evolution of important biological traits in
nature, for example, those related to resilience to extinction when exposed to
environmental threats such as climate change. It would also provide information
about the emergence and evolution of novel human pathogens that pose severe
threats to human health. Thus, the development of statistical and computational
tools to reconstruct the Tree of Life are paramount in evolutionary biology,
systematics, conservation efforts, and human health research. Existing tree
reconstruction methods, however, are limited because they do not account for
important biological processes such as species hybridization, introgression or
horizontal gene transfer, and thus, recent years have seen an explosion of
methods to reconstruct phylogenetic networks rather than trees. Existing network
reconstruction methods lack statistical guarantees ensuring the detection of
reticulate signals in data, are not scalable enough for big data, and are
tailored to reconstruct simple networks. Thus, they are not sufficient to tackle
the complexity of reticulate evolution in fungi, prokaryotes, or viruses. This
project will develop novel network inference methods with strong statistical
guarantees that are robust enough to infer complex networks and scalable enough
to accommodate big data. The methods will allow the integration of all organisms
into the Tree of Life and thus help to complete a broader picture of evolution
across all domains of life. The project will produce open source software and
data science modules for K-16 outreach, and includes a strong focus on training
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the fundamental research of the Network of Life by producing four
entirely novel scientific outcomes with broad scientific outreach: 1) the first
phylogenomics inference method tailored to metagenomic data that adequately
propagates statistical error on every step of the pipeline starting on raw reads
to estimate the evolutionary history of complex fungal, prokaryotic or viral
communities, 2) the first statistical theory on identifiability of complex
phylogenetic networks, 3) the first divide-and-conquer algorithms to produce the
most scalable to date inference procedures to meet the ever growing needs of
biological big data, and 4) open-source easy-to-use publicly available software
with broad applicability within the evolutionary biology, systematics,
conservation and human health communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.