* 2144310
* CAREER: Transforming Biosensor Reliability using Sensor Time-series Data and Physics-based Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Blake Johnson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2026
* USD 457,560.00

Access to reliable biosensors could transform public health by aiding ongoing
and future pandemic management. However, biosensor reliability (e.g. false
positive (type 1) and false negative(type 2) diagnoses) remains a barrier to
widespread industrial and clinical use. Preliminary work performed in the
Investigator’s lab suggests that using biosensor time series (TS) data and
physics-based supervised Machine Learning (ML), a form of artificial
intelligence that makes predictions from data, can reduce the probability of
these errors. Thus, the research goal of this CAREER project is to examine the
integration of machine learning and chemical engineering domain knowledge for
improving biosensor reliability and performance. The proposed methodology will
be applied across various sensor types, sizes, form factors, and data
structures. If successful, access to reliable biosensors could catalyze
biomanufacturing innovations and improve the speed and accuracy of current and
emerging diagnostic methods. The education goal of this project is to create an
interactive Open Course Ware (OCW) platform to increase education and workforce
development opportunities at the interface of healthcare and data sciences for
urban-underserved students. Planned activities include Gaming-driven Simulations
in Biosensing for High School Students, a Virtual Lecture and Workshop on Data
Archiving for Sensor Machine Learning for Undergraduate Students and Virtual
Lectures on Emerging Applications of Machine Learning in the Bioanalytical,
Life, and Materials Sciences for High School and Undergraduate Students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s overarching career goal is to help
transform biosensor performance through concepts in data-driven chemical
engineering and expand the leadership of underrepresented groups in emerging
data-driven life sciences industries. In keeping with this goal, the objective
of this project is to transform the reliability of biosensors through the
integration of physiochemical process modeling and supervised ML. The central
approach is to integrate supervised machine learning and mass transfer-limited
surface binding reaction theory for improving the reliability of bioanalyte
quantification via biosensor time-series data. This project will test the
hypothesis that integrating experimental parameters and mass transfer-limited
surface binding reaction theory with supervised machine learning models for
target analyte classification can reduce the extent of type 1 and 2 errors
relative to state-of-the-art calibration methods. The proposed methodology will
be applied to reliable biosensor-based detection of RNA, microRNA, and protein
targets and benchmarked against standard clinical bioanalytical methods. This
work will identify new data- and model-driven features of target binding,
nonspecific binding, and biosensor drift in biosensor time-series data that can
support the reliable classification of bioanalyte concentration using machine
learning. If successful, identifying features of target binding and interfering
inputs in biosensor time-series data could significantly improve the reliability
and reproducibility of biosensors and biosensor-based
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.