* 2144845
* CAREER: Extrusion-based Additive Manufacturing of Sustainable Thermoplastics via Enzyme Encapsulation and Microfluidic Structuring of Hierarchical Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Cecily Ryan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2027
* USD 697,158.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) of thermoplastics serves a large and growing market
to produce parts for industries such as consumer electronics, automotive,
aerospace and medical, etc. As the demand continues to increase, there is a need
to advance the science of AM to create processing and materials that not only
achieve a balance of performance, efficiency and cost, but especially also
address impacts on the environment. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports fundamental research into novel AM processes combining
sustainable plastic composite blends with thermally-protected biological
components and electrically conductive fillers. The approach will leverage
innovations in microfluidic print technologies, which enable precise
thermoplastic processing of materials to combine a variety of unique material
properties. Once completed, the project will inform materials selection for a
variety of performance-driven applications, accelerating widespread adoption and
commercial viability of such materials as degradable-by-design plastics and
environmental sensors. At its central effort, this project will establish
education and outreach activities for a variety of student groups, including
those historically underrepresented in these areas of research. In particular,
this project will develop interactive hands-on three-dimensional printing
experiences for rural high school and tribal college students and integrate
additive manufacturing research of sustainable, hierarchical polymers into
curricula at Montana State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this interdisciplinary research, integrating manufacturing, materials science
and chemistry, is to enable novel multi-material thermoplastic composite
structures that incorporate functional biologics, such as enzymes, and
electrically conductive fillers. There are two research thrusts in this CAREER
endeavor. The first is to understand the conditions needed to create additive
manufacturing filaments that can successfully encapsulate heat-sensitive
biologically derived enzymatic constituents, such that their biological activity
is substantially retained upon thermoplastic processing into final composites.
The amount of thermal shielding will be quantified by analyzing the
environmental degradability of complete composite samples manufactured via
microfluidic controls of material extrusions through custom-design print-heads
for fused filament fabrications. The second thrust is to explore the processing
and properties of electrically-conductive components using the developed methods
to hierarchically structure multi-material systems. An innovative microfluidic
technique, based on combining materials with precise local structural and
thermal control through engineered AM print-heads, will be utilized to better
understand the required process conditions. Further, topology optimization and
microfluidic modeling will be used in conjunction with experiments to determine
processing parameter space. The culmination of these two research efforts will
be a successful demonstration of an additively manufactured bio-based passive
sensor that biodegrades in response to humidity. This project is jointly funded
by the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.