* 2144018
* CAREER: CAS: Red-light mediated photoredox catalysis by helical carbenium ions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Thomas Gianetti, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 01/31/2027
* USD 558,660.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry, Thomas Gianetti of the
University of Arizona is studying a novel class of organic photocatalysts. A
photocatalyst is a molecule that converts light into chemical energy and
facilitates chemical reactions. This project aims to develop stable organic ions
that can utilize low-energy red light to promote chemical transformations.
Coupling metal-free and non-toxic organic photocatalysts with abundant and safe
red light sources holds promise to provide for safer, greener, and more
sustainable synthetic methodologies for the synthesis of fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals. The outreach activity for this CAREER project aims to develop
and expand a new interdisciplinary course at the frontier between science,
policy and the law. The course will engage both STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) and non-STEM undergraduate students by examining
the challenges relevant to the incorporation of science in public policy and
everyday modern life. This curriculum will be taught and developed as a
partnership between the College of Science and the School of Law at the
University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry, Thomas Gianetti of the
University of Arizona is studying the use of helical and stable carbocations as
a novel photo-redox platform to promote chemical transformations. These fused
heterocyclic helicenium ions have fascinating properties such as possessing
inherent helical chirality and strongly absorbing red light. The chemistry here
proceeds through photo-active reduced (neutral radical) or oxidized (radical
dication) analogues. Dr. Giannetti and his research team will endeavor to
explore and develop concepts such as driving large-scale red light-mediated
transformations, established conditions for enantioselective photocatalysis, and
exploring multi-photon excitation to access highly photo-reducing or photo-
oxidizing species. These activities will provide training in synthetic
chemistry, photophysics, and photocatalysis for a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.