* 2144153
* CAREER: Development of Novel Domain-Tailored Machine Learning Tools for Organic Reaction Development and Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Connor Coley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2027
* USD 650,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Connor W. Coley of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology will establish new algorithms, computational approaches, and
educational tools for the data-driven modeling of synthetic organic reactions to
advance their development and discovery. Organic synthesis enables the creation
of functional molecules that have impact in wide range of fields, including
medicinal chemistry, chemical probe technology, polymer science, agrochemical
science, catalyst development, and organic electronics. Dr. Coley and their team
will build novel computer-aided synthetic chemistry tools to make the synthesis
of new molecules more predictable and robust, augmenting and enhancing the
intuition of expert practitioners of synthetic chemistry. This goal will be
pursued through the close integration of experimental data, theoretical
chemistry knowledge, and machine learning modelling. The new capabilities
generated through this research will tangibly benefit the cost and speed with
which new chemical entities can be synthesized, with applications to human
health (e.g., medicines) and sustainability (e.g., catalysts, organic
electronics). Educational offerings in the form of open-source code, online
courses and trainings, and conference symposia are expected to contribute to the
training of trans-disciplinary researchers at the interface of data science and
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning models for chemistry have
started to gain traction for isolated tasks such as computer-aided synthesis
planning and reaction condition optimization, but remain limited in terms of the
scope of challenges they help address. State-of-the-art statistical models are
notoriously data-hungry, do not generalize well, do not build on well-
established chemistry theory, and arguably have not yet made genuine discoveries
or produced novel insights into new synthetic methods. Dr. Coley will endeavor
to address these limitations through four complementary aims associated with the
following underlying hypotheses: (1) that reaction condition optimization
algorithms can be made more efficient by using literature-trained
representations as priors; (2) that models for reaction prediction grounded in
physical organic chemistry principles will exhibit greater generalization power
than domain-agnostic models; (3) that significant discoveries in organic
synthesis can be characterized through novelty detection algorithms and used to
bias de novo generation; and (4) that knowledge gaps such as uncertainty about
substrate compatibility can be systematically resolved via query-driven active
learning and Bayesian optimal experimental design. Each aim will involve a
significant technology development effort to improve how machine learning
techniques learn and generalize, highlight opportunities for further algorithmic
research, and ultimately accelerate the discovery and development of new
synthetic organic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.