* 2144011
* CAREER: Polyploid phylogenetics and ploidy-aware taxonomy of Cystopteridaceae: Research and education from the field to museum collections
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Carl Rothfels, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 07/31/2027
* USD 240,686.00

Polyploid species—species with more than the two complete sets of
chromosomes—are common across the tree of life, especially in plants. These
polyploids are often also hybrids, with their different chromosome sets coming
from different parent species. Such “allopolyploids” are a tremendously
important component of global biodiversity, but study of their long-term
evolution (the field of phylogenetics) has been limited because allopolyploids
have a web-like rather than tree-like evolutionary history and thus standard
tools for phylogenetic analysis do not apply. This research will develop
phylogenetic tools for the study of allopolyploids and demonstrate the
effectiveness of these tools for understanding complex patterns of biodiversity
and the processes that generated them in the widespread fern family,
Cystopteridaceae. In conjunction with this research, the project will leverage
the power of field- and collections-based experiences to provide transformative
educational opportunities for an annual cohort of Indigenous students
transferring to Utah State University (USU) Logan from USU Blanding (a two-year
institution), including the creation of an associated Blanding Four Corners
Herbarium. These educational activities have the potential to transform the
educational experience of Indigenous transfer students at the USU Logan campus,
and by extension, to make a lasting impact on the representation of Native
American students in STEM fields. Opportunities for mentored research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students will be integrated with the
project’s research activities, and an Intermountain Herbarium Foray Program will
be offered, which will generate important biodiversity data and provide field
botany experiences to the public while connecting them with the local
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a phylogenetic tree
model that incorporates the processes of lineage birth, death, and
polyploidization, which will allow for the biologically-informed inference of
the reticulate evolutionary history of polyploids and testing of hypotheses
related to polyploid diversification. A densely sampled polyploid species
network for the fern family Cystopteridaceae will be inferred from a multi-locus
dataset of approximately 1500 accessions, which will provide the first major,
focused empirical test of the “dead-end” hypothesis of polyploid macroevolution.
Finally, an online revisionary monograph showcasing “ploidy-aware” revisionary
systematics and the potential of dynamic online e-monography will provide a
critical resource for members of the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.