* 2144121
* CAREER: Future phylogenies: novel computational frameworks for biomolecular sequence analysis involving complex evolutionary origins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Kevin Liu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2027
* USD 457,904.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetics is the discipline
that seeks to reconstruct and analyze the phylogeny, or evolutionary history, of
a set of organisms. Phylogenetic reconstruction is primarily accomplished
through computational analysis of DNA and other biomolecular sequence data.
Phylogenies and the evolutionary insights that they provide are essential to
biology and other disciplines, as well as many applications: important examples
include reconstructing and studying the Tree of Life - the evolutionary history
of all life on Earth, understanding human origins, infectious disease
epidemiology and discovery of new solutions to future pandemics, crop
improvement and agriculture, and forensic science. One of the two key
ingredients needed for phylogenetic studies has seen a major leap forward thanks
to advances in biomolecular sequencing technology: the scale of available
biomolecular data is now among the largest in any domain and, in 2025,
biomolecular data velocity and storage is projected to be comparable to or
larger than Twitter and YouTube. On the other hand, recent "big data"
phylogenetic studies point to a critical gap regarding the second of the two key
ingredients in phylogenetics: existing computational algorithms need to move
beyond their traditional simplifying assumptions about biomolecular sequence
evolution. Two of the most important assumptions are: (1) "sequence-unaware"
methods that ignore the inherently sequential nature of biomolecular sequences,
and (2) the pre hoc assumption that evolutionary relationships have a simple
branching structure and are "tree-like" - i.e., can be accurately described by a
tree or other simple representation. New computational approaches and
infrastructure are needed to move beyond these traditional assumptions and
unlock the study of "future phylogenies" and next-generation phylogenetics. This
project will therefore create new pathbreaking models and algorithms for complex
phylogenetic analyses of biomolecular sequence data. The project also addresses
gaps in STEM education through new curriculum development and a collaboration
with the Impression 5 Science Center, a children’s science museum in mid-
Michigan. Project impacts will be broadened through open-source software
distributions and open data resources, new scientific discoveries enabled by the
developed software and data infrastructure, scientific outreach activities, and
student training and mentoring with a strong emphasis on diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the field of
computational phylogenetics along multiple frontiers. The first research
objective is to develop new statistical resampling algorithms that move beyond
"uninformed" analysis where biomolecular data are assumed to be independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.), and towards "informed" sequence-aware
analysis; a central approach will be to make use of the latest advances in
machine learning. The new algorithms will be used to better assess rigor and
reproducibility during phylogenetic analyses and other critical-path analytical
tasks. The second research objective is to create mathematical theory,
statistical models, and computational algorithms to move beyond traditional
phylogenetic representations (e.g., phylogenetic trees, etc.), and towards more
general graph-theoretic models of complex genome evolution. The third research
objective is to conduct comprehensive validation and performance assessment
studies of the first two research objectives’ computational frameworks. The
studies will utilize both synthetic and empirical benchmarking datasets that
capture a wide range of evolutionary conditions and dataset features. The
project also includes two educational objectives: a new course on DEI topics in
interdisciplinary computer science, and a new museum exhibit on technology and
computer programming that will be exhibited at the Impression 5 Science Center.
Open-source software and open data deliverables will drive future methodological
research and enable otherwise inaccessible scientific discoveries, and
scientific outreach will help seed and drive uptake of the project’s
contributions. The project also includes student training and mentoring
activities at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Project deliverables and
other results can be found at
https://gitlab.msu.edu/liulab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.