* 2144259
* CAREER: Epigenetic Dynamics Shaping the Early Evolution of Duplicate Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Frederic Chain, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 03/31/2027
* USD 808,420.00

Gene duplication is a frequent mutational process that can help generate new
biological functions. While many genes in a genome have arisen by duplication,
most new duplicate genes start off as redundant genetic copies. Extra copies of
genes can be potentially harmful via dosage imbalances, causing health disorders
and preventing new duplicate genes from evolving new functions. Gene regulatory
mechanisms that can successfully compensate for such dosage effects offer a
pathway for long term duplicate gene retention and functional diversification.
By studying the regulatory dynamics of duplicate genes across their early
evolutionary lifespan, this research aims to evaluate the role of different
epigenetic factors in modulating expression and impacting gene retention and
evolution after duplication. Student participation and training is central to
this project, which includes data analysis by a diverse base of first-generation
college students, and the transfer of coding and analytical skills to high
school students from underrepresented groups in STEM. Course-based undergraduate
research experiences will help generate online video tutorials on genomic and
computational analysis that will become publicly available resources. These will
be used in the development of workshop materials for high school educators to
establish genomics curricula to help strengthen genome data
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regulation of a newly duplicated gene during
its copy-number polymorphic phase is critical in establishing its likelihood to
reach fixation and be retained over time. This project will use long-read
sequencing and assembly to determine the transcriptional and epigenomic
landscape of polymorphic duplicate genes among natural populations. The extent
of epigenetic repression by gene age and under different selection regimes will
be used to test whether epigenetic mechanisms facilitate the retention and
evolution of duplicate genes before they diverge. Establishing the evolutionary
dynamics of polymorphic paralogs will provide insights into the role of
epigenetic modifications in regulating newly emerged genes. This award was co-
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms cluster of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Evolutionary Processes cluster of the Division of
Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.