* 2144117
* CAREER: Bootstrapping Recognition from Little Data in New Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Bharath Hariharan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2027
* USD 197,846.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With current computer vision technology, one
can easily build software that can recognize thousands of objects, be they cats,
cars or birds. However, such systems must be trained on large datasets of
millions of images which have been painstakingly labeled by human annotators.
Such large, labeled datasets are difficult to create for many application
domains, such as microscopy, where annotators will need to be highly trained.
Collecting large datasets may also run afoul of privacy concerns, and may need
expensive curation to remove racial, gender or other kinds of bias. Finally, the
steep cost of collecting large datasets makes computer vision technology
inaccessible to many. This project develops technologies for recognition systems
that can successfully identify difficult visual concepts without needing any
large datasets. Recognition systems that can work with limited training data
will unlock many downstream applications, especially in specialized domains, and
will make advances in computer vision technology accessible to all. The project
team will make these recognition systems broadly accessible to all, organize a
workshop for high school students from underrepresented communities, and develop
a new computer vision curriculum that focuses on broad applications of computer
vision technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build recognition systems from little
data (as few as 1-2 labeled images and around 1000 unlabeled images), this
project explores two strategies inspired from human vision. First, unlike
current recognition systems that are trained in isolation for each problem
domain, humans learn to perform new visual tasks (such as analyzing microscopy
images) in the context of their vast prior visual experience. This project
similarly designs visual learners that learn new recognition tasks from limited
data by leveraging a memory of past visual tasks across multiple domains.
Second, unlike current systems that learn only from labeled images, humans learn
through rich interactions and back-and-forth with expert teachers. Inspired by
this observation, this project builds systems that can learn by asking detailed
questions of experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.