* 2144475
* CAREER: Interpretable machine learning deciphers single-cell multi-modal data for understanding cell-type functional genomics in complex brains
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Daifeng Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2027
* USD 510,365.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brains are made up of billions of
cells with different functions and have dramatically drawn research and public
attention. However, underlying molecular mechanisms of brain cell functions are
unclear. Recent advances in single-cell technologies enable measuring different
characteristics (multi-modal data) of thousands of individual cells in complex
brains, such as gene expression patterns, cell shapes, and behaviors. However,
integrating such complex multi-modal data and interpreting molecular mechanisms
from the data for brain cell functions remains challenging. This project will
develop machine learning methods to build roadmaps linking multi-modal data of
brain cells, revealing unseen data connections, insights into biological
mechanisms, and improving prediction of cellular phenotypes and functions. The
developed methods will be open-source and available for broadening community
use. The project will also foster the integration of research and education
through STEM programs, seminars, courses, online learning and provide publicly
available materials. These activities will enhance participation and scientific
understanding of minorities, underrepresented groups, and families with
intellectual or neurodevelopmental disabilities, especially for machine learning
in brain research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deliver novel machine
learning methods to predict cellular phenotypes and functions from multi-modal
data of single cells and decipher cell-type functional genomics and gene
regulation, a key molecular mechanism in brain cell functions. Aim 1 will
develop a manifold learning method to align general single-cell multi-modalities
(beyond multi-omics) and identify genes for predicting other modalities of brain
cells (e.g., electrophysiology and morphology). Aim 2 will develop a comparative
network analysis to reveal the relationships of multiple cell-type gene
regulatory networks, revealing potential novel cell-type conserved and specific
regulatory mechanisms. Aim 3 will develop a deep neural network model to
prioritize “multi-modal networks” linking potentially causal genes and networks
and other modal features for cellular phenotypes and functions. The results of
this project can be found at
https://daifengwanglab.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.