* 2144802
* CAREER: Uncover contact line dynamics during thin film evaporation on micro/nano-engineered surfaces with combined velocimetry, thermometry, and interferometry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yaofa Li, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 508,085.00

Computers and electronics with ever-increasing power densities have become an
indispensable part of our daily life to support our learning, communication,
driving, and other applications. Effective thermal management technologies are
essential to cool these devices to a safe temperature to sustain their high
performance. Thin film evaporation, based on continuous evaporation of very thin
films of liquid coolant, is a promising cooling strategy due to its simple
design, high cooling capacity, and high stability. By incorporating micro/nano-
structures such as micro-pillars and nano-pores, the cooling capacity of thin
film evaporation has been significantly improved in recent years but is still
much lower than theory predictions, due to the lack of fundamental
understanding, especially the detailed flow and thermal characteristics at
microscopic and nanoscopic scales. This CAREER project seeks to study fluid flow
and thermal transport processes at evaporating interfaces by accurately
measuring the flow speed, film shape and temperature within thin coolant films
that are typically a few micrometers thick. The knowledge gained will be
integrated into educational and outreach activities by establishing a thermal-
fluid instructional laboratory at Montana State University and creating
educational materials targeting the general public and school children with a
special emphasis on those from rural communities and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to advance
the fundamental understanding of the flow, thermal transport, and contact line
dynamics at evaporating interfaces via quantifying 3D velocity fields, interface
temperature, and interface profile, enabled by innovative experiments and
modeling efforts. Specifically, the project team will (i) employ combined
astigmatism particle tracking velocimetry, fluorescence thermometry and
interference microscopy to perform measurements on micro-structured surfaces,
(ii) quantify film temperature and meniscus dynamics within nanopores using
nanoscale quantum dot thermometers and environmental scanning electron
microscopy, and (iii) develop a microscale model for thin film evaporation on
micro-structured surfaces with improved accuracy by incorporating Marangoni
flows. The research will characterize the wicking dynamics, liquid-vapor
interface temperature, curvature and meniscus dynamics of thin evaporating films
with high spatial and temporal resolutions, which will allow precise
determination of the accommodation coefficient and the quantification of
Marangoni effects, thus filling in current knowledge gaps and informing the next
generation of predictive tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Thermal Transport Processes Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.