* 2144047
* CAREER:Why Are Species Where They Are? Identifying the Interplay of the Evolutionary, Environmental, and Biotic Mechanisms Driving Niche Diversification in Oedipodinae Grasshoppers
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Tereza Jezkova, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 04/30/2027
* USD 989,063.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geographic range of a species
is one of its most important characteristics. Such a range is primarily
determined by the ecological niche of the species, which represents the
environmental conditions (such as temperature, precipitation, or vegetation)
that are suitable for the species and allow it to survive and reproduce. For
example, the ecological niche of the Indian tiger is represented by high
temperature, high precipitation, and dense vegetation. Sometimes, similar
species have very different ecological niches. The ecological niche of the snow
leopard is very different from that of the tiger, even though the two species
are closely related. When ecological niches differ between two related species,
it can be said that these ecological niches have diverged. But how much and in
what ways do ecological niches diverge between two similar species? Here, the
researcher will explore niche divergence among more than 150 species of
grasshoppers from throughout North America. The knowledge and tools gained from
this project will be applicable to a broad variety of questions related to
important topics, such as species diversity (why are there so many species in
the tropics?), species conservation (how much change in environmental conditions
can a species endure?), or human health (can a tropical disease spread to areas
with moderate climates?). The project will provide research and educational
opportunities in state-of-the-art methods in ecology and evolution at the high
school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of understanding niche
divergence in the fields of ecology and evolution, quantitative and qualitative
characteristics of niche divergence and the mechanisms that drive their
evolution have not been explored in a comprehensive way. This research will
address knowledge gaps via a new theoretical and analytical framework to
classify and quantify ecological niche divergence between taxa. This new
classification system 1) promises to enhance understanding of different types of
niche divergence; 2) can be applied to any ecosystem or group of organisms; and
3) can be used to address a broad variety of ecological and evolutionary
questions. The framework will be used to explore the evolutionary,
environmental, and biotic factors driving niche divergence in grasshoppers in
the subfamily Oedipodinae, as a model system. Specific educational goals include
advancing bioinformatics literacy necessary for success in STEM fields,
providing applied skills to work with a variety of big data, and training
students in interdisciplinary, integrative approaches for understanding patterns
of biodiversity and advancing conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.