* 2144901
* CAREER: Topology-Driven Learning for Biomedical Imaging Informatics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Chao Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 121,325.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thanks to decades of technology
development, scientists are now able to visualize in high quality complex
biomedical structures such as neurons, vessels, trabeculae and breast tissues.
These complex and dynamic structures encode important information about
underlying biological mechanisms. Innovative approaches are needed to fully
exploit these structures and to predict biological and clinical outcomes. By
identifying crucial structural patterns, scientists can better explain disease
progression and discover novel structure-informed diagnosis and prognosis
biomarkers. The challenge is that the structures are often highly complex in
geometry and topology, and highly variable. Topology is the branch of abstract
mathematics that deals with structures such as connections and loops; this
project combines advanced mathematical theory from topology (in particular,
persistent homology) and modern deep learning to develop novel methodology for
accurate reconstruction and analysis of these complex, dynamic and heterogeneous
biomedical structures. The outcome of the project will not only generate novel
learning methods that are better suited for these topology-rich structures, but
also advance the understanding of the functionality of different biomedical
structural systems. This project also trains the next generation of researchers
and educators through a carefully integrated educational and outreach plan. By
implementing a Play-With-Data (PWD) principle, the investigator will engage
students and the public through direct interactions with real-world data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a foundational
topology-driven learning paradigm for biomedical structures, including
segmentation, generation, and analysis. Using the theory of persistent homology,
which provides robust and differentiable representations involving topology, the
investigator will (1) explicitly capture and reason in a topological feature
space, and (2) seamlessly incorporate topological reasoning into modern learning
in an end-to-end fashion, so that critical topological patterns can be learned
in a data-driven and task-driven manner. Technical contributions are proposed to
address key theoretical and algorithmic challenges in formulating topological
information as a topological loss. The loss is used to train image-segmentation
models with high topological accuracy, which is crucial for structural analysis.
The investigator will also develop topology-aware deep generative models that
can learn topology from the real data. Novel topological representation and
learning algorithms will be developed to fully exploit the topology-rich
structures and identify crucial patterns differentiating populations. The
investigator will also investigate new time-varying topology representations and
address the challenging problem of learning the dynamics. The resulting
techniques and software will be validated on public datasets and real-world
biomedical problems. The methods to be developed are general and will impact
data from other scientific domains, such as ecology and geographic information
science, where intrinsic complex and dynamic structures
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.