* 2144082
* CAREER: Deciphering Mechanisms Underlying Chemical Adaptation in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Fang Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2027
* USD 428,055.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Act of 2021
(Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “arms race” between plants and
insects has driven their coevolution for hundreds of millions of years. Once
damaged by herbivores, plants release induced volatile organic compounds called
herbivore-induced plant volatiles (HIPVs). It has been well documented that
HIPVs play fundamental roles in insect-plant interactions, but knowledge of how
herbivores adjust and adapt to plant HIPVs remains largely absent. The research
objective of this CAREER proposal is to understand the mechanisms underlying
herbivores’ adaptation to plant HIPVs, attempting to link insect olfaction with
evolutionary resilience to pesticides, using the herbivorous Colorado potato
beetle and its host plant, potato, as a study system. A key innovation in this
project is that it will uncover previously uncharacterized mechanisms of insect-
plant interactions and evolution of pesticide resistance. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project provides a unique educational platform for students from
diverse backgrounds, especially underrepresented groups. Three educational goals
of the project are to: (1) develop an innovative, hands-on experiment-based
course that includes modern molecular techniques; (2) engage underrepresented
students from high schools and undergraduates at Penn State in insect science
research through an existing EnvironMentors program; and (3) develop and deliver
the “Bugs Win” multigenerational family program at the Pasto Agricultural Museum
to interest youth and their families in science. These educational activities
will expose larger and more diverse groups to insect science and should make
basic research more inclusive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the known roles of
HIPVs in insect-plant interactions, it remains unclear which mechanisms assist
insects in adapting to these volatile compounds. The enzymes involved in rapid
antennal sensory processing of HIPVs may be co-opted by other processes such as
xenobiotic detoxification. To test this hypothesis, research is designed to
integrate powerful structural biology, functional genomics, enzymology, and
insect behavior approaches to functionally dissect and understand the roles of
enzymes in insect olfaction and detoxification pathways. In addition, the
integrated education program will ensure active learning outcomes, engage
students in Entomology and Biology research, enhance students’ critical thinking
and problem-solving skills, and prepare the next generation of young scientists
with advanced tools and techniques along with fundamental knowledge. This work
will significantly enhance our understanding of physiological mechanisms of
insect-plant interactions and of xenobiotic adaptation in insects. Completion of
this project may ultimately contribute to the development of resistance-free
pesticides for precision pest control and beneficial insect
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.