* 2144252
* CAREER: Mechanisms and drivers underlying thermal specialization patterns in elastic recoil and muscle powered movements
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Christopher Anderson, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 06/30/2027
* USD 907,270.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2). In addition, this project is jointly funded by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems in the Biological Sciences Directorate and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of an
animal to perform well in its environment is central to accomplishing many of
its most basic and important functions. Since those abilities--and the physical
features of the animals that permit them--evolved slowly over thousands of
generations, rapidly changing environments challenge the ability of animals to
respond and adapt. A key feature of an animal’s environment is temperature,
particularly for cold-blooded animals like chameleons, who rely on heat from the
environment to warm their bodies to the best operating temperature while seeking
ways to cool off when it gets too hot. To investigate how the temperature
impacts a fundamental ability--the chameleon’s feeding with its projectile
tongue--this project measures the range of environmental temperatures
experienced by different species of African chameleons, how those different
habitats correspond to differences in feeding performance, how differences in
feeding are related to differences in the temperature sensitivity of the muscles
and connective tissues of the tongue, and how those differences might have
evolved. In addition, this research harnesses the charismatic nature of
chameleons and the captivating visuals of high-speed video of their feeding to
engage and educate a broad audience. In particular, these results will be
integrated into education modules developed to address specific K-12 learning
objectives in the biological and physical sciences. Specifically, as part of a
curriculum enhancement resource developed to connect scientists to teachers and
classrooms in rural and tribal communities in South Dakota, this research will
result in free curriculum modules based on scientific research occurring in
South Dakota’s higher education institutions that are aligned with the South
Dakota Science Standards. In the process, this research will form a foundation
for developing content for new curricula offerings at the undergraduate and
graduate level through the development of novel laboratory modules, original
case study materials, and new course offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature
exhibits strong effects on animal movement and performance through its effect on
muscle contractile dynamics. Movements powered by the recoil of elastic tissues,
however, respond differently to changes in environmental temperature than
movements powered by muscle contraction directly. These systems and their
underlying functional processes therefore may also experience different
selection pressures relating to thermal specialization to their environment.
This project will compare patterns of thermal specialization in two movement
types: elastic recoil-powered tongue projection and muscle-powered tongue
retraction in chameleons. These comparisons will focus on examining the thermal
sensitivity of whole organism performance and the different underlying
mechanistic processes involved in producing these movements (e.g., motor
control, muscle contractile physiology, anatomical variation) in chameleons
living in different thermal environments. Combining ecological work in the field
and experimental work in the laboratory, this work will determine to what extent
different types of movement undergo thermal specialization, at what mechanistic
level thermal specialization occurs for both movement types, what environmental
factors drive these patterns, the extent to which acclimation affects
performance in both movements, and evolutionary trends in these patterns. In the
process, this research will provide insight into how animals using different
types of movement for critical ecological functions may respond to shifts in
environmental conditions. These advancements in our understanding of adaptation
to differing and changing environmental conditions, particularly temperature,
will impact the fields of ecology, physiology, and evolutionary biology. In
addition, the work includes broad outreach efforts, educational activities, and
scientific presentations and publications, with research training for
undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.