* 2144020
* CAREER: Decoding the dynamics of complex fluids near surfaces and interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sepideh Razavi, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2027
* USD 462,755.00

When liquid drops contact a solid surface, they can wet the surface and spread
over it, which is important in a variety of industrial and technological
processes such as cooling industrial reactors, applying pesticides to the leaves
of plants, oil recovery from underground reservoirs, and inkjet printing.
Understanding wetting and evaporation of biological fluids on solid surfaces is
a critical step toward solving problems related to human health, such as
preventing disease transmission by virus-loaded droplets. Wetting, spreading and
evaporation of liquid drops can be strongly affected by the presence of surface-
active agents in the liquid, such as surfactants or nanoparticles, as well as
the properties of the solid surface. Predicting and controlling spreading of
liquids is challenging in this case and formulations often are based on trial-
and-error experiments. This CAREER project will investigate how the composition
of liquids, including simple liquids, liquids containing surfactants and/or
nanoparticles, and biological fluids, affect droplet wetting, spreading, and
evaporation. A series of experiments will be carried out on droplets of various
composition to reveal how various components in the liquid contribute
individually and synergistically to the physics of wetting and spreading
dynamics on a series of solid surfaces. The results will identify key parameters
in wetting, spreading and evaporation, and also uncover details of complex flows
at interfaces that affect these processes. The research will be used in training
a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students. It will also enable the
creation of educational videos and demonstrations to engage middle school and
high school students in scientific activities, attract female veterans to
science and inspire them to pursue higher education as they transition to
civilian life, and enhance the science literacy of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large body of literature is available on the
wetting, spreading, and evaporation of simple fluids; however, concepts
established for simple fluids cannot be directly applied to droplets of complex
fluids carrying surfactants and nanoparticles. The understanding of key factors
in spreading and evaporation in a mixed particle/surfactant system and the
impact of particle/surfactant synergism in these cases is limited. The
scientific goal of this CAREER project is to advance fundamental understanding
of the wetting and spreading in case of multicomponent fluidic systems by
elucidating the roles that colloidal particle interfacial adsorption and solid
surface energies play in the dynamics. Surface properties of the particles will
be modified to alter the energy barrier for nanoparticle adsorption to the
fluid/fluid interface. Magnitudes of the polar and dispersive components of the
solid surface energy will be systematically tuned to examine the role of
interaction forces between the complex fluid and the substrate in the wetting
behavior. These studies will identify the influence of nanoparticle interfacial
adsorption, and potentially the interfacial rheology of the particle layer, on
spreading dynamics and evaporation kinetics of a sessile drop. Mixed
particle/surfactant dispersions will be examined to illustrate whether the
interfacial confinement of nanoparticles combined with Marangoni effects
influences wetting behavior and whether interfacial rheology affects drying in
multicomponent systems. Artificial saliva models will be used as a base fluid to
investigate the importance of mucin at the fluid-fluid interface on spreading
and evaporation on various surfaces. This research addresses the need to develop
an empiricism-free understanding of the behavior of complex fluids near surfaces
and interfaces, and the function of surface characteristics in altering
wettability in such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.