* 2144961
* CAREER:  A research foundation to improve understanding of the post-thaw permafrost microbiome via collaboration networks and experiential learning
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Jessica Ernakovich, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,163,440.00

The Arctic is warming about four times faster than elsewhere on Earth, resulting
in thaw of permafrost—permanently frozen soil underlying many Arctic landscapes.
Permafrost occurs under approximately one fourth of the northern hemisphere's
land surface and contains as much carbon (stored as undecomposed organic
material) as the entire atmosphere. When permafrost thaws, microorganisms (such
as fungi and bacteria) decompose and convert this organic material to carbon
dioxide and methane, two of the most important greenhouse gases in our
atmosphere. This mechanism is referred to as positive climate feedback because
the warming of permafrost generates higher concentrations of carbon dioxide and
methane in the atmosphere which increases atmospheric temperatures even further.
This permafrost–climate feedback is one of the least well-understood global
climate feedbacks, partially due to our lack of understanding of permafrost
microbial communities. There is limited data about how permafrost thaw affects
the microbial community—or microbiome—including the ecological processes
underpinning the composition of the microbial community after permafrost thaws.
New evidence shows that microbial communities are not only shaped by the
environment in which they live, but that random chance—or coincidence—also
determines which microbes are present at any given time. The degree of
coincidence influences our ability to predict microbiomes and their functions.
The proposed work will deepen the understanding of the ecological processes that
are shaping the post-thaw composition and activity of soil microorganisms. At
the same time this project will train the next generation of polar researchers
(at the postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels) and build a network of
permafrost microbiologists able to address questions about the role of
microorganisms in the permafrost–climate feedback. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will improve understanding of the poorly known dynamics of post-
thaw microbiomes in permafrost landscapes, which are rapidly changing due to the
amplification of Arctic climate warming. The goal of the work is to address this
knowledge gap through a series of heavily integrated research, education, and
broader impacts activities. Specifically, this project will (1) synthesize
publicly available and as-yet-unpublished DNA sequence data on post-thaw
microbiomes from permafrost across the globe; (2) use ecological modeling to
assess the contribution of stochasticity to the post-thaw microbiome composition
over space, time, and disturbance intensity using a field sampling approach; (3)
test mechanisms of assembly in post-thaw microbiomes in highly controlled
laboratory incubations performed across many ecological axes; (4) equip the next
generation of Arctic scholars and/or natural resource managers with the skills
necessary to excel in scientific research, networking and collaboration, and
science communication by training a postdoctoral researcher, a PhD student, and
undergraduate and graduate students; (5) develop a professional network of
permafrost microbial ecologists to elucidate the complex unknowns of permafrost
and post-thaw microbiomes; and (6) support efforts to continue work in making
polar and biogeosciences more diverse and inclusive. Together, these activities
will contribute to enhanced understanding of the permafrost–climate feedback,
which will guide planning and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.