* 2144031
* CAREER: Minimize ab initio Tasks in Dynamics Simulations of Chemical  Reactions with Active Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Rui Sun, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2027
* USD 465,340.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Rui Sun of University of Hawaii, Mānoa will work
to develop a novel machine learning algorithm to accelerate simulations of
chemical reactions. Since a chemical reaction can take place at a very fast rate
and on a very small scale, sometimes too fast and small for equipment to
directly measure, computer simulations, which follow the motions of atoms by
solving equations of motion, play an essential role in seeking a thorough
understanding of the nature of a chemical reaction. However, such simulations
are computationally very demanding (e.g., require a large number of computers to
run for a long period of time), thus severely limiting the scope of their
applications. Rui Sun and his research group are developing a novel machine
learning algorithm that utilizes the information gathered along the study of the
chemical reaction to speed up simulations potentially by an order of magnitude
or more. This algorithm, along with a specifically designed data storage and
fetch system, will be open-source and implemented with state-of-the-art
computational chemistry software. Simulations boosted by this machine learning
algorithm have the potential to achieve unprecedented efficiency and accuracy,
and thus to push the boundary of our knowledge on chemical reactions, perhaps
the central element of the field of chemistry. By introducing computation as a
different means for problem solving, Rui Sun will also develop educational
programs to enhance the learning experience of students at the University of
Hawaii, which hosts the largest population of Pacific islander students in
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rui Sun is developing an active machine learning
protocol with the aim of increasing the efficiency of ab initio molecular
dynamics simulations of chemical reactions by at least one order of magnitude.
This is to be achieved by replacing 90+% of the ab initio energy gradient
calculations with a specifically designed machine learning algorithm,
interpolating moving ridge regression (IMRR). IMRR is trained on data fetched
from an indexed library containing all the ab initio energy gradients calculated
in the previous simulations and updated on the fly as each trajectory
progresses. Rui Sun and his research group will also develop an optimal
molecular descriptor to efficiently identify ab initio training data that yields
the smallest error in IMRR-predicted energy gradients. Each IMRR will provide a
risk factor, indicating its probability of reproducing the ab initio energy
gradient and maintaining a well-behaved trajectory. A high-risk factor will be
used as a rejection criterion to refer back to ab initio calculation in order to
protect the integrity of the simulation. Due to the expected dramatic boost in
efficiency, the proposed active machine learning protocol has the potential to
push the capability of AIMD to an unprecedented level and to set a new standard
for dynamics simulation of chemical reactions. Rui Sun will also develop
computation modules to support current chemistry labs as well as the very first
computational course for non-CS (Computer Science) STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) majors at the University of Hawaii at
Mānoa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.