* 2144944
* CAREER: Spintronic Devices Using Screw Dislocations in Single-Crystalline Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Francesca Cavallo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

“This project is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic
Devices (EPMD) Program of the Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS) Division, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR)”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This synergistic research and education program
aims to investigate the device physics of a novel spin field-effect transistor
(spin FET) while broadening the participation of Deaf, Hispanics, and Native
Americans in nanoscience and engineering. The work will be the first
experimental study to focus on the fabrication and characterization of spin FETs
that leverage screw dislocations in single srystal-crystalline semiconductors. A
screw dislocation is a type of crystal defect that promises to act as a suitable
channel for a spin transistor that operates at variable temperatures (i.e., room
temperature and above) for commercial, industrial, and military applications.
The improved knowledge and technological advances generated in this project will
potentially accelerate very-large-scale integration of high-performance
spintronic devices, which is required for the practical realization of hybrid
and entirely spin-based classical and quantum computers. This program will also
benefit society by impacting science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education. Experiential exhibits that will target K-12 students and the public
will be established to broaden participation of Deaf, Hispanics, and Native
Americans in STEM. As such, this work will have a wide-ranging impact by
communicating the value of nanoscience, nanotechnology, and spintronics to a
broad audience and potentially increasing the number of Deaf, Hispanics, and
Native Americans that will pursue a career in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research effort encompasses three strongly overlapping intellectual threads: (i)
fabrication and structural characterization of spin FETs embedded screw
dislocations(SDs); (ii) characterization of gate-tunable spin transport; (iii)
investigation of process-structure-property relationships in the fabricated spin
FETs. The operation of the proposed spin FET is based on controlling the spin
lifetime in screw dislocations channels using a gate voltage. Two opposite
aligned spin-selective ferromagnetic/semiconductor contacts will be placed at
the two ends of a screw dislocation. As the spin lifetime in the dislocation
core is expected to be long, the transistor will be in an OFF state in this
condition. Under an applied gate voltage, spin-polarization can be tailored to
allow transport from one ferromagnetic contact to another, putting the
transistor in an ON state. The ratio between the spin lifetime and the
relaxation time will determine the ON/OFF ratio of the device. Spin FETs designs
that rely on controlling spin lifetimes have been proposed before. However,
these devices have not found practical uses due to the requirement of large
(&gt;100 ms) spin relaxation times at room temperature. Screw dislocation
channels can overcome this limitation owing to a unique form of spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) that promises to increase spin lifetimes even at high
temperatures, thereby enabling the practical application of the proposed spin
FET design. Briefly, the interplay between Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC in screw
dislocations of materials with medium ionicity makes spin polarization
scattering resistant. The technical plan relies on the controlled synthesis of a
screw dislocations network by annealing ultra-compliant twisted bicrystals or
two single-crystalline nanomembranes (NMs) that have been previously overlayed
with a controlled twist angle. NMs will provide more uniform interfacial bonding
than their bulk counterpart, expand the palette of semiconductor hosts of screw
dislocations to include epitaxially grown alloys, and increase the ON/OFF ratio
of the transistor by reducing the transit time of the carriers. Dislocated NMs
will be processed in spin FETs, and the process-structure property relationships
of the devices will be evaluated. The focus will be on SDs in SiC NMs as
theoretical predictions have shown that a fixed spin orientation, which is
robust against all forms of electron scattering, can be obtained in this
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.