* 2144809
* CAREER: Textile-Based Wearable Robots with Integrated Fluidic Logic
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Daniel Preston, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2027
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
integrate fluidic computation—in which electronic voltages and currents are
replaced by fluid pressure differences and flows—directly into a textile-based
platform. Integration of fluidic logic in textiles represents an important step
toward fully soft, untethered wearable assistive robots capable of improving
quality of life for the 85 million adults in the United States living with
physical functional limitations. Existing soft fluidic actuators for motion
assistance and rehabilitation currently rely on hard valves and bulky electronic
control systems which increase system weight and decrease comfort or require
cumbersome tethers to external infrastructure, limiting adoption of these
technologies. Textile-based fluidic computers will overcome this limitation,
allowing onboard memory, decision making, and interaction with the environment,
and leading to truly soft wearable assistive robots that look and feel like
everyday clothing. An integrated educational plan focused on teaching, outreach,
and mentoring will allow simultaneous development of impactful and innovative
technology and promotion of the next generation of leaders in STEM. Planned
activities include the use of hands-on fluid logic components in a local museum
outreach and undergraduate curriculum that will be disseminated online, and
longitudinal mentoring of high school and undergraduate students, with focus on
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a textile-based
platform for fluidic computation, a stepwise approach is taken. First, a deep
fundamental understanding will be developed at the circuit element level by
designing and characterizing textile-based fluidic analogs to resistors,
capacitors, and relays. These circuit elements will be used as building blocks
for fluidic digital logic, which will be engineered for high performance in
terms of speed and other computational metrics. Finally, fluidic computers
constructed from digital logic elements will be integrated directly into the
structure of wearable assistive robots along with textile-based input/output
devices and actuators. By default, all designs will be composite in nature, with
performance dependent upon material choices and active element geometries.
Design and experimental characterization will be significantly aided with
physical modeling, including analytical nonlinear models of fluid flow.
Validated models of circuit elements as well as logic circuits will be one of
the research outcomes. Scalability of design and repeatability of fabrication
will be key factors in the evaluation of success at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.