* 2144213
* CAREER: Valuing Education and Career Transition Opportunities Raising Student Success in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Kristin Frady, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2027
* USD 347,371.00

Two-year colleges play a vital role in educating and awarding advanced
credentials to America’s future scientists and technicians. The research
supported by this CAREER award will emphasize the importance of and expand
understanding of the role that two-year colleges play in the engineering
education and career pipeline. Yet, racial and location inequity in vertical
transfer highlight a lack of access to life changing educational opportunities.
This project will focus on identifying unique geographic and cultural assets to
make pre-transfer engineering students, from a variety of backgrounds,
locations, and opportunities, more successful thereby increasing the number and
preparedness of transfer students. To make this information accessible to
engineering transfer students, this project will also develop and test a first-
of-its-kind digital Engineering Transfer Student Dashboard where students will
receive custom reports identifying assets, areas of strengths, and suggestions
for improving engineering transfer student capital. Further, this research
aligns with the overarching goals of the NSF Engineering Education program in
its focus on exploring diverse pathways to and through engineering degree
programs. This educational research will enhance inclusion and participation in
engineering which also supports the NSF Engineering Education program’s focus on
developing a more innovative and inclusive technical workforce. This CAREER
award will provide a foundation for future research supporting innovation at the
intersection of two-year college, engineering education, human resource
development, and educational leadership fields focusing on valuing education and
career transition opportunities raising student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this CAREER proposal is two-
pronged. The first, is a mixed methods study to create new knowledge to increase
engineering transfer numbers and preparedness more broadly through investigating
the geographic and cultural assets of transfer intending two-year college
students. The second is to integrate these research findings into digital
educational interventions aimed at improving transfer student capital and to
test the efficacy of those interventions. The research will be informed by
Laanan’s theory of transfer student capital and examines core constructs of
transfer student capital. The two research questions for the research portion of
this project are: What are assets, factors, and strategies that enable access
for two-year college students to engineering transfer pathways? Do assets,
factors, and strategies vary in magnitude and/or presence across student
demographics, location, institutions, or intention to transfer? The educational
portions of this project, directly integrate findings from the research, and aim
to answer two additional research questions: How does use of digital learning
tools and resources impact transfer outcomes for pre-transfer engineering
students? To what extent can transfer outcomes be improved, through use of
digital learning tools, for students from underrepresented and disadvantaged
backgrounds? A multi-institutional team will support implementation of this
project including Clemson University, TriCounty Technical College, Piedmont
Technical College, Greenville Technical College, and the South Carolina
Technical College System. This project aims to broaden participation through
improving access to engineering education and baccalaureate degree programs for
underrepresented minority, low-income, first-generation, and nontraditional
students. Increased transfer pathways and educational innovations specifically
designed for marginalized communities can improve transfer outcomes and
positively impact college affordability for students from communities not
previously well served. This research is distinct from other transfer student
research in its combined focus on geographic and cultural assets and needs,
inclusion of multi-institutional data, pre-transfer student focus, data
disaggregation by subpopulations, and disciplinary focus on engineering. This
research will also inform institutional supports, pathways, and resources needed
for increased transfer student capital, stimulate interaction of researchers and
practitioners with policymakers and the public, and expand of stakeholder
capacity to support and engage diverse populations in STEM education through new
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.