* 2144472
* CAREER: Effect of changes in power spectral density on neuromodulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Vincent Chen, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2027
* USD 450,213.00

Each year in the United States, approximately 2.9 million people experience a
traumatic brain injury, more than 795,000 have a stroke, and about 17,700
experience a spinal cord injury. Some of these individuals lose their functional
abilities and face challenges even in the basic activities of daily living.
Neurorehabilitation is the usual choice of treatment for such neurological
illnesses, and while few people will achieve full recovery of their motor
functions, slight incremental improvements in the treatment outcomes may go a
long way towards boosting their future quality of life. This proposal will
investigate how best to use neuromodulation techniques to improve the outcomes
of neurorehabilitation, by incorporating different electrical stimulation
sequences to determine optimal ways of enhancing the effects of therapeutic
exercises performed during routine physical therapy sessions. The theory behind
the science of neurorehabilitation and neuromodulation is that therapeutic
exercises can reorganize synaptic connections of the nervous system, and
electrical stimulation can be applied to enhance the effects on the central
nervous system, via a mechanism known as neuroplasticity. This project seeks to
address the relevance between the power distribution of electrical stimulation
and signs of neuroplasticity from a signal processing perspective, confirm the
curative role of neuromodulation in neurorehabilitation applications, and
provide insights as to how peripheral nerve stimulation can assist axon
regeneration from a power distribution perspective. The study aims to provide a
transformative educational experience to college and high school students who
aspire to work in the biomedical engineering profession. Students with strong
interests in engineering from Chicagoâ€™s public high schools will be invited to
work with undergraduate researchers who will lead specific portions of the
study. The PI hopes that conducting research on improving neurorehabilitation
treatment outcomes will help these students realize that their proficiency in
math and science can be translated into useful tools to help society and inspire
them to pursue careers in biomedical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will establish a fundamental theory of utilizing electrical modalities
to enhance physical rehabilitation, in particular, the use of neuromodulation
approaches to assist, support, and/or improve sensory or motor functions of
persons who experience neurological ailments. The study will involve the use of
an animal model to evaluate the effects of electrical stimulation on the nervous
system by acquiring force and electromyography from the resulting neuromuscular
contractions, focusing on the relationship between power spectral density and
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Unlike previous studies that
evaluate the varying effects of different stimulation frequencies, this study
analyzes the power spectral density of the stimulation train, i.e., the power
distribution within specific frequency bands. The plan is to evaluate
individually the central and peripheral effects of a stimulation train over
potentiation, depression, or other forms of neuroplasticity by looking at the
correlation between the power spectral densities and the elicited muscle force
profiles by conducting measurements before and after a nerve block. The
hypothesis underlying this study is that the electrical stimulations that
correspond to certain frequency components of a power spectrum may induce higher
levels of potentiation via stimulation signals sent via afferent pathways
(central contributions) and/or accelerate the recovery of peripheral nerve
injury by regulating ion channels of Schwann cells (peripheral contributions).
Three objectives will be explored: 1) refining the apparatus design to provide
concurrent acquisition of electromyography and muscle force corresponding to
selected frequency bands of electrical stimulation power spectral densities; 2)
comparing the electromyography and force profiles before and after applying a
nerve block proximal to the peripheral nerve stimulation site to evaluate the
central contribution of electrical stimulation power spectral densities; 3)
applying select frequency bands of electrical stimulation power spectral
densities to compare their abilities to accelerate recovery of peripheral nerve
injury and to evaluate the peripheral contribution of electrical stimulation.
The results derived from these studies are intended to provide a better
understanding of how electrical stimulation can be used to modulate human
neuromuscular systems, design devices that can generate desired brain and
peripheral nerve stimulations, and provide guidance for planning clinical trials
to test such devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.