* 2144384
* CAREER: GPU Performance Portability for Volunteer Computing through Heterogeneity-aware Autotuning
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Sreepathi Pai, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2027
* USD 223,624.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational power is increasingly critical
for discovering phenomena such as gravitational waves and to accelerate the
discovery of new drugs such as vaccines. Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are
computational devices that are frequently used to speed up such scientific
calculations. To achieve maximum performance, software must be tuned to the
particular GPU being used. Although such automatic performance tuning
(autotuning) is routine and effective in conventional supercomputing
environments where all the GPUs are identical, the process does not scale well
or extract maximum performance in environments containing hundreds of different
types of GPUs. Such heterogeneity is common in volunteer computing where donated
computer time is used to perform massive computations. By developing autotuning
algorithms that can deal with heterogeneity, providing feedback to programmers
about unrealized performance, and working at scale in real volunteer computing
systems, this project will enable these systems to maximize GPU performance and
accelerate scientific discovery in fields such as medicine, biology, and
astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to automatically
adapt applications to obtain maximal performance on all GPUs in the highly
heterogeneous volunteer computing environment at lower cost than re-running
autotuning on each GPU encountered. First, methods to identify similarities
among GPUs are developed to reduce autotuning effort while performance data
gathered across different GPUs is used to bootstrap and speed up the autotuning
process. Second, performance models are integrated with autotuning to provide
feedback to programmers about bottlenecks and missed performance optimization
opportunities. Third, parallel and distributed search is used to prune
unproductive explorations of an application’s performance landscape. All these
will be implemented in the popular real-world BOINC volunteer computing system
to benefit both existing and future scientific volunteer computing projects. The
project will conduct outreach activities for K-12 students, and also aid the
preservation of electronic games by providing hi-fidelity GPU
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.