* 2144550
* CAREER: Establishing a Knowledge Base for Use and Discharge of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Daqian Jiang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2027
* USD 458,433.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are fluorinated organic chemicals
that have been used in numerous consumer products and industrial applications
since the 1940s. PFAS are one of the most stable chemicals ever produced. During
the last two decades, increasing detection of PFAS in environmental media
(including air, water, soils, and biota) has raised significant concerns about
their persistence, stability, and adverse impact in the environment including
toxicity to living organisms and humans. A critical challenge in the management
and mitigation of PFAS contamination in the United States (US) is the lack of
curated data and systematic knowledge on the flows, emissions, and discharges of
PFAS over their entire manufacturing, supply chain, and product life cycles. The
overarching goal of this CAREER project is to develop and validate system
analysis and modeling tools that could be used to 1) estimate the total use,
accumulation, and discharge of PFAS in the US and 2) help identify the Nationâ€™s
geographic hotspots and economic drivers of PFAS contamination. To advance this
goal, the Principal Investigator proposes to carry out an integrated data
collection and modeling research program structured around two thrusts. Thrust 1
will collect and synthesize available measurements of PFAS uses and emissions
(including spatial and temporal data) into a national material flow analysis to
generate an integrated data set that can inform and improve PFAS risk assessment
and management. Thrust 2 will operationalize multi-disciplinary techniques to
guide the safer management of PFAS including the evaluation of the supply-chain
and socio-economic drivers of PFAS utilization and consumption in the US. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development and validation of new system analysis and modeling tools to guide
and support the development and implementation of more effective PFAS risk
assessment, management, and mitigation strategies in the US. Additional benefits
to society will be achieved through outreach and educational activities
including the mentoring of a post-doctorate research fellow, a graduate student,
and an undergraduate student at the University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United States (US), various programs,
policies, and regulations, ranging from product phaseout to new drinking water
health advisories, are currently being developed to manage and mitigate the
risks of PFAS contamination to human and ecosystem health. However, the
effectiveness of these measures cannot be assessed accurately due to critical
knowledge gaps including a lack of system-level knowledge and spatially
integrated information about PFAS usages, emissions, and discharges throughout
the entire product life cycles. This CAREER project will address these knowledge
gaps. The specific objectives of the research are to develop and validate system
analysis and modeling tools to: 1) Quantify system-wide use, accumulation,
emissions, and discharge of PFAS based on past and future product usage
scenarios; 2) Spatially delineate PFAS accumulation and emissions; 3)
Characterize the supply-chain and socio-economic drivers of PFAS use; and 4)
Estimate the global sensitivity of PFAS accumulation and emissions to
methodological and data uncertainties. The successful completion of this project
has the potential for transformative impact through 1) the generation of curated
data sets on PFAS usages, emissions, and discharges in the US and 2) the
development and validation of system analysis and modeling tools to guide and
support PFAS risk management and mitigation programs in the US. To implement the
educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes to develop and teach a new Industrial Ecology course
for senior/graduate students at the University of Alabama (UA) Tuscaloosa. In
addition, the PI plans to mentor undergraduate students at UA Tuscaloosa and
organize immersive summer workshops on material sustainability research to
facilitate exchange, networking, and collaboration between faculty and students
from US, Asian, and European academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.