* 2144904
* CAREER: Pricing Non-convexities Toward Transparency in Electricity Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Wenyuan Tang, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Despite the intention of providing the right signals to incentivize efficient
market outcomes, pricing has been a major challenge in electricity market
design, due to the discrepancy between the idealistic convexity assumptions in
economics and the practical non-convexities of the operating characteristics of
generating units. Corrective measures have been adopted, such as side-payments
for cost recovery, but at the expense of compromising transparency. The issue of
transparency has been a persistent concern from the stakeholders: the rationale
behind a market mechanism is unclear, the settlement process is obscure, the
evidence of effectiveness is insufficient, and so forth. While the wholesale
electricity markets throughout the U.S. have been redesigned after the
California electricity crisis, there remain a lot of ambiguities arising from
the sophisticated market rules, resulting in many long-lasting litigations.
Moreover, emerging market mechanisms including virtual transactions may bring in
additional gaming opportunities, which can be further exacerbated by the lack of
transparency. This project aims to better understand and resolve the pricing
challenges arising from non-convexities, thus enabling more transparency in
electricity market design. The integrated research and education activities,
including the Energy Immersion Week which provides hands-on opportunities for
students with disabilities, will promote the participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM, improve STEM education and educator development, and
increase public energy literacy and engagement in energy efficiency
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this five-year project is to build
analytical frameworks to understand, evaluate, and adapt the evolving market
mechanisms, toward the long-term goal of creating market mechanisms and
providing policy recommendations that enhance the transparency, reduce the
manipulation, and ultimately improve the efficiency of electricity markets.
Given that the underlying engineering details are typically highly abstracted in
policymaking, this project will recognize and incorporate the intricate
operational constraints in power systems into economic modeling, elevating the
role of engineers in market design. Following a convergence approach of
engineering, economics, operations research, and data science, this project will
advance the state of knowledge in electricity market design regarding: (1)
comprehensive comparison of different combinations of pricing and uplift
schemes; (2) game-theoretic modeling and analysis of strategic bidding in the
presence of uplift; (3) data-driven characterization of two-settlement,
networked systems; (4) theoretical and empirical evaluation of the efficiency
impact of virtual transactions; (5) analysis of uplift allocation rules for
virtual transactions; and (6) design of financial instruments and operating
paradigms for increased situational awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.