* 2144769
* CAREER: Firms and the Macroeconomy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Yueran Ma, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2027
* USD 355,268.00

Production activities in the world economy do not happen in a vacuum. A majority
take place in the context of firms. This project aims to integrate detailed
empirical analyses of firms’ operations and financial contracts with higher-
level macroeconomic inquiries. Recent developments in the US economy raise many
intriguing questions that require such an integration. As a first example,
economic activities increasingly rely on nonphysical assets (e.g., intellectual
property, software) rather than traditional physical assets (e.g., plants and
machinery). What are the implications of this development for firms’ production
decisions and financing structure? How might this development affect
macroeconomic outcomes? As a second example, the concentration of economic
activities in the US economy has been rising (i.e., large firms account for a
growing share of the output and production assets in the economy). What
underlies the rise of large firms and what are the implications of rising
concentration? To better understand firms’ activities in practice, this project
will collect original micro data and combine knowledge from different fields
(e.g., corporate finance, law, contracts). It will then use the insights from
such investigation to study macro implications and potentially shed light on the
effects of economic policies. Data collected from primary sources in this
research will be shared publicly, and research activities in this project also
hope to facilitate communications among researchers in different fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions will cover two sets of topics. The
first set of questions will focus on firms’ financing activities, especially
their ability to borrow. In particular, the traditional account of lending is
that firms pledge physical assets, which creditors can seize in default to
enforce repayment. However, with the development of legal systems and capital
markets, a primary form of corporate debt in the US is based on the cash flows
from firms’ operations (not necessarily physical assets). What are the
implications of this modern form of corporate debt for the availability of
credit for different types of firms, for the growth of firms and the economy,
for aggregate productivity and resource allocation, and for economic
fluctuations? The second set of questions will study firms’ assets and
operations (e.g., the economic effects of intangible assets), as well as the
long-run evolution of firms’ activities to put today’s world into perspective.
It will also shed light on the landscape of firms (e.g., why some firms are
large while others are small), and the formation and evolution of the largest
firms that play a key role in the economy. Taken together, the research in this
project has two main objectives: 1) uncover key empirical facts about firms’
economic activities, and 2) utilize these facts to inform economic mechanisms
and theoretical frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.