* 2144551
* CAREER: Mechanically Adaptive, Energetically Passive Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* David Braun, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 02/28/2027
* USD 608,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will create robot
exoskeletons that provide the wearer with capabilities beyond those of an
unassisted human, to an extent previously thought to require externally powered
actuators, such as electric motors or pneumatic cylinders. Unpowered mechanical
devices are already used for performance enhancement -- a person can travel much
farther and faster on a bicycle than they can on foot. However, the exoskeletons
considered in this project go beyond such familiar passive devices by
integrating actively controlled energy storage, in the form of springs of
controllable stiffness. The scientific contribution of this research is a
theoretical framework for mechanically adaptive energetically passive robotics
where the amount of energy stored in a spring of controllable stiffness can be
decoupled from the deformation of the spring. This new capability could enable
unprecedented human and robot mobility. As an example, a person jumping on a
conventional spring trampoline can build up energy for a desired high leap by
making a series of jumps of successively increasing height. In contrast, a
controllable-spring robot limb could allow the necessary energy for the target
leap to be accumulated over a series of fixed-depth squats, instead of jumps,
which can be safer and more desirable. The project will have significant
societal impacts by facilitating the creation of novel assistive devices for the
elderly, performance-augmenting exoskeletons for emergency responders, and
legged alternatives to bicycles for efficient unpowered transportation. The
project will promote a new engineering curriculum emphasizing controlled energy
storage and release in unpowered mechanical systems. Outreach activities will
include public exhibits of prototypes and knowledge-based journalism about novel
devices used for human augmentation and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this research is a new modeling and design framework for the analysis
and creation of mechanically adaptive, energetically passive robots. A key
component of these robots is the integration of mechanically adaptive compliant
structures, referred to as programmable springs. Programmable springs are a new
class of mechanical elements that combine the benefit of levers and springs,
with the key feature that enables near-zero energy cost mechanical adaptation,
irrespective of the energy stored in the spring. The specific project goals are
to (i) formulate a comprehensive model of robot limbs using programmable
springs; (ii) define a resonance-based control method robots and humans could
use to leverage the benefits of programmable springs, for example, optimally
accumulate energy through multiple squats and steps despite limited limb force
and limited limb motion; and (iii) establish the physical limits of legged
transportation by consolidating the trade-off between performance and user-
comfort similar to wheeled transportation. The results will enable levels of
human mobility enhancement unprecedented in unpowered devices. The results will
also lead to increased energy efficiency in mobile robotic systems for extended
missions and improved autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.