* 2144645
* CAREER: Compositional IoT Safety and Security in Physical Spaces
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Zeynel Celik, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 212,137.00

The inevitable integration of many individual system components programmed
independently into the Internet of Things (IoT) systems has brought new
challenges that require urgent attention. The main challenge is to produce
proofs of correctness that ensure the composite behavior of IoT devices in
physical spaces - the environment in which they operate - adheres to desired
safety and security policies. Recent research in systems security introduced
methods to synthesize IoT implementations that guarantee a range of safety and
security policies. These approaches focus either on policy specification and
verification of individual components in isolation of each other or ensure
security through models solely abstracted from the source code of programs.
Despite the success of past research, there is a significant gap in developing
theory and practice that indicates how the behavior of each device can be
unified to formally reason about the safety and security of IoT systems in
practice. This project integrates research activities aimed at designing and
developing algorithms and tools that formally produce the composite behavior of
an IoT system and a rigorous foundation for reasoning about an IoT environment's
global safety and security. The results of this project will ultimately enhance
the current verification and validation practices of IoT systems and build trust
in national infrastructure and protect citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of the project are divided into three research thrusts. The first
thrust focuses on constructing a novel composite model by unifying the behavior
of individual system components through a combination of static analysis and
system identification techniques to represent an IoT system's global behavior.
The second thrust aims to establish a rigorous foundation for identifying
physical behavior-based policies and developing formal analysis techniques that
ensure an IoT system adheres to safety and security policies. The last thrust
seeks to establish a series of techniques to make model construction and policy
validation scalable and exhaustive in diverse IoT systems. A common theme in all
research directions is the adaptive creation and disposal of system components
that allow for flexible configuration of added, removed, and updated IoT
devices, programs, and environmental changes. Thus, the research activities will
apply to existing software systems and guide future system
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.