* 2144766
* CAREER: Large-scale Dynamic Reconfigurable Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Manya Ghobadi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2027
* USD 228,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to society’s ever-increasing
dependency on online services, reliable working of the underlying communication
networks is of paramount importance. For modern online services, emerging
workloads (such as remote video calls, augmented reality, machine learning, and
health care) depend highly on the underlying network’s response. However, the
design of today’s network infrastructures still treats the physical layer of
networks as a static black box with minimal reconfigurability. This project
seeks to develop new paradigms for large-scale dynamic reconfigurable networks
that are applicable to datacenter networks and software-defined private wide
area networks to improve service delivery. The core mission of the project is to
make physical layer reconfigurability an intrinsic part of future networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on high-impact use-cases and
applications to develop novel solutions for reconfigurable networks by
leveraging optical technologies. To make large-scale reconfigurable networks a
reality, this proposal tackles the foundational challenges of high-performance
reconfigurable systems, including: (1) A set of algorithmic and system design
techniques to co-optimize the network topology jointly with the parallelization
strategy of emerging distributed machine learning jobs in datacenter networks.
(2) A set of optimization and learning-based techniques to build practical
cross-layer solutions for reconfigurable software-defined private wide-area
networks while providing guaranteed performance. (3) Techniques to balance
algorithmic and engineering foundations for reconfigurable systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deploying reconfigurable networks will enable users around
the world to have access to reliable and fast online services. As a result, this
project has the potential of high industry impact. From an educational
perspective, the project will develop a new graduate-level course on Systems for
Machine Learning and Machine Learning for Systems. This emerging area at the
intersection of machine learning and optical systems is driven by the explosive
growth of diverse applications of artificial intelligence and the complexity of
large-scale systems. This project will develop a variety of simulated and
emulated environments with a focus on machine learning workloads and techniques
which will be accessible to a large community of students and researchers who
may not have expertise in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated
through the work in this project will consist of papers, source code, and
benchmarks and will be released at the following website:
http://reconfignets.csail.mit.edu/ Data will be retained for at least three
years beyond the award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.