* 2144978
* CAREER: Sustainable Racial Equity: Creating a New Generation of Engineering Education DEI Leaders
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Homero Murzi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Narcrisha Norman
* 04/30/2027
* USD 210,530.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) program is a National Science Foundation-wide activity that
supports early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role
models in research and education, to lead advances in the mission of their
department or organization, and to build a foundation for a lifetime of
leadership in integrating education and research. This CAREER project aims to
explore the beliefs, experiences, educational training, and research that
supports the development of effective engineering education leaders who are
assuming roles focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). Advancing
equity and broadening the participation of historically marginalized populations
in engineering remain a priority for sustaining U.S. global leadership and
economic progress. DEI initiatives, programs, and research are increasing in
number across the country in an effort to better understand and dismantle the
challenges. However, many DEI efforts are developed in isolation and are not
supported by strong institutional commitment and policy. Results from this work
will advance understanding of DEI issues, approaches, and effective
institutional implementation and will prepare the next generation of DEI leaders
to promote long-term, sustainable racial equity
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary objectives guide this research
effort. First, is to understand DEI leadersâ€™ perceptions, knowledge, and
challenges around their roles. Second is to examine the extent to which those
perceptions compare and contrast with graduate students and early career faculty
members from groups who have been historically underrepresented in their
participation in STEM fields of study. Third, is to develop training and faculty
development programs to prepare the next generation of DEI leaders. Data will be
collected in the first phase of the project by conducting interviews with DEI
leaders at multiple institutions and contrasting their experiences with a
document analysis of institutional DEI programs, policies, awards, and
incentives. In a subsequent phase the project will use a survey, based on
results from phase one, to examine the beliefs and practices of engineering
faculty members and graduate students from groups historically marginalized in
engineering. Training and faculty development are the focus of phase three,
which includes the preparation of senior PhD students and early-career faculty
members in engineering not only for DEI positions, but also for research,
teaching, mentoring, and enhancing student understanding of DEI
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program, with the support of the NSF Racial Equity
Program Description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.