* 2144023
* CAREER: Goal-Oriented Variable Transformations for Efficient Reduced-Order and Data-Driven Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Boris Kramer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 04/30/2027
* USD 614,435.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research that enables efficient
data-driven modeling of complex natural and engineering processes, including
climate dynamics and rocket combustion, thereby promoting the progress of
science, and advancing the national prosperity and welfare. Fast and accurate
computer simulation of such processes is required for real-time prediction,
control intervention, or engineering design. Current techniques for developing
simulation models from measurements rely on approximations that may complicate
analysis and certification, without a reduction in computational cost or
guarantees that underlying physical laws are respected. This project overcomes
these challenges by developing a new theoretical approach for systematically
uncovering optimal formulations of the system dynamics that are computationally
tractable and rigorously certifiable, and that preserve key properties of the
physical processes. Such formulations may enable computationally efficient and
reliable modeling of chemical and thermal processes or be used to predict long-
term ocean flow dynamics that can then be integrated with coupled climate
models. In collaboration with industry, this research will advance the design
and control of air-conditioning systems by allowing them to use more accurate
and faster models of air flow in buildings. Through close integration of
research and education, this project will support and engage with first-
generation and low-income students from local high schools, community colleges,
and universities through outreach, mentoring, and undergraduate research. Free
educational material aimed at an undergraduate audience will be disseminated
widely to promote training of new generations of engineers with strong
computational skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the
foundations of a new theoretical and computational paradigm that leverages
variable transformations to uncover low-dimensional structures in nonlinear
dynamical systems and achieve efficient and accurate model reduction that may be
certified with respect to stability and structure-preservation. It accomplishes
this aim in model- and data-driven settings by exploiting symbolic computing
algorithms for systematically identifying transformations and subsequent order-
reduction projections that result in optimal quadratic or polynomial models that
also preserve symplectic structure for Hamiltonian systems. In the data-driven
case, transformations are sought that lead to long-term predictive reduced-order
models that are physically interpretable and have favorable numerical
properties. Through this effort, new low-dimensional models of the physics of
medium-scale applications of chemical reaction dynamics and additive
manufacturing will be discovered. The methodological contributions will be
assessed on large-scale models of reactive flows and ocean
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.