* 2144593
* CAREER: Federated Learning: Statistical Optimality and Provable Security
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jiaming Xu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 242,322.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid developments in machine
learning and data science have compelled organizations and individuals to rely
more and more on data to solve inference and decision problems. To ease the
privacy concerns of data owners, researchers and practitioners have been
advocating a new learning paradigm – federated learning. Under this framework,
the central learner trains a model by communicating with distributed users and
keeping the training data stored locally at the users. While opening up a world
of new opportunities for training machine-learning models without compromising
data privacy, federated learning faces significant challenges in maintaining
statistical efficiency and security due to the heterogeneity and unreliability
of the distributed users. Successful completion of the project provides key
enabling technologies for efficient and secure federated learning and
accelerates its adoption in security- and safety-critical systems such as self-
driving cars and personalized medicine. The proposed education activities
include teaching and mentoring graduate and undergraduate students targeted
specifically at members of under-represented groups and community outreach
aiming at raising public privacy and security awareness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops an interdisciplinary program to
investigate the fundamental and algorithmic aspects of federated learning
ranging from statistical efficiency to security and privacy. The statistical
efficiency of the widely-adopted algorithms is analyzed beyond their failures of
reaching stationary points. New algorithms are developed based on meta-learning
and clustering, and shown to be statistically optimal even in the presence of
model and data heterogeneity. Moreover, this research conducts a comprehensive
study of decentralized learning under Byzantine attacks. By borrowing insights
from robust statistics, byzantine-resilient gradient descent algorithms with
exponential convergence to the optimal error rates are devised. Finally, to
protect the learner's privacy against eavesdropping attacks, the investigator
aims to design optimal private learning strategies by innovating ideas from
information theory and duality theory between the learner and adversary.
Complementing the theoretical investigation, the new learning algorithms are
made available as computational packages for the federated learning systems and
real-data applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.