* 2144127
* CAREER: Algorithmic Foundations for Demand-Responsive Transit Systems - Creating More Equitable and Sustainable Cities through Better Transit
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Samitha Samaranayake, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2026
* USD 598,119.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project will address fundamental research questions related
to designing and operating transit-centric transportation systems, with the aim
of enabling an efficient, sustainable and equitable transportation system for
all. While the past decade has seen enormous advances in transportation
technologies such as ridesharing and self-driving cars powered by, for example,
artificial intelligence, mobile phone adoption and new business models, it
remains unclear whether these innovations alone can lead us toward a future that
is sustainable and equitable. This project argues that fundamental progress in
this regard is best achieved via hybrid transit systems, services that
seamlessly integrate the efficiencies of mass transit with agile, demand-
responsive modes related to ridesharing. The technical focus will be on
algorithms for designing and operating such systems, an area with key research
gaps. The research will be conducted through the lens of Algorithm Engineering,
which focuses on developing theoretical insights from successful data-driven and
heuristic approaches, and heuristics from theory. Collaborations with
stakeholders, such as transit agencies, technology providers, community groups,
and policy makers will enable an understanding of practical and societal needs,
model calibration using real-data, and validation through simulation and
deployments. The project aims to broaden the renewed national focus on transit
infrastructure to innovations in service modes, and will involve community
outreach and education efforts targeting high school students, college students
and public agencies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will incorporate
technical ideas from Civil Engineering, Operations Research and Computer Science
to develop new methodologies and train students with cross-disciplinary
expertise. The project aims to make fundamental intellectual contributions for
enabling the realization of hybrid transit systems, spanning four research
thrusts: 1) Quantifying the value of integrating agile, demand-responsive
systems with mass transit via formalizing a new metric, the Value of Dynamism,
and designing efficient techniques based on two-stage stochastic optimization
for computing it; 2) Developing new models and algorithms for hybrid transit
network design via approximation algorithms and data-driven heuristics; 3)
Integrating pricing and social welfare analysis with hybrid network design, via
compact mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulations, and using these
methods to understand the impact of service design and policy decisions (e.g.,
subsidies) on societal goals (e.g., equity); and 4) Developing fast, scalable,
passenger-matching and routing algorithms for the demand-responsive component of
hybrid transit systemsâ€”by formulating novel relaxations of the classical integer
linear programming approach that can efficiently integrate information about
future demand (i.e., be non-myopic).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.