* 2144880
* CAREER: DURAIS : A Platform for Co-Designing and Understanding the Roles of Conversational Artificial Intelligence Systems on Caregiving
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Jina Huh-Yoo, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2027
* USD 467,854.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caregiving involves socially, emotionally, and
physically demanding work. However, resources for caregivers are limited. This
research project aims to advance the state-of-the-art of human-centered
artificial intelligence (AI). This project investigate the roles conversational
AI systems (CAI) can play in supporting caregivers (e.g., parents, guardians,
other family members) and how domain experts and caregivers can work together to
define these roles. By studying two different contexts of caregiving--parenting
and living with dementia--the research contributes to; (1) understanding the
roles and limitations on when conversational AI addresses caregiving needs; and,
(2) developing a platform for stakeholders to co-design conversational AI that
supports the work of caregiving. Conversational AI is expected to help
caregivers to focus on the work that cannot be automated, reducing caregiving
demands and improving quality. Engaging with community throughout the research
program is expected to generate beneficial outcomes. Processes of engagement
include community-facing workshops and seminars, disseminating knowledge, and
generating synergistic collaborative opportunities with cross-disciplinary
fields, such as nursing, nutrition, and family health, solving society’s big
problems through AI technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project contributes to identifying the social and technical boundaries of how AI
systems can support the work involved in caregiving (e.g., parenting, caregiving
ill individuals) by defining these roles through co-design with domain experts
and caregivers. The project begins by performing formative interviews and
analysis of conversational data sources of caregiver support activities to
conduct requirements engineering on which caregiving work can be supported,
reduced, or automated through CAI. Implementing these requirements with
generative and rule-based CAI then tests comparative performances of various
language models in effectively generating automated CAI responses. Building on
this formative work, the project develops the DURAIS platform, allowing domain
experts and caregivers to co-design CAI supporting caregiving. By developing and
evaluating a co-design platform of CAI in two different contexts of
caregiving—parenting and living with dementia--the research contributes to
testing how CAI co-design can resolve challenges around inefficiencies of rule-
based systems and unreliability of generative models and evaluating how
automatically generated conversations of generative- vs. rule-based CAI can
uniquely support caregiving. The research program broadly contributes to
understanding novel paradigms for co-designing AI systems that support socially
and culturally complex and demanding work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.