* 2144562
* CAREER: Socially-Aware Language Technologies To Support People in Supporting Others for Better Online Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Diyi Yang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2023
* USD 101,161.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This research will invent a set of new socially aware
language technologies designed for online peer support groups, including machine
learning classifiers that automatically predict helping skills from text in
noisy and low-resourced settings, and language generation techniques that
effectively generate tailored and contextualized assistance for supporters. The
people who provide support are the key to the success of these online groups,
which are used by millions of people with health concerns. However, online
supporters often do not receive rigorous training and tailored feedback, which
might lead to unsupportive or even negative helping behaviors. Existing
mechanisms of training or scaffolding largely rely on human supervision, making
it hard to scale up to help the large number of supporters who support millions
of people in need of care. This work has the potential to advance the state-of-
the-art and scale up to many different other domains with minimal human effort.
By developing, deploying, and evaluating new interventions that empower
supporters in socially important domains, this work broadens the scientific
understanding of technology use for mental health peer support. By combining
computer science with the study of online peer support groups, this work will
appeal to students who might not otherwise be attracted to science and
engineering careers, including women and members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will accomplish the vision of supporting
people in better supporting others in several representative text-based online
peer support groups by: (1) developing innovative natural language processing
techniques to predict supporters' helping skills and examining how helping
skills related to positive outcomes; (2) designing contextualized language
generation approaches that provide tailored assistance for supporters by
highlighting which helping skills are needed in a given situation and suggesting
example responses with actionable feedback; and (3) creating an open-source and
human-in-the-loop tool to empower supporters and evaluating how the tool can be
used for both training and real-time scaffolding via lab studies, field
experiments, and real-world deployment. The result will be a novel synthesis of
social science theories and beneficial advances in natural language processing
(NLP) communities, to pioneer this emerging research field that uses NLP to
support mental health and well-being. Concretely, it will develop scientific
knowledge of how supporters use different helping skills to help seekers, and a
deep understanding of how such support exchange relates to positive
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.