* 2144770
* 2022 Origins of Life GRC and GRS: Environments for the Origins of Life and Habitability
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Nita Sahai, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 0.00

This grant will provide partial support for the 2022 Origins of Life (OoL)
Gordon Research Conference(GRC)and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), Galveston, TX,
in January 2022. How life emerged on Earth is one of the most fundamental
questions that human societies have asked in all cultures and all periods of
time. Thus, exploring the answers to this question has fundamental value to
human society. Furthermore, OoL is a tremendously interdisciplinary field and
requires expertise, including geochemistry, geophysics, planetary science, space
sciences, biochemistry, cell biology, paleontology and organic chemistry, among
many other fields. Thus, OoL represents the true spirit of Convergence Science
as envisioned by NSF. Hence, the advances in concepts and techniques in OoL
could bring huge impacts with a wide range of scientific, technological and
society benefits. For example, the bottom-up assembly of model protocells shares
many technological skills and concepts with the field of synthetic cells, that
has potential applications in biotechnology, synthetic photosynthesis to control
anthropogenic global warming and even bioinspired architectural design. Finally,
the unique format of the GRC/GRS has tremendous potential impact on shaping the
careers of young scientists, especially graduate students, postdocs, and
assistant professors, and this award will support specifically their
participation. The GRC/GRS Chairs/Vice-Chairs have also made a tremendous effort
to invite a large number of Invited Speakers and Discussion Leaders from
underrepresented groups and early career scientists to encourage participation
from these groups among the conference attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant will provide partial support for the 2022 Origins of Life (OoL) Gordon
Research Conference(GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), Galveston, TX, in
January 2022. Paradigm-changing discoveries about stellar and planetary
evolution, survival of organic molecules and microorganisms under extreme
conditions, and geochemical environments on early Earth and other planets are
sparking a synergistic dialogue between geoscientists, chemists, and biologists
to understand how life might have originated under geochemically plausible
environments. The importance of the geochemical environmental conditions as
providing constraints on prebiotic organic chemistry has only recently begun to
be acknowledged in this field. The 2022 OOL GRC is entitled “Environments for
the Origins of Life and Habitability” to reflect this growing recognition and
the 9 sessions focus on how geochemistry may have evolved to biogeochemistry.
The Chair of this GRC is Dr. Nita Sahai and the Vice-Chair is Dr. Laurie Barge.
The GRS Chair and Vice-Chair are, respectively, Dr. Laura Rodriguez and Mr.
Tyler Roche. Sahai and Barge are both geochemists and the specific focus of this
GRC is on the plausible geochemical environments that could have served as the
cradle for the OoL, thus supporting the transition from geochemistry to
biogeochemistry. This distinguishes it from many prior OoL GRCs which have
focused primarily on biochemistry and organic chemistry. The GRC is one of the
most intellectually stimulating conferences because of its design and format.
Another unique feature of the 2022 OoL GRC is that the question of Epistemology
will also be addressed by one Invited Speaker, which is an especially important
topic for understanding the OoL or the Origins of the Universe. New ideas that
move the field forward often emerge from the informal and formal discussions at
the GRC. Thus, the OoL GRC is resonant with the scope of the NSF Ear GG program
and NSF’s vision of Convergence Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.