* 2144253
* CAREER: Micromechanics and Metabolic Properties of Living Interfacial Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Tagbo Niepa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2027
* USD 663,372.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will support research to reveal how bacteria grow and
adapt at the interface of water and oil, and at the interface of water and air.
Films of bacterial aggregates, also called biofilms, are a ubiquitous form of
microbial life. When they grow on solid-liquid interfaces, they can cause health
problems like infections near joint implants. When biofilms grow at air-liquid
interfaces, they can cause lung problems. How biofilms grow and adapt at these
interfaces is not well understood. This work will first explore how bacteria
cope with changes in surface tension and energy. Next, this work will study how
bacteria’s adaptation to changing conditions can be manipulated to create new
materials. Finally, this work will suggest how viruses and nanomaterials could
be used to control bacterial development at fluid interfaces. The results of
this work will ultimately be relevant for treating chronic lung infections or
developing more effective treatment of crude oil spills using bacteria.
Moreover, these research activities will motivate students to pursue STEM
careers. The project will adapt professional engagement strategies to develop
pre-college and college experiences for minorities, first-generation, and
financially challenged students. It will promote an inclusive climate and
facilitate these students’ academic success through a range of mentored
experiences. Educational activities include a “Bugs as Materials” Camp, a
college application workshop, and a summer experience for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physicochemical mechanisms that
regulate microbial growth in biofilms remain poorly understood, in part because
of the versatility of microorganisms’ ability to respond to diverse
environmental conditions. Even less well-known are the mechanisms governing the
growth and metabolic responses of biofilms formed at the fluid interface. To
test the overarching hypothesis that bacteria metabolize a patch of an interface
and secrete a protective coating to thrive under harsh interfacial conditions,
three objectives will be pursued: (1) systematically elucidate the viscoelastic
properties and the physiology of interfacial films; (2) characterize the effects
of phenotypic adaptation of bacteria under interfacial confinement on
interfacial film mechanics; and (3) determine how the mechanical integrity of
mixed interfacial films is altered by chemical and biological insults. Model
organisms, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, will help
elucidate how films at bacterial interfaces form, and how the rheological
properties are altered by physical, chemical, and biological
insults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.