* 2144634
* CAREER: Towards Scale-Invariant Identification and Synthesis  Algorithms for Control Using Randomization
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* James Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Networked systems such as smart city infrastructure and the Internet are
engineering triumphs. However, modeling and designing controllers for systems of
this scale is technically and computationally challenging at best, and
intractable in the worst case. As the magnitude, complexity, and connectivity of
these and future systems accelerates, so too do the technical challenges.
Feedback control is the mechanism that enables engineers to guarantee desirable
system behaviors such as stability (do the effects of disturbances decay over
time?), performance (is the system operating efficiently?), and robustness (can
performance and stability be maintained despite operating in an uncertain
environment?). For networked systems, feedback control can only be applied in a
distributed manner, there is no central decision maker. Unfortunately,
distributed control is theoretically and computationally more challenging than
its centralized counterpart. Moreover, distributed control requires transmission
of potentially sensitive data over a network. Despite recent progress in
distributed control and data privacy, there is a large gap between the
complexity of systems we can control, and complexity of systems we want to
control. The difference further increases when we additionally ask for data
privacy guarantees. This project seeks to bridge the gap between theory,
scalable computation, and data privacy and thus help make autonomous systems
that we depend upon safe and trustworthy. Results from this research will enable
the widespread adoption of distributed control in the aerospace, robotics,
automotive, and energy industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of
three foundational research topics; i) learning a dynamical system model from
partially observed data, ii) designing robust and optimal distributed
controllers from the model, and iii) integrating data privacy mechanisms into
the modeling and control workflow. The contention of this research project is
that it is impossible to achieve these goals for large-scale networked systems
using traditional “exact” methods. Instead we will formulate “approximations” of
the learning and control problems that can be solved at a fraction of the cost
of doing so for the full problem. Correctly designed, these approximations can
provide stability and performance guarantees for the original large-scale
system. To achieve this formulation, we will develop new theory and algorithms
based on randomized methods for numerical linear algebra and high-dimensional
probability, customized for distributed control problems. Moreover, data privacy
will be naturally accounted for as sensitive data gets compressed and
transformed in the approximation stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.