* 2144380
* CAREER: Actuating robots with actomyosin active gels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jose Alvarado, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2027
* USD 254,154.00

Non-technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gels of the proteins actin and
myosin exist in virtually every mammalian cell. These gels are capable of
exerting contraction forces, which allow cells to move, divide, and change
shape. Although it is well known that these gels consume chemical energy and
exert mechanical power, the relationship between energy consumption and power
exertion is not well understood. This proposal aims to quantify this
relationship by measuring both the energy consumption and mechanical power
simultaneously. This work will directly address the energy-consuming nature of
materials containing actin and myosin, which will elucidate how these proteins
can deform cells and tissues. Furthermore, this proposal will develop gels of
actin and myosin as actuators for soft robots. These robots will take advantage
of the dynamic nature of actin-myosin gels to switch on-the-fly between optimal
states. In addition, this research will inspire an educational robotics project
that seeks to build a robot that is powered by the expulsion of a fluid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active matter,
including active gels of the cytoskeletal proteins actin and myosin, comprises a
fascinating class of systems wherein macroscopic phenomena emerge from a
microscopic consumption of chemical energy. Can this energy consumption be
harnessed to power mechanical tasks? This question has been extensively explored
in the context of active fluids, which can rotate gears and drive flows. More
recently, theoretical studies have looked at the work done by self-propelled
particles. However, existing studies have not investigated cases where active
gels deform their environment. Thus, the mechanical power output of cytoskeletal
actomyosin gels remains poorly understood. The existence of this problem is
surprising, considering the central role that the actomyosin cytoskeleton plays
in driving deformations on cellular and tissue levels. This proposal aims to
quantify the relationship between microscopic energy consumption and macroscopic
power exertion by measuring both the energy consumption and mechanical power
simultaneously. Furthermore, this proposal will develop the principles of
applying such gels as actuators for various soft-robotics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.