* 2144189
* CAREER: Mechanisms and control of nitrous oxide emissions from forage conservation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jeongdae Im, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2027
* USD 487,827.00

Agriculture is a major industry in the United States contributing about $1
trillion to the Nationâ€™s gross domestic product (GDP) in 2019. Agriculture is
also a significant contributor to the global emissions of greenhouse gases
(GHGs). It is the largest source of nitrous oxide (N2O), a GHG which is about
300 times as potent as CO2 at heating the atmosphere. However, the current N2O
emission inventories from agriculture and farming operations, including ISO
14064 and USEPA Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, only track
emissions from soil management, manure management, and field burning of
agricultural residues. This CAREER project will focus on N2O emissions from
forage conservations as an abundant and yet unaccounted source of N2O from
agriculture and farming. Forages are plants or parts of plants that serve as
feed for livestock. Forage conservation often relies on fermentation as lactic
acid produced from fermentation works as a natural preservative for forage
crops. However, microorganisms that produce GHGs can also thrive in conserved
forages with preliminary studies by the Principal Investigator (PI) of this
CAREER project showing the production of a significant amount of N2O from
laboratory incubations of alfalfa, a widely used crop in forage conservation.
Building upon the results of these preliminary studies, the PI of this CAREER
project proposes to carry out an integrated laboratory and field research
program to quantify N2O emissions in forage conservations and investigate the
microbial processes that control such emissions. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the generation of new data and
fundamental knowledge to quantify, manage, and mitigate the emissions of a non-
CO2 and more potent GHG such as N2O. Further benefits to society will be
achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of two
graduate students and two undergraduate students at Kansas State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forage conservation is a significant and
understudied source of potent GHGs such as nitrous oxide (N2O) in agriculture
and farming. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to quantify and
advance the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of N2O emissions from
forage conservation processes. The specific objectives of the project laboratory
and field studies are to: (1) Quantify and probe the mechanisms of N2O emissions
by microorganisms in forage conservations (Objective 1), (2) Develop new
strategies to control and manage N2O emissions from forage conservations
(Objective 2), and (3) Validate the findings from the lab experiments in field-
scale experiments (Objective 3). The successful completion of this research has
the potential for transformative impact. The integrated laboratory and field
experiments could contribute to more accurate estimates of N2O fluxes from
forage conservations at local, regional, and global scales. The microbiological
investigations could produce new fundamental knowledge and open new avenues to
develop more effective strategies and solutions to manage and mitigate N2O
emissions from forage conservation processes. To advance the education and
training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will work with K-State Research
and Extension (the Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and
Cooperative Extension Service) to raise awareness of the environmental impact of
GHGs produced from forage conservations among livestock producers through
outreach and educational activities. In addition, the PI plans to 1) partner
with Future Farmers of America (FFA) to develop a course module on GHG gas
emissions and management in farming and livestock production for high school
teachers who run FFA programs in rural Kansas and 2) work with the K-State
Project Impact staff to encourage and recruit rural students to pursue graduate
education in Environmental Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.