* 2144385
* CAREER: Dissecting the Fundamental Components of Multi-input Response in Exploration and Navigation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Mason Klein, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2027
* USD 300,000.00

A fundamental task of understanding physical systems is to determine how inputs
are received, manipulated inside, and transformed into external outputs. This
CAREER award investigates a living organism, the fruit fly larva, in a similar
way, with the goal of characterizing how its simple brain and body operate to
produce physical movement. Crawling larva traversing controlled environments
that include changing temperature, vibration, and/or light level will be tracked
with cameras, and their behavioral features determined precisely with computer
video analysis. The study will use new methods that seek to predict the animalâ€™s
behavior in complex temperature environments, use a laser system to destroy
single brain cells and observe the effect on behavior, simulate crawling to
compare the larva to physics models, and determine how the larva handles
multiple kinds of inputs at once. The results together will provide greater
understanding of how living systems process the information in their
environments and perform important actions. The research is also paired with
education and outreach programs, which includes gathering data from student
researchers around the world doing larva projects in physics courses, and an
animal behavior art museum installation to reach a broader K-12 and public
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of thoroughly understanding
sensorimotor transformations in a step-by-step fashion, the experiments are
designed to deliver complex stimulus functions to freely crawling Drosophila
larvae, ideal animals for behavioral quantification and neuronal interrogation
and manipulation. By characterizing the whole-animal response to a single input,
temperature, as mathematical, predictive functions that maps input to output,
the group will dissect the basic input elements that govern the rules of
exploratory and navigational motion, and dissect the essential output elements
that determine the overall diffusive and directed movement. Through fs laser
ablation the group will selectively eliminate combinations of input circuit
elements and observe the effect on behavior. They will also observe the whole-
animal response to multiple input types: temperature, visible light, mechanical
vibration, and optogenetic light. The work in this project will determine how
multiple individual input elements in a stimulus circuit combine with internal
parameters to produce behavior. In natural contexts animals must respond to many
forms of inputs simultaneously, and a full understanding of living systems
requires a comprehensive treatment that examines multiple stimuli, multiple
sensory neurons acting in a circuit, and internal states and biases of
individuals. Completion of the proposed work will make available to the
scientific community a detailed characterization of how information travels
through a living system, and how multiple inputs interact with each other to
produce behavioral output. Determining how multiple inputs combine and
especially how the weight of each input depends on surrounding conditions and
history, will have direct bearing on more complex systems. Research will be
integrated with an innovative education program that brings animal behavior
experiments to physical sciences curriculum, and brings animal motion to an art
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.