* 2144540
* CAREER: Qurious: Methods for Making Erroneous Near-term Quantum Computers More Usable
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Devesh Tiwari, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2027
* USD 218,283.00

Quantum computing offers exceptional promise for transformative discoveries in
many scientific and business domains, including drug discovery, cybersecurity,
manufacturing, financial services — realizing this potential requires urgent
research efforts toward making quantum computing technology more usable and
mature quickly, and developing a capable STEM workforce with strong technical
skills in quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, existing
quantum computing machines, widely known as Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum
(NISQ) machines, are highly error-prone and expected to remain to be
reliability-constrained in the future. When computational scientists execute
their applications on NISQ machines, they receive erroneous and noisy program
outputs. The promise of exponential speedups by quantum computers is not
meaningful if the end-users cannot infer the correct program output after
executing their programs on these machines. Therefore, this project, Qurious
(pronounced as "curious"), aims to design and develop a robust system software
ecosystem for quantum computers to help quantum programmers make meaningful
interpretations of noisy and erroneous runs on quantum computers. The methods,
developed in this project, will mitigate the side-effects of errors on quantum
computers, and hence, enable high-performance computing (HPC) programmers to
leverage quantum computers for solving computationally challenging problems of
societal importance. This project will help HPC programmers scale their programs
on larger quantum machines, and exploit the heterogeneity among quantum machines
in terms of resilience characteristics on quantum cloud computing platforms, to
make program outputs less noisy and more reliable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to prepare a diverse and competitive STEM workforce with quantum
computing skills to achieve economic competitiveness in the quantum-enabled
future and leverage the transformative changes quantum computing will bring to
society. This project devises a novel three-pronged education and outreach plan.
The first step aims to raise curiosity and elevate excitement about quantum
computing at an early stage (e.g., high school students). Then, at the next
stage (i.e., undergraduate level), this excitement is converted into the
development of quantum-style thinking. At the next educational stage (i.e.,
graduate students), the students are provided technical expertise for
efficiently managing quantum computing resources under reliability constraints —
leveraging the research advances and outcomes achieved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.