* 2144226
* CAREER: Utilization of Unique Atomic and Nuclear Properties of Gadolinium in Nuclear and Radiological Sciences
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Marian Jandel, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2027
* USD 149,331.00

Gadolinium (Gd) is an intriguing element that has a variety of interesting
properties. One of its isotopes, Gd-157, has the largest rate of capturing
thermal neutrons than all other known stable nuclei. In Gadolinium Neutron
Capture Therapy (GdNCT), the radiation emitted as a result of neutron capture
can be used for cancer treatment. A striking advantage of GdNCT compared to
other radiation therapy treatments is that the initial pharmaceutical solution
with the gadolinium content is non-radioactive. Nuclear and atomic excited
states are induced only after neutron interactions, and the resultant radiations
can be used to destroy nearby cancer cells. The focus of this project will be
the characterization of the radiations associated with GdNCT and their
radiological dose using various gadolinium nanoparticle-based materials. The
materials will be irradiated by neutrons from the UMass Lowell Research Reactor
(UMLRR), and the resultant gamma rays and electrons will be measured using a new
detector array recently designed at UMass Lowell. In parallel, the potential use
of gadolinium in a novel thin-film neutron and x-ray detector will be studied.
The radiation detection technologies are at the forefront of all experimental
discoveries in low and high energy nuclear physics. New technologies are needed
in security applications, counter terrorism, nuclear medicine imaging and
scanning. Proposed work on a novel radiation detection technology based on thin
films with Gd layer will advance the field of radiation detection with designs
of small flexible films capable of measuring doses of x-rays and neutrons. The
involvement of undergraduate and graduate students will be a strong emphasis of
these research activities. Students from three different accredited graduate
programs: (1) Radiological Sciences and Protection, (2) Medical Physics and (3)
Physics and Applied Physics, will contribute to the activities proposed herein.
The capabilities developed during this project will be used to launch a new
course, “Advanced Radiological Measurements Laboratory”, in the UMass Lowell
Physics and Applied Physics Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nuclear de-
excitation of gadolinium after neutron capture results in the emission of gamma
rays and internal conversion electrons, followed by the emission of Auger
electrons to resolve atomic excitations. These electrons can efficiently deliver
local dose to tumors saturated with a pharmaceutical solution containing
gadolinium. In this project, the resultant gamma rays and electrons produced by
neutron capture reactions on gadolinium in nanoparticle-based materials will be
measured using the combination of high-resolution gamma-ray spectroscopy and
high-efficiency calorimetry. Details of correlated emissions will be probed
using fast nanosecond coincidence methods. Comprehensive computational
simulations of the capture cascades and the dose distributions in local tissue
and neighboring organs also will be performed based on validated physics models
and new improved correlated atomic and nuclear data libraries. The size and
morphology of the nanoparticles will be studied to control and optimize the
range of emitted electrons to potentially tune the local dose to the tumor.
Likewise, high-fidelity Monte-Carlo radiation transport simulations will guide
design and development of the thin-film neutron and x-ray
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.