* 2144342
* CAREER: Establishing the Drosophila proventriculus as a model symbiosis organ
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* William Ludington, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2027
* USD 239,342.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most animals maintain certain
types of bacteria in their gut that aid the animal by improving the nutrition of
the diet and modulating the immune system. Microbial associations are
particularly important in insects, which are critically important to
agriculture, ecology, and human health, including pollinators such as bees,
pests such as squash bugs and fruit flies, and disease vectors such as mosquitos
and ticks. How insects recruit and maintain their preferred bacteria is largely
unknown in terms of the specific genes and molecules the host uses to regulate
colonization. The proposed research aims to close this knowledge gap by
identifying these genes and molecules and how specific host cells regulate them.
Due to critical roles of insects in ecology, agriculture, and public health,
outcomes of the proposed research could have major impacts by developing uses of
symbiotic bacteria to aid and control insects. Furthermore, the high
conservation of gene function across mammals means discoveries in insects could
apply to other animals, including vertebrates. Broader impacts of this grant
also include development and implementation of hands-on and online microbiology
curricula in public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across animals, there is a
knowledge gap around the precise developmental genetic mechanisms that construct
and maintain the host tissues that house symbiotic organisms as well as whether
a host can use certain bacteria to control others. Drosophila has long been a
workhorse of animal developmental genetics, with unparalleled resources of
publicly available genetic stocks with defined gene perturbations, and the wide
genetic conservation across the animal kingdom. The PI’s discovery of symbiotic
bacteria that form an adherent, multispecies community in a precise and
understudied section of the Drosophila foregut presents a transformative
opportunity to apply Drosophila genetics to the study of symbiosis between
diverse gut bacteria and the host. This research will define the Drosophila
symbiotic organ in terms of the fly genes that support the bacteria. Host
genetic pathways, in secretion and immunity will be evaluated by quantitative
cell biology, microbiology, and genomics approaches as well as by isotope ratio
mass spectrometry, which will be used to measure nutrient exchange between host
and bacteria. This will advance the field by providing candidate genes and
developmental programs to discover symbiotic niches in other insects and
animals, possibly even humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.