* 2144503
* CAREER: Conversational User Interfaces to Support  Older Adults' Social Wellness
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Aqueasha Martin-Hammond, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2027
* USD 543,539.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maintaining social wellness
through a sustained network of in-person relationships is essential to
preserving health. Yet, as individuals age, remaining socially active can become
challenging. For example, many older adults relocate for retirement, experience
changes in mobility, or begin losing family and friends, which may weaken the
fabric of their social network. Because of this, older adults are at risk of
experiencing feelings of loneliness and social isolation, which may lead to
declines in mental and physical health. This project will investigate the
potential of emerging conversational user interfaces such as voice assistants
and chatbots to help older adults stay connected with the world around them,
thus improving their social wellness. By engaging older adults in the design
process and adapting state-of-the-art conversational design methods, this work
will develop empirically validated novel strategies for personalized
conversational interfaces that leverage real-world social connections and
motivate older adults to engage in social activities with other people. The
project will also yield new curriculum, experiential learning opportunities,
community engagement initiatives, and tools to aid reflective thinking of the
impact of artificially intelligent technologies on an increasingly aging
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages social-behavioral theories
to identify and examine a new family of conversational interaction approaches
for supporting older adults in maintaining and building social relationships
with others. To do so, the team will employ participatory methods that leverage
close community collaborations with senior organizations and older adults. The
research will include three main aims. First, the team will generate an
empirical account of the needs of older adults to maintain social wellness in an
interconnected world, along with situations that pose risks of isolation.
Second, the team will explore conversational design principles to support
collaborative two-way dialogues that encourage engagement in social wellness
activities, with particular attention to people's concerns about privacy and
aspects of the situation where they are using the system. Finally, the team will
develop and evaluate a novel platform implementing tested conversational
strategies to motivate older adults' participation in socially meaningful
activities. This project will advance knowledge of the uses, challenges, and
real-world barriers of designing and deploying conversational user interfaces to
support older adults' social wellness, contributing to human-centered artificial
intelligence, aging, and conversational design. The research is expected to
reveal new approaches that can benefit older adults' social wellness while
decreasing the risk of social isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.