* 2144915
* CAREER: Fossil Amber Insight Into Macroevolutionary Dynamics in an Ecologically Diverse Island System
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Phillip Barden, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2027
* USD 414,651.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fossils provide direct evidence
for the processes that shape ecosystems and biodiversity over long periods of
history on earth. In particular, the fossil record has helped us better
understand past extinctions and ecological changes, which are increasingly
relevant to a rapidly changing planet. At the same time, the fossil record is
highly incomplete, and it can be difficult to unify our understanding of
ecosystems across long periods of time spanning millions of years. This project
seeks to synthesize information from data-rich fossil and modern communities in
a unique island system to reveal broadly applicable patterns and processes that
are responsible for maintaining biodiversity. This research focuses on ants and
ant communities of Hispaniola, which are both preserved in high detail in the
amber fossil record and highly diverse on the island today. This synthesis will
address key questions including: Why do some organisms go extinct while others
persist over long periods of time? How predictable are changes in ecosystems and
communities across long periods of time? How quickly do these changes occur?
Knowledge and data resulting from this research will be used in the creation of
K-12 educational materials, which will be developed through interdisciplinary
collaborations between industrial design and biology undergraduates. Educational
products will be widely disseminated in schools and museums in the U.S. and
Dominican Republic. The project will produce biological, ecological, and
analytical resources for researchers locally and worldwide. It will provide
research and educational opportunities at the high school, undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels with inclusive
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a comprehensive dataset
for the entire fossil and extant ant communities on Hispaniola, with a total of
~250 species collectively. Project activities will integrate taxonomy,
systematics, morphology, high-resolution CT-scan imaging, genome-scale molecular
data, phylogenetics, supervised machine learning, and phylogenetic comparative
methods. Research is specimen-based and will utilize and contribute to multiple
museum collections. Data derived from fossil and extant taxa will be used to
test interrelated hypotheses related to extinction selectivity, faunal turnover,
and the role of macroevolutionary processes in community assembly. All project
products, including datasets, will be made publicly available, and open-access
resources will be produced for future researchers. Educational products from the
project comprise tactile lesson plans and active learning projects that will
reach underserved communities and encourage participation in STEM career
pathways. This inclusion work will be further supported through a high school to
postdoctoral mentoring pipeline with the goal of recruiting and retaining
diverse students in biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.