* 2144304
* CAREER: Characterizing the phylogenetic lineages and genomic factors enabling adaptation in free-living marine nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Holly Bik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2027
* USD 373,414.00

Free-living nematodes are one of the most abundant microbial phyla found in
benthic habitats worldwide, representing 70-90% of metazoan life forms in marine
sediments and performing key functions such as nutrient cycling and sediment
stability. Yet, their unexplored diversity—and the extreme paucity of taxonomic
and molecular data from benthic marine ecosystems— represents one of the major
challenges in biology and currently limits our capacity to understand the
accelerating consequences of environmental change. This project uses cutting-
edge -Omics approaches in conjunction with classical morphological taxonomy to
characterize patterns regarding the biodiversity, evolution, and ecology of
free-living marine nematodes and their host-associated microbiomes. First, this
work uses eDNA metabarcoding to determine how overall meiofaunal biodiversity
changes across marine habitat transitions (depth, salinity) and gradients of
environmental stress (pollution, oxygen availability). Second, the project
identifies key nematode lineages which maintain “cosmopolitan” distributions
across key marine gradients, and lineages which can tolerate the most extreme
environmental stressors. Finally, this work characterizes the nematode genomic
adaptations and host-associated microbiome patterns that may facilitate nematode
dispersal and adaptation to extreme environmental stress. Educational activities
are being strongly integrated with data generation and analysis of nematode
-Omics datasets. The investigator leads an effort to build foundational
computational skill sets in undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Georgia, establishing and growing a local bioinformatics community
of practice. Weeklong summer hackathons aimed at intermediate bioinformatics
learners merge data visualization and science communication tools and teach
participants how to “tell stories through data”. Finally, this project engages
undergraduate researchers in “sediments to species” workflows, providing
interdisciplinary education in classical molecular systematics, bioinformatics,
and science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
carry out the first large-scale investigation of free-living marine nematodes
that that collects molecular data across marine habitat transitions (salinity,
depth) and gradients of environmental stress (pollution, oxygen availability),
providing a comparative dataset for the existing body of historical
(morphological) taxonomic studies. This research uses a novel approach that
combines traditional light microcopy, environmental DNA sequencing, and single-
worm genome sequencing in order to advance scientific knowledge of free-living
nematodes and their ecological and evolutionary roles in marine habitats
worldwide. The resulting datasets produce an important baseline of global
nematode biodiversity in shallow-water and deep-sea marine habitats, and
illuminate “dark areas” in the Nematode Tree of Life (lineages which are
currently poorly sampled and lack molecular DNA barcodes). This project combines
interdisciplinary research themes spanning marine nematode systematics,
bioinformatics, and microbial ecology, with a strong integration of
computational training and science communication for undergraduate and graduate
students across all project aims. Research outputs are rapidly advancing our
knowledge of the structure and function of seafloor habitats worldwide, and
molecular datasets lay the groundwork for future genome-enabled studies of
diverse free-living nematode groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.