* 2144549
* CAREER: Liminal locomotion: life at the air-water-land interface
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Margaret Byron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 05/31/2027
* USD 400,017.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Act of 2021
(Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most animals are movement specialists:
swimmers, walkers, or flyers. But a few species have the unusual ability to move
in all of these modes. To be this versatile, a multimodal animal must overcome
the significant functional challenge of generating thrust in the divergent
physical conditions of water, land, and air. Understanding how animals do this
remarkable behavior remains unclear. This project studies trimodal freshwater
insects — water boatmen, backswimmers, and diving beetles that swim, walk, and
fly — using a biomechanical approach. To visualize the ultrafast motion of their
limbs and bodies in 3D, a cutting-edge high-speed video system that can be used
in the lab or outside is being developed. During swimming and underwater
walking, those limb motions move the water: by tracking precisely how the water
moves, the investigator will calculate thrust and gain a mechanical
understanding of the behaviors. Comparing three species allows investigation of
the different pathways by which the behaviors, and the body shapes that allow
them, may have evolved. This research offers insights into the biology of
movement versatility and the functional principles needed to invent bioinspired
multimodal machines. Graduate students will be trained both in the cutting-edge
techniques and in science communication and outreach, helping them integrate
public service into their work from the beginning of their research careers. To
put outreach into practice, graduate students will partner with two local nature
centers to share insights with community members with projects designed to reach
different demographics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how some freshwater
insects manage to achieve trimodal locomotion, high-speed videography and laser-
based flow velocimetry will be combined to build a complete, three-dimensional
picture of the kinematics and fluid dynamics of (1) walking in air and
underwater, (2) swimming, and (3) the swimming-to-flying transition. Operating
at intermediate Reynolds numbers and moving between mediums, the study species
offer opportunities to study transitional fluid dynamics, for example, in the
scaling of drag-based paddling, a fundamental and widespread locomotor
mechanism. This is the first study to measure high-resolution flow fields
generated by the swimming of the target species, the first to measure 3D
velocity fields of underwater walking in any arthropod, and the first to
quantify water takeoff in conjunction with flight in insects. For the takeoff
from water to flight, preliminary data suggest that the behavior is driven by
both surface tension and aerodynamic forces. This work will shed new light on
the general biomechanical principles of free surface locomotion by developing a
methodology that permits simultaneous high-resolution temporal and spatial
measurement of underwater velocity fields and above-water kinematics. In
addition to the important broader impact of graduate student training, this
project creates a new learning community for engineering graduate students that
will support public outreach efforts, not only for this project, but also for
many others, spanning the breadth of the mechanical engineering discipline.
These efforts will be assessed as part of an educational study on how graduate
students develop into holistic scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.