* 2144489
* CAREER: Toward Lifelong Safety of Autonomous Systems in Uncertain and Interactive Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Changliu Liu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 01/31/2027
* USD 744,123.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research that enables autonomous
systems to operate safely in close interaction with humans, as required, for
example, in next generation manufacturing infrastructure, thereby promoting the
progress of science, and advancing the national prosperity. Until recently,
humans were physically separated from robots to prevent injuries and fatalities.
Modern robotics focuses on humans and collaborative robotic systems working
together on the same tasks. A safety hazard in such interactive environments is
the occurrence of human errors. It is critical that safety conscious responses
be programmed into collaborative robotic systems to guarantee safe behavior even
when tasks or environments change. This project will develop a new algorithmic
framework for safety assurance of autonomous robotic systems that aims for
optimal performance when safety can be managed, anticipates and compensates for
inevitable failures when it cannot, and learns from past mistakes. This
framework will increase trustworthiness of autonomous systems while minimizing
human efforts in deployment and maintenance, critical steps toward granting full
autonomy to intelligent robots in uncertain and interactive environments,
including such application domains as industrial robotics and autonomous
driving. Through close integration of research and education, this project will
contribute to new interdisciplinary training in robotics and autonomy,
accessible dissemination of research in robot safety to the public, and
opportunities for interactive learning through a remotely operated robotic
platform. Partnerships with the Advanced Robotics for Manufacturing Institute,
the Girls of Steel Robotics program, and the Choate Rosemary Hall college-
preparatory school will be leveraged to provide opportunities for graduate
student internships with small manufacturers and broaden participation in
research of individuals from currently underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to a theory of cross-task safe guardians that augment existing
hardware platforms without manual tuning, monitor and optimally modify their
nominal task-oriented control actions to satisfy constraints representing safety
requirements, and accomplish these objectives under time-varying uncertainty. It
achieves this aim by investigating data-efficient model learning algorithms that
accurately track the dynamics of an interactive environment, as well as by
designing adaptive controllers that safely adjust the control strategy according
to newly learned dynamic models. A responsibility-based evolutionary adversarial
learning approach is developed to enable the adaptive safe control algorithm to
achieve optimal performance given limits on available resources. Evaluation of
the safe guardian and intelligent optimizer approaches is achieved in simulation
and experimentally using autonomous vehicles interacting with human-operated
vehicles in different traffic conditions, as well as in space-sharing
applications involving robot arm manipulators and other human or robotic
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.