* 2144194
* CAREER: Vision Systems for an Evolving World
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Judy Hoffman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2027
* USD 589,854.00

When transitioning into a dark room most people initially struggle to see, but
are quickly able to adjust and see in the new setting. In fact, people continue
to see and understand the world around them even as the appearance of the world
changes in many different ways. In contrast, our computer vision systems have
limited ability to understand the world if it changes. Imagine if the first time
one drove at twilight or in the snow one could no longer recognize the road. No
doubt, driverâ€™s training would require many hours of sitting in the passenger
seat at all times of day, within different weather conditions, across different
cities, and so on before allowing a new driver behind the wheel. This project
aims to study and build new models, algorithms, and measures of success enabling
the next generation of visual recognition systems to be resilient to an evolving
visual world. The project will integrate research with education and outreach to
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advocates for resilient vision
systems through a new integrated approach which iterates between generalizing
across available visual domains and rapidly adapting given new domain data.
Prior approaches optimize for independent criteria, either generalization across
multiple domains, or adaptation to a new target domain, which limits advancement
towards the larger goal of creating vision systems that can operate in more
domains over time. Further, existing solutions are slow to adapt, relying on
substantial new observations before updates can be made. The project will work
on: 1) Model design and learning approaches for multi-domain generalization that
facilitates future adaptation. 2) Transformative visual domain adaptation
algorithms that are capable of rapidly adapting to a target domain using limited
target observations and without accessing a large auxiliary source of data,
reducing compute demands. 3) Algorithms that enable vision systems to expand the
set of domains they can successfully operate in over time. Finally, this project
will introduce a benchmark and new evaluation protocols to measure the
resilience of visual recognition models to changing
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.