* 2144883
* CAREER: Architecting a Hardware-Software Co-Designed Data Management System for Heterogeneous Memory Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jason Lowe-Power, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2027
* USD 249,310.00

Data processing is integral to society, and the amount of data our computing
systems are asked to process is growing rapidly. For example, some of today’s
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) workloads have billions
of parameters requiring terabytes of working memory for training and inference.
To efficiently process this deluge of data, the data must first be moved from
distant random-access memory to memory closer to the processor. In today’s
systems, this data movement itself is one of the most expensive aspects of
computation in terms of both performance and energy/power. To improve the
efficiency of computing systems, this CAREER project aims to answer the question
“where should data be placed and when should it move from one memory type to
another?” The main insight driving this CAREER proposal is that bridging the
semantic gap between the application which knows how the data is used and the
hardware which directly interacts with the data will enable a new set of
optimizations. Leveraging this insight, this CAREER project will develop a new
interface for data movement which separates the data movement mechanism from the
data movement policies. This separation of concerns will enable programmer hints
and runtime-directed data movement which will significantly increase the
performance and efficiency of heterogeneous memory
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will improve the efficiency
and performance of a wide variety of applications including AI/ML which
increasingly depend on both high memory performance and large memory capacities.
To broaden the impact, the techniques developed in this project will be realized
in software, as a hardware-software codesign, and as hardened logic. Further,
the software models, systems, and hardware prototypes will be released open
source as they are developed. This CAREER project will also lay the foundation
for a sustainable undergraduate research internship program at UC Davis. This
program will give experience with open-source software development, career
development opportunities, and hands-on hardware-software co-design
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.