* 2144033
* CAREER: Reliability of Three-dimensional Interconnects for Heterogeneous Integration: An Integrated Experimental and Modeling Study
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Tengfei Jiang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Three-dimensional integrated circuits (3DIC), where chips are vertically
connected by through-substrate vias, is one of the most promising technologies
to overcome the materials and processing limitations of Moore’s Law Scaling.
This project aims to develop fundamental knowledge and practical solutions to
address the critical reliability challenges for the integration and scaling of
high density through-substrate vias in 3D heterogeneous integration. Using a
combined experimental and modeling approach, the proposed work will study the 3D
interconnect system of current interest, namely copper (Cu) through-silicon vias
(TSVs), to elucidate the effect of stress, microstructure, and scaling on the
deformation and failure mechanisms, model the effect of dimensional scaling on
microstructure evolution, device performance and reliability, and develop an
innovative solution to control via protrusion and enable reliable 3D
interconnects. By solving these critical challenges, this research will generate
new knowledges in the reliability of 3D interconnects to enable high density 3D
heterogeneous integration, which is critical for a broad range of applications
such as high-performance computing, autonomous vehicles, mobile connectivity,
and aerospace and defense applications. This project also entails educational
and outreach activities aiming at educating and training talents in interconnect
reliability to advance America’s scientific and technological leadership in
microelectronics technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to develop an integrated research program that combines experiments and
modeling to address the reliability challenges of three-dimensional (3D)
interconnects, which are essential for vertical heterogeneous chip-package
integration. Using copper (Cu) through-silicon via (TSV) and via protrusion as a
model system, this project will address the important knowledge gaps in the
reliability for 3D interconnects, including: 1) establish the quantitative
correlation between the microstructure and deformation, which will lead to the
identification of critical microstructure features and deformation mechanisms
that dictate the high tail of the reliability statistics; 2) determine the
effect of scaling on microstructure evolution, device performance and the
resulting reliability statistics, which is particularly important for the
development of high-density heterogeneous integration; 3) develop methods to
control the reliability statistics using approaches based on materials and
interface optimization. The fundamental knowledges, practical solutions, and
methodologies generated in this work will be appliable to other metallization
and substrate systems beyond Cu TSVs. By enabling 3D heterogeneous integration,
this project will pave the way for many key applications ranging from mobile
devices and consumer electronics to medical devices and autonomous vehicles. The
educational component of this project will integrate classroom teaching,
research training, and outreach activities to inspire, educate and train
students, with special attention to women and underrepresented minority student
groups, and will produce talented workforce in interconnect reliability at one
of the nation’s largest universities by enrollment to help US’s microelectronics
industry retain its competitiveness and global
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.