* 2144246
* CAREER: Topological Abstraction for Robot Path Planning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Subhrajit Bhattacharya, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2027
* USD 194,662.00

High degree-of-freedom robotic systems such as those involving one or more
flexible cables, multi-robot systems, robotics manipulators and soft robotic
arms, are ubiquitous in automation industries, household robotics, medical
robotics, field robotics and social robots. Cables can be used by multi-robot
systems to tug or transport large loads, and robots can use fixed tethers for
power supply or communication for long-term missions in GPS-denied environments.
Multi-agent systems need new innovations for coordination-free planning in a
sociopolitical environment in which privacy concerns are on the rise.
Articulated robotic manipulators are used in a variety of industrial
applications such as automated manufacturing, as well as in minimally invasive
assisted laparoscopic surgery. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project addresses the fundamental question of complexity reduction for such
systems with high-dimensional configuration spaces using techniques of
topological abstraction with an aim of achieving fast &amp; efficient planning.
Integrated with the research objectives of this project are educational plans
aimed at training current and future generation of engineers &amp; researchers
in the science and technologies of complex autonomous systems that are
increasingly becoming part of our modern society. As an integral part of the
project, STEM education will be advanced through establishment of a mentoring
ecosystem involving graduate, undergraduate &amp; K-12 students. Students from
underrepresented groups will be involved in the research activities with an aim
of developing a comprehensive &amp; scalable education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project novel theoretical and algorithmic
tools will be developed for achieving topological abstraction of high-
dimensional configuration spaces with an aim of allowing efficient optimal path
planning for high degree-of-freedom systems using Topological Path Planning
methods. Homotopy invariants will be developed for joint configuration spaces of
multiple robots navigating on planar domains with obstacles, resulting in
complexity reduction in problems involving tethered multi-robot systems,
constrained human-robot teams, and planning for large multi-agent systems
without coordination. Novel algorithms for efficient computation of homotopy
invariants in spatial domains will be developed, leading to direct amalgamation
with search-based planning algorithms with application to spatial systems
involving cables. The project goes beyond homotopy to develop the theoretical
foundations of a deep generalization to the notion of homotopy, which will pave
the way for the discovery and computation of novel topological constructions
called Reeb structures that are suitable for dimensionality reduction of
configuration spaces of articulated and soft robotic manipulators. All these
fundamental advances will allow development of efficient path planning
algorithms with completeness and optimality guarantees for high degree-of-
freedom systems such as spatial, multi-robot systems &amp; human-robot systems
involving one or more flexible cables; coordination-free multi-agent systems;
and articulated robotic arms &amp; deformable manipulators. The developed
algorithms will be implemented and evaluated on real robotic
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.