* 2144466
* CAREER: Thermal Inequality, Health, and the Built Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Bharat Venkat, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 218,397.00

Exposure to heat has been described as a major index of climate-related
inequality. Heat is a particular problem for those who live in cities, which are
typically hotter than non-urban areas, largely due to the role of the built
environment in retaining heat. Exposure to heat can contribute to a range of
health issues and can even lead to death. This project aims to contribute an
understanding of how the ordinary experience of heat might be translated into
expert conversations about urban climate that in turn contribute to shaping
policies about how we live in cities. The project also has a significant
educational component that involves establishing a pipeline to train the next
generation of interdisciplinary scientists, scholars, and policy makers. This
educational component includes developing climate-focused curricular enrichment
modules for school-age children and an undergraduate Heat Lab through which
students will learn to conduct interdisciplinary research. The data generated
through this research will be shared to inform and advance policy related to
urban heat mitigation and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of a
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award, the researcher will undertake a
five-year study of the relationship between urban heat, bodies, and the built
environment. Many generalized measures of heat response in urban environments
suffer from sampling biases that make them less equipped to explain variability
across different urban contexts. This project focuses on how experiences of heat
are potentially shaped by the interaction of history, culture, and the built
environment. It employs a mixed-methods approach, including ethnography, oral
histories, archival research, and GIS-based mapping. The layering of these
multiple forms of data will offer a more robust understanding of how the
experience of urban heat is shaped by both environmental and cultural factors,
as well as provide a more experience-near perspective on these factors that
shape the distribution of thermal exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.