* 2144256
* CAREER: Nonlinear THz electrodynamics of spin quasiparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Fahad Mahmood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2027
* USD 227,202.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all existing computing devices are based on the
manipulation of the charge of electrons. Unfortunately, fundamental limits at
which charge information can be transmitted and preserved is slowing down and
preventing breakthrough technological advances in next-generation computing.
Recent research has indicated that this impasse can be overcome by using the
collective motion of the spin of electrons. The spin of an electron is like a
microscopic bar magnet. Most magnetic materials can be thought of as consisting
of these tiny electron magnets aligned and fixed in a geometric pattern. In
certain materials, however, the quantum interactions between these electron
magnets causes them to move synchronously rather than remaining aligned. These
collective behaviors are called emergent spin quasiparticles, and they are
predicted to have the unique ability to store and transmit information in the
form of angular momentum while not carrying any electron charge. In this way,
spin quasiparticles can potentially enable faster, more energy-efficient and
robust computation than is currently possible. However, these particles are hard
to detect, and the underlying rules governing their behavior are poorly
understood. This research project fills this knowledge gap by developing
experimental methods based on powerful light sources to directly observe and
manipulate these spin quasiparticles. Simultaneously, the educational component
of this project increases exposure of middle school students to modern physics
concepts (such as quantum mechanics) through a traveling and interactive physics
demonstration show called the “Physics Van.” Undergraduate students at the
University of Illinois are also coached as part of this project to lead these
demos, visit local schools, and mentor middle school students on viable future
pathways into science and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) and the Electronic and Photonic
Materials (EPM) programs of the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In a variety of
magnetic insulators, strong interactions, geometric frustration, and low
dimensionality intertwine to give emergent spin quasiparticles that can be
viable platforms for quantum computation and efficient spintronics. Examples
include fractionalized spin excitations (spinons) and antiferromagnetic magnon
currents. This experimental project uses nonlinear optical response in the
terahertz (THz) range to measure, characterize and ultimately manipulate these
spin quasiparticles. The specific objectives are (1) identifying distinctive
experimental signatures of spinons in the nonlinear THz susceptibility of
quantum magnets as indicated by recent theoretical work; (2) driving coherent
antiferromagnet currents in insulators using strong THz light-spin coupling; and
(3) understanding decoherence and relaxation mechanisms of THz-induced spin
excitations. The research effort is implemented by using newly developed
multidimensional nonlinear THz spectroscopies on magnetic heterostructures
having resonators specifically designed to enhance THz light-matter coupling.
This approach allows highly controllable and adaptable settings for inducing the
strongest possible light-matter coupling. Materials under study include two-
dimensional quantum spin liquid candidates, one-dimensional spin chains that are
known to host spinons, and trivial antiferromagnetic insulators. The nonlinear
magnetic susceptibility and shift magnon currents in these materials is measured
to systematically determine relaxation and decoherence properties of spin
quasiparticles. This work establishes a framework for discovering new spin
quasiparticles and implements nonlinear THz spectroscopy as a general method to
probe material properties inaccessible in conventional linear
spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.