* 2144511
* CAREER: Chirality and Polymer Thermodynamics: Frustration and Amplification
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Poornima Padmanabhan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2027
* USD 195,050.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports theoretical and computational research, and integrated education
on self-assembly that leads to chiral structures in polymeric materials. Without
turning one hand over, one cannot superimpose one’s left-hand over their right
one. Atoms or molecules in a material may position themselves so that they may
have this same property; the atoms in the material are not in registry with
those of the material’s mirror image. The ability to distinguish a material as
being either right-handed or left-handed indicates that the material has
chirality. Chirality lends itself to specific interactions and novel properties,
with applications ranging from selective catalysis, negative refractive index
materials, to synthetic life. In chemical systems where complex interactions
lead to self-assembly of hierarchical structures at a multitude of length
scales, chirality may or may not result in each of those length scales. Numerous
examples exist on both sides of the spectrum where chirality at the smaller
scale is also exhibited at the larger scale (amplification), or where chirality
at the smaller scale does not translate to chirality at the larger scale
(frustration).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of the project is to
enhance the understanding of when and how chirality is transferred from the
smallest to the largest length scale by studying the underlying thermodynamic
principles and interrogating the molecular-level detail. The systems under
consideration are made from polymers, long chain-like molecules made of
repeating molecular subunits. Specifically, they are chiral polymers, either
studied in isolation, in mixtures, or incorporated into a portion of a longer
molecule that has a chiral part and one that is not chiral. A novel particle-
based simulation model is developed in this project to measure several
thermodynamic properties, including various components of energy and entropy.
The use of thousands of molecules also provides insights into the conformations
of individual molecules and variations within an individual molecule.
Altogether, the project will identify thermodynamic conditions and molecular
mechanisms that amplify or frustrate chirality transfer. Such findings can be
applied to a variety of self-assembling polymers including synthetic
polypeptides and self-assembling foldamers. &lt;br/&gt;The education goal of the
project is to develop activities and curricula that enhance spatial thinking
skill among students at the K-12 and undergraduate levels. Tools such as
projections on isometric paper, tactile 3D objects, and visualization software
are utilized to support learning. Spatial thinking skills are especially
important in the identification of chiral structures, where mental rotations
must be performed to identify right-handedness or left-handedness. Such skills
not only enhance student performance in structure identification, but also
enhance overall performance in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Chirality is the
property where a material cannot be superimposed on its mirror image. This
property can not only be exhibited at any length scale, but it can also be
exhibited simultaneously at several length scales. For example, in achiral-
chiral block copolymers, chirality can be exhibited at the atomic scale, at the
conformational scale of a macromolecule, and at the mesoscale. Despite numerous
examples of chirality transfer from lower to higher length scales, diverse
examples also exist where chirality is limited to a lower length scale alone and
does not transfer to a higher length scale. A thermodynamic understanding of
conditions when such transfer is amplified, or conditions when such transfer is
hindered, remain unknown. Such principles will have implications for the
assembly of biomaterials such as synthetic polypeptides and self-assembling
foldamers and can be used to answer fundamental questions regarding the origin
of life.&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of the project is to understand the
thermodynamic principles and to establish mechanisms that amplify or frustrate
chirality transfer in model polymer systems, using particle-based simulations.
Specifically, the project develops a tunable and parametrizable model for chiral
block copolymers to exhibit conformations that are comparable to experimental
measurements. Free energy calculations in the disordered state decouple various
thermodynamic contributions, namely, intra- and inter-molecular energies, and
entropy arising from conformational changes. To interrogate mechanisms of chiral
frustration during self-assembly, the project compares the conformations of the
polymers in a lamellar (achiral) structure to that of the ideal scenario. To
promote chiral amplification arising from self-assembly, strategies such as
nematic ordering through purposefully designed mixtures will be employed.
Overall, insights from the project will enable a deeper understanding of the
relationship between molecular and structural characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;The
education goal of the project is to strengthen the spatial thinking skills of
students for improved STEM achievement and attainment. Activities are designed
for students from diverse backgrounds at the K-12 level and will also be
incorporated in the early undergraduate curriculum. Enhancement of spatial
thinking skills is anticipated to improve learning gains broadly. Diverse modes
of building spatial thinking skills are utilized, including drawings on
isometric paper, use of tactile 3-D printed objects, and visualization software.
The curriculum developed through this project will benefit students broadly and
will fill the current gap in chemical education for identification of chiral
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.