* 2144072
* CAREER: Family Behavior, Health Technologies, and Government Policy: Research and Training
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Petra Persson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2027
* USD 235,103.00

Assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) are transforming couples' ability to
conceive, and prenatal screening technologies allow parents to gain precise
information about fetal health during pregnancy. These technologies have the
potential to fundamentally alter family structure and family wellbeing. However,
because these technologies are expensive, their arrival may introduce new health
inequities, which underscores the role of public policies that regulate their
accessibility and affordability. Understanding the consequences of ARTs and
prenatal screening technologies for family decisions, family outcomes, and
inequality is essential for informing public fertility-related policies, and
thereby advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare. This CAREER research
program combines population-wide administrative data, with uniquely detailed
information on individual-level use of these technologies, and experimental and
theoretical research methods to better understand their effects on families. The
research project will study how ARTs and prenatal screening technologies affect
family reproductive decisions, as well as whether these technologies affect
inequalities across families. This proposal's education plan focuses on training
students in how to access and use big administrative data for research -
knowledge that is often passed through personal connections - to help level the
playing field in the profession for the next generation of researchers. The
results of this research project will have major influence on the conduct of
public fertility policy, and health care policy generally. The results could
help improve the health of Americans as well as help establish the US a global
leader in reproductive health care policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
research project has four components. The first project is motivated by sharp
differences in utilization of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs) across
socioeconomic groups. It exploits age thresholds in public health insurance
coverage of ARTs to investigate the role of affordability in driving this
inequality; further, it examines the long-run consequences of ARTs uptake on the
health and well-being of women who use them and their families. The second
project will study the arrival of a new and superior - but expensive - screening
technology for identifying chromosomal abnormalities. It will combine reduced-
form evidence leveraging insurance eligibility thresholds with a theoretical
model of parents' prenatal testing decisions to examine the implications of the
superior technology on parents' testing choices, birth outcomes, and measures of
aggregate population health. The third project focuses on a particular type of
ARTs, In Vitro Fertilization (IVF). The project is based on the observation that
IVF with donated gametes (sperm and oocytes) decouples a baby's environment in
utero from the baby's genetic material. Using data containing information about
IVF children born with donated gametes, this project will bring novel evidence
to the debate on the importance of "nature" versus "nurture" in the association
between parents' socioeconomic standing and children's health. The fourth
component is a mentoring workshop that aims to reduce inequality among students
in access to information about the use of large-scale administrative data in
research. The results could help improve the health of Americans as well as help
establish the US a global leader in reproductive health care
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.