* 2144074
* SBIR Phase I: Mixed reality wearable technology to improve workflow, productivity, and training in medical sterilization environments
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Scotty Jones, STERILE GEEKS VR INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,718.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to help hospitals improve their sterile processing departments (SPD),
where decontamination, sterilization, and assembly of medical equipment and
devices occur. The company’s proposed solution seeks to enhance SPD technicians’
work performance and skill levels, decrease SPDs’ operating costs, reduce
Hospital Associated Infections (HAI) and Surgical Site Infections (SSI), lessen
expensive surgical delays, and reduce related healthcare service delivery costs.
Sterile processing technicians play a critical role in preventing infection by
sterilizing, cleaning, processing, assembling, storing, and distributing medical
supplies. They are directly responsible for disinfection and sterilization of
hospital instruments/devices. The team uses mixed reality designed to augment
the day-to-day work responsibilities of SPD technicians while supporting the
cost-effectiveness of operating a SPD. The solution’s digital content and
holograms provide an immersive experience increasing competency, maximizing
workflow, and boosting productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project incorporates three applications into
augmented reality hardware to enhance the job performance of sterile processing
department (SPD) technicians. The applications include barcode/radio frequency
identification (RFID) reading, traceability and surgical instrument detection,
and inspection utilizing Visual Inertial Odometry (VIO). These applications are
designed to provide efficient and accurate tracking, improved workflow, and
increased worker productivity. The research goals of the project include
creating a software application programming interface (API) capable of reading
barcodes and RFID tags. By providing additional monitoring and tracking
capabilities with automated data within the users' field of view and creating an
application to enhance object detection capabilities, SPDs in hospitals,
doctors' offices and at-home care locations can learn, in real time, the best
practices for sterilization of infected surfaces to enable safer and healthier
living and work spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.