* 2144801
* CAREER: Systematic Approach for Extensively (SAfEly) Testing and Verifying the Security of Connected and Autonomous Vehicle
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Arman Sargolzaei, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 09/30/2022
* USD 393,671.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential benefits of
connected autonomous vehicles (CAV) are numerous, and society is expecting that
this technology will increase the quality of everyday life and follow through on
its promises. However, to be effective, they must be tested to demonstrate a
standard level of safety and security. The complex and interconnected nature of
the transportation system makes the task of testing and verification exceedingly
difficult, raising serious concerns regarding their safety and security. It,
thus, calls for new problem formulation and a novel systematic approach for the
task of CAV testing and verification. The existing testing solutions use ad-hoc
methods, such as miles driven, to demonstrate some indication of safety, often
assuming that the CAV's perception of the surrounding environment is
comprehensive and ideal. However, no fundamental structure has been developed to
demonstrate the security of CAV products. This CAREER proposal models the
transportation system as a networked control system providing a novel resiliency
metric enabling the testing resiliency of CAVs. In addition, it utilizes the
prior developed verification framework to formulate the testing and verification
process as a centralized feedback control system enabling the development of a
novel attack generator. The expected outcomes of this project would pave the way
towards safely testing CAVs, directly impacting the future of this technology
and related standards, ultimately eliminating crash-related fatalities and
saving lives. The research findings can be further implemented for all networked
control systems, such as high-assurance military systems and autonomous systems
ranging from unmanned aerial vehicles to power systems. The educational purpose
of the project is to expand students', particularly underrepresented and women
minorities, awareness of CAV security by designing fully integrated educational
modules and demonstrations. We plan to include the following activities to serve
the need for rural and largely economically distressed regions: (i) develop
after school online STEM curriculum adjusted for primary, High-school, and
college students; (ii) provide workshops for educators and industrial partners
as their professional development activities; (iii) involve underrepresented
undergraduate and college students through research for undergraduate experience
and internship program; (iv) develop an undergraduate and an advanced graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project addresses the problem of
testing and verification for the security of CAVs. The importance of the
security of CAVs has been recognized in the existing literature and has
motivated the development of several detection and compensation algorithms to
ensure safety under faults, failures, and attacks. However, not much effort is
invested in the task of CAVs testing and verification. This CAREER project
illustrates that the current approaches are insufficient to safely verify the
security of CAVs in a realistic environment, suffering from the lack of a metric
that is dynamic-dependent to measure the system resiliency. We describe a
research plan where a transportation system is modeled as a networked control
system where roads, pedestrians, vehicles, and traffic signs (due to their
dynamic behavior) are modeled as agents, interacting with each other using
sensors and communication networks. The new perspective allows us to propose a
novel resiliency metric to be used alongside the safety metric to develop
reinforcement learning-based controllers for testing CAVs' security. As there
are infinite types of faults and attacks, the proposed controller formulates the
effects of attacks rather than focusing on specific types, easing the process of
fault and attack generation. This project is expected to advance the area of
testing and verification of CAVs by (i) Introducing a novel perspective using
the concept of networked control systems enabling the development of a unique
data stream generator utilizing reinforcement learning to generate attacks by
modeling the testing process as a feedback control system where minimizing
safety and security is the desired objective and (ii) Developing a unique
experimental platform enriched with the power of mixed reality (MR) and vehicle-
in-the-loop (ViL) to test the security of CAVs safely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.