* 2144113
* CAREER:Formal Synthesis of Provably Correct Cyber-Physical Defense with Asymmetric Information
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jie Fu, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2027
* USD 211,521.00

For mission-critical Cyber-physical systems (CPSs), it is crucial to ensure
these systems behave correctly while interacting with open, dynamic, and
uncertain environments. Synthesizing CPSs with assurance is a daunting task: On
the one hand, the interconnected networks, sensors, and (semi-) autonomous
systems introduce unprecedented vulnerabilities to both cyber- and physical
spaces; On the other hand, purposeful attacks may aim to compromise more complex
system properties beyond traditional stability and safety. For example, in a
robotized security patrol system, a successful cyber-attack on the sensor
network can be combined with adversarial control commands to compromise the
system and disrupt its mission. In this project, the goal is to develop
intelligent sensing and control methods for CPSs that leverage advanced cyber
defense techniques for constructing provably secured systems subject to high-
level complex mission objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal,
this project will develop formal modeling and solutions for a class of CPS
Games, featured by multi-stage, strategic interactions between a
controller/defender and a (coordinated cyber- and physical-) attacker. The
synthesis of CPS control/defense strategies will explicitly account for
asymmetric information and investigate how to leverage cyber defense and
deception for guaranteed performance in mission-critical CPSs. The fundamental
theory and algorithms will be validated via both a physical testbed including
multiple mobile robots and a wireless sensor network and a simulation as a
virtual proving ground. The technical contributions are: 1) to develop solutions
of imperfect information games with temporal logic objectives and employ the
solutions to design control and information acquisition strategies for CPSs
under attacks; 2) to investigate the use of cyber defense techniques for gaining
defender information advantages against CPS attackers in the synthesis of
integrated cyber-physical defense; 3) to develop control strategies against
coordinated cyber- and physical- attacks, and novel control methods that
incorporate human’s preference for CPS resilience against prior unknown attacks.
The project also includes an educational plan by developing an interdisciplinary
curriculum for engineering students on cyber-physical security and attack
mitigation techniques. The PI will promote K-12 outreach by participating in
campus-wide activities and offering a two-week summer course for high-school
students with hands-on robotic and wireless sensor networks experiments, aiming
to raise students’ interest in science and engineering and public’s awareness of
CPS security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.