* 2144505
* CAREER: Vision and Learning Augmented D-Band Networking and Imaging
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Sanjib Sur, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2027
* USD 272,327.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millimeter-wave (mmWave) is the
core wireless technology to enable new applications in transportation,
entertainment, education, and telemedicine. Specifically, the recent
availability of inexpensive hardware above 100 GHz makes the time ripe for
bringing D-band (110-170 GHz) mmWave networks to the masses. However, D-band
mmWave networks bring new challenges in optimizing the deployment of picocells,
coordination and adaptation of mobile links with unprecedentedly wide frequency
options, and a disruption-free confluence of networking-imaging. This research
project addresses these key challenges and improves the performance,
reliability, and usability of mobile D-band networks. The project will design
machine learning augmented scalable D-band systems and networks, and integrate
them into applications, such as Augmented Reality (AR), drone delivery, and
autonomous cars. The research outcomes will impact the broader population by:
(1) bringing ubiquitous and high-quality bandwidth to underserved users; (2)
enabling efficient use of spectrum to better utilize this nationally important
resource; and (3) elevating the utility of networking devices by enabling
several critical applications on them. The proposed research will be
disseminated through publications, open-source software and datasets, and close
collaboration with industry partners. It will be integrated into education by
designing new undergraduate and graduate cross-disciplinary wireless curricula
and involvement in broader community outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enable the practical
adoption of D-band mmWave networks and applications by solving the fundamental
challenges in deployment, link adaptation, coordination, and unified networking-
imaging. Specifically, the project explores an optical vision and deep learning
augmented paradigm by thoroughly understanding the physical properties of the
D-band channel, building measurement-driven empirical and learning models, and
designing practical, real-time systems. Successful execution of this project
would enable the following. (1) A framework for optimal deployment and a “what-
if” analysis tool to help optimize the cost and benefits of D-band deployment in
both indoor and outdoor environments. (2) Link adaptation and coordination
protocols that significantly minimize latency and maximize throughput and
efficiency for scalable D-band networking. (3) A unified networking-imaging
protocol that reduces disruptions to the throughput and latency and overcomes
challenges with the channel specularity to enable high-resolution D-band images.
The project will design, build, and empirically validate the proposed systems in
a D-band testbed, and the testbed will be extended into an educational platform
that enhances the knowledge of wireless networking and sensing for students at
different levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.