* 2144297
* CAREER: Rethinking Dynamic Wireless Networks through the Lens of Riemannian Geometry
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Ahmed Ibrahim, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 01/31/2027
* USD 187,850.00

The current revolution of wireless systems aims to support massive connectivity
along with emerging applications, such as connected vehicles and extended
reality, which simultaneously require high data rate and low latency. Dynamic
network architectures, which include moving relays and flying drones, can
support such requirements thanks to their adaptive nature. Maximizing data rate
in such relay-assisted networks can be accomplished via 1) designing
environment-aware and relay-based beamforming codebooks, 2) managing wireless
interference that is caused by or towards relays, and 3) adaptive placement of
relays. Unlike existing solutions for these problems, this project starts with a
transformative modeling of the underlying data structures of wireless channels
and network topologies over curved surfaces, known as Riemannian manifolds. The
novel design of wireless networks through the lens of Riemannian manifolds leads
to developing low-latency structure-aware (i.e., “gray-box”) machine learning
(ML) models and low-complexity optimized solutions for these three problems.
This project serves the national interest by promoting the progress of
foundational science of wireless communications and networks along with
providing the research community nationwide with fast ML models and efficient
optimization tools, which will have far-reaching impact on addressing many
challenges in wireless networks and alike. Furthermore, this project equips
engineering students nationwide with new mathematical tools and hands-on
educational platforms that uniquely integrate Riemannian geometry into wireless
networks. Multiple undergraduate and graduate students, including
underrepresented minorities, are mentored through this project. Finally, this
project gravitates high-school students, including students with disabilities
such as autism spectrum disorder, towards STEM through active engagement in
interdisciplinary activities of non-Euclidean geometry, engineering, and
neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to lay the foundations of
utilizing Riemannian-geometric tools, particularly, geometric machine learning
(G-ML) and conic geometric optimization (CGO), to advance the knowledge of
designing dynamic networks with low latency, low complexity, and high data rate.
Such goal is accomplished through synergistic integration of three components,
which span multiple network layers (i.e., PHY, MAC, NET), as follows. First,
environment-aware beamforming codebooks are developed using low-latency
unsupervised G-ML models, thanks to representing the covariance matrices of
spatially-correlated wireless channels over Riemannian manifolds. Second,
wireless link scheduling and resource allocation mechanisms are developed using
low-latency supervised G-ML models, which are based on jointly modeling the
Riemannian-geometric and temporal structures of interference-aware network
topologies over Riemannian manifolds. Finally, locations of relays are optimized
for maximizing the network flow rate using low-complexity CGO, given the
representation of relay-enhanced network topologies over Riemannian
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.