* 2144468
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Improving the Participation of Diverse Residential Buildings in Demand Side Management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Kristen Cetin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2027
* USD 398,806.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). As major consumers of energy and therefore a
significant source of climate-impacting emissions, buildings are a prime target
for improvements to support decarbonization goals. Grid-interactive buildings
can support achieving such targets through acting as flexible loads in energy,
capacity, and more recently, ancillary service electric grid markets. Such
demand side management (DSM) strategies can reduce overall electricity needs,
and support increased use of renewable energy. However, current building energy
modeling methods are not well adapted to estimate DSM potential, as they do not
represent the highly varied occupancy, internal load consumption behaviors, and
energy preferences and priorities across U.S. households, nor do they consider
their interdependencies. Rather, current methods model occupancy and internal
loads independently, and assume “typical” schedules for all households
regardless of their demographics. These limitations and generalizations are a
problem as their use can result in solutions that misrepresent DSM participation
and disproportionally benefit different populations. The extent to which
variations in socioeconomic variables influence DSM potential, and how this can
be appropriately modeled is not yet established in the current literature.
Consequently, the overarching goal of this research is to develop an integrated
framework to assess the DSM potential of diverse residential households,
specifically targeting underserved, lower-income urban, rural, and remote
populations. The primary educational goal is to educate the existing and future
workforce in sustainable, smart buildings and demand side management. The
developed educational tools, resources, and videos will address barriers to DSM
participation, and support stakeholders implementing DSM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort includes three research goals: Develop models
that consider the impact of socioeconomic factors on (R1) the maximum DSM
potential of U.S. residential households, and (R2) willingness to participate in
DSM and its relationship to occupancy and energy consumption patterns; (R3)
validate the developed DSM scenarios through controlled laboratory testing to
address potential occupant comfort barriers to DSM participation. The project
will result in better estimates of DSM potential of residential buildings, with
particular insights for low-income, energy burdened households, as well as a
framework that can be used to evaluate DSM potential. This will support greater
and more equitable DSM participation, also resulting in potential substantial
environmental benefits. The educational effort will target three groups, the
younger workforce, the future workforce, and the broader public with two main
objectives: (E1): Emerging Workforce: Develop a smart, grid-interactive building
certificate program, and training materials, targeted at students and emerging
professionals. (E2a) Preschool/Elementary School Students and (E2b) Broader
Public: Address misconceptions and barriers to engaging in sustainability and
efficiency, through the development, testing, and dissemination of Mythbusters-
style videos, curriculum materials, and case studies. The multi- faceted
educational efforts will support all ages of students who make up the future
workforce, as well as instructors that teach them. A certificate program will
help reduce professional barriers to minorities in the workforce pipeline.
Preschool/elementary programs will help increase awareness about sustainability,
and encourage development of problem solving skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.