* 2144057
* CAREER: Photonic Quantum Machine Learning: From Architecture to Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Zheshen Zhang, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2023
* USD 394,583.00

The formulation of quantum mechanics in the 20th century shifted the landscape
of science, giving birth to a plethora of revolutionary technologies that
empower the information age. Humankind is now on the verge of a second quantum
revolution fueled by quantum information science (QIS), which is envisioned to
enable disruptive communication, sensing, and computing applications. Despite
the tremendous prospects promised by QIS, building large-scale and robust
quantum information processing systems remains an outstanding challenge due to
the fragility of quantum information in the present noisy intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) hardware. To unlock the power of NISQ devices and systems, hybrid
quantum-classical protocols have become a focus of recent QIS studies, in which
state-of-the-art classical data science tools are leveraged to steer NISQ
hardware towards solving specific data-processing problems. This CAREER project
will develop a new photonic quantum machine-learning architecture that combines
mature, classical machine-learning tools and NISQ platforms to endow
unprecedented communication, sensing, and data processing capabilities. Compared
with other NISQ platforms, quantum photonics feature room-temperature
operations, mass productivity, and compatibility with the existing
telecommunication and sensing infrastructures. The project will advance basic
knowledge for the NISQ era and the interdisciplinary areas of QIS, machine
learning, and NSFâ€™s 10 Big Ideas Harnessing the Data Revolution and the Quantum
Leap. A critical ingredient for a sustainable QIS ecosystem is to develop the
next-generation quantum workforce. To this end, this CAREER project will
encompass activities for: 1) QIS teaching laboratories for undergraduate
students; 2) a QIS training program for industry workforce development; and 3)
outreach to engage K-12 STEM students early in QIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities of this CAREER project will encompass both: 1) a photonic
quantum machine-learning architecture based on a classical machine-learning
framework and photonic quantum information-processing hardware, including
reconfigurable entanglement sources and adaptive quantum receivers; and 2)
photonic quantum machine-learning applications for long-haul optical
communications, multi-domain sensing, and quantum-enhanced data processing. The
new photonic quantum machine-learning architecture will effectively use cutting-
edge classical machine-learning tools to configure variational photonic quantum
circuits, as a powerful means to generate, process, and measure quantum
information. Although photons interact only weakly with each other to hinder the
use of large-scale photonic entanglement, the proposed photonic quantum machine-
learning architecture will overcome this barrier by leveraging quantum photonics
that offer deterministic generation, the processing of large-scale entanglement,
and suitability for sensing and communication applications. By combining
enhancements from machine learning and quantum coherence, the expected project
outcomes will enhance various sensing- and communication-related tasks,
including pattern recognition, deep-space signal detection, and efficient data
compression. Ultimately, broadly sharing the new knowledge grown out of these
research activities should spark collaborations between academia, National
Laboratories, and the U.S. healthcare, aerospace, environmental protection, and
chemical engineering industries. By working with industrial partners, the CAREER
project will connect with new quantum technologies that transform U.S.
industries. The project research facilities and workforce development activities
will help to prepare the U.S. technology industry workforce for the future
quantum edge and establish comfortable and personally relevant quantum
foundations for students across university to high-school
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.