* 2144062
* CAREER: Toward Improved Parameterizations of Brown Carbon in Wildland-Fire Emissions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Rawad Saleh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2027
* USD 287,046.00

This CAREER project will advance the understanding of the light-absorption
properties of brown carbon (BrC) emitted from wildfires. The light-absorption
properties of BrC vary over 3 orders of magnitude, posing major challenges to
representing BrC in climate models. An optical distributions framework will be
developed to enhance the representation of BrC in climate calculations by
accounting for the variability in BrC light-absorption properties and their
evolution upon photochemical aging in the atmosphere. This research could make a
major contribution to improving the understanding of the role of BrC in earth's
climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tasks to be conducted as part of this
research are as follows: (1) Simulating wildland fires at the U.S. Forest
Service facility; (2) Retrieval of BrC light-absorption properties (optical
distributions); (3) Parameterization development; and (4) Chemical transport and
radiative-transfer modeling. Biomass combustion experiments will be conducted
that simulate wildfires and prescribed fires, and the effects of critical
variables such as fuel type, firing techniques, and moisture content on emission
profiles will be investigated. Three intensive measurement campaigns will be
conducted at the newly built U.S. Forest Service Center for Forest Disturbance
Science combustion facility. The BC and BrC emission factors, and their optical
distributions, will be derived from these experiments and parameterized as a
function of fire radiative power (FRP), a proxy of combustion conditions. The
novelty of the framework lies in the utilization of correlations between BrC
physicochemical and optical properties to retrieve optical distributions. The
parameterizations developed through these studies will combine findings from the
measurement campaigns with remote-sensing observations. The parameterizations
then will be implemented in WRF-Chem, a coupled chemical-transport and climate
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both graduate and undergraduate students will
receive training through this effort. The project also includes a unique cross-
disciplinary education component that involves developing a course that would
link University of Georgia engineering students with urban design students
taking a regional planning course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.