* 2144374
* CAREER: Harnessing Multiscale Biophysical Cues for Engineering Adult Heart Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Darryl Dickerson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2027
* USD 697,545.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will reveal how biophysical
signals at multiple length scales can be used to engineer personalized heart
tissues. These engineered tissues could replace damaged heart muscle in adults.
Heart attack causes permanent loss of heart muscle and can lead to heart
failure. Current treatments cannot regenerate damaged heart muscle. Induced
pluripotent stem cells, which come from a person’s own cells, can become any
cell type. As such, these cells offer new hope for personalized engineered heart
tissue regeneration. However, heart tissues made from these cells to date lack
the functionality of adult tissues. This is because heart muscle cells generated
from stem cells are immature in shape, size, and function. There is a critical
need to improve heart muscle cell maturity for engineering adult heart tissue.
Drawing inspiration from the heart’s multiscale structure, this research will
explore how three-dimensional biophysical signals can be used to improve heart
muscle cell maturity and how this knowledge can be leveraged to manufacture
personalized adult heart tissues. The complementary education program will use
this research context to promote equity in engineering education through
curriculum innovation. This work will also broaden access to engineering for
those who have been historically excluded through scalable K-12
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to develop
fundamental mechanistic understanding of how multiscale biophysical cues can be
used to influence the structural and functional maturity of engineered heart
tissues. Using a novel multiscale platform that permits orthogonal control of
stiffness, viscoelasticity, and three-dimensional geometric confinement, this
research will determine how these microscale and mesoscale cues influence
cardiomyocyte maturation defined by cellular ultrastructure, contractile force,
and conduction velocity. Through bioinformatic analyses, this work will uncover
mechanisms by which these cues have influence individually and collectively.
Additionally, this work will determine if biophysically mediated maturation
introduced in unit biomanufacturing processes persists in the hierarchical
formation of large-scale engineered heart tissues. This inclusively designed
research will identify differential effects of biophysical stimuli associated
with cell sex in engineering adult heart tissues. The integrated education
program will create systems to advance equity in engineering education and
broaden participation of historically excluded racial and ethnic groups. This
award will present a major step toward transforming mechanobiological insights
into biomanufacturing processes enabling the creation of personalized, fully
functional engineered tissues and to measurably impact equity, diversity, and
inclusion in engineering with new faculty-driven change
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.