* 2144534
* CAREER: Computational tools for analyzing and interpreting DNA methylation
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Vicky Yao, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2027
* USD 610,097.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA methylation is a critical
biological process that plays such an important role in gene regulation that it
has often been referred to as the “fifth base of DNA.” In addition to playing an
important role during development and throughout aging, aberrations in DNA
methylation have been discovered to cause disease, including cancer and
neurological disorders. Yet much is still unknown regarding where DNA
methylation changes occur and which genes they impact. This, coupled with its
dynamic nature, which can vary across regions of the body, throughout the life
cycle, and in response to the environment, makes accurately identifying the
association of specific methylation patterns to biological phenomena of interest
and interpreting their downstream impacts challenging. The project will result
in a suite of new tools to enable analysis of methylation sites across
experimental technologies, analyze methylation data in the context of different
tissues and cell types, and predict the downstream impacts of methylation sites
that are changing across conditions. These tools will enable researchers to
better interpret their methylation data in light of existing knowledge, which
can in turn result in improved understanding of fundamental biological processes
(e.g., development, aging). In addition to making all methods available as open-
source software, databases of predictions and interactive visualizations will be
developed and accessible online. By doing so, biological researchers with no
programming experience can use a query-based system to easily make and explore
predictions in the context of their own data. This project also has a local
outreach component to help increase the diversity and persistence of
underrepresented minorities in STEM by engaging high school biology teachers and
community college students with newly designed data driven curricula as well as
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will adapt cutting
edge deep learning methods used for imputation in other domains to increase the
coverage of DNA methylation platforms that profile &lt;10% of all sites, saving
time and resources; use a hierarchical framework that mirrors natural tissue and
cell type dependencies to find location-specific methylation hallmarks; and
incorporate known protein-protein interactions to associate CpG sites with
biological function, beyond existing methods which primarily capture proximal
regulatory relationships. In addition to the methodological contributions of
this work, the project is inherently interdisciplinary and will lay the
groundwork for understanding fundamental biological questions such as how
methylation regulates and maintains tissue specificity. The tools and results
from this project can be found at:
https://cs.rice.edu/~vy/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.