* 2144332
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Climate Adaptation Pathways in Eco-Hydrologic Systems with Physics-Informed Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Scott Steinschneider, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2027
* USD 409,104.00

Sustainable water resources planning and management in the 21st century requires
adaptation strategies that are robust to deep uncertainties in future climate
and environmental change. To manage this uncertainty, recent decision-making
frameworks have promoted flexible adaptation pathways that respond dynamically
to the trajectory of climate as it unfolds. This project will explore the
hypothesis that the optimal design of flexible adaptation pathways â€“ including
the sequence, timing, and permanence of adaptation actions - depends on the
mechanisms of dynamic and thermodynamic climate change influencing the water
system, and the degree of natural climate variability and predictability across
time scales. To test this hypothesis, this work will develop innovations in
physics-informed machine learning that will enable process-guided climate
simulation, hydrologic prediction, and sub-seasonal-to-seasonal forecasting that
support risk-based adaptation planning. These approaches will be applied in the
Lake Ontario eco-hydrologic system to examine three fundamental questions: 1)
What are the primary patterns of dynamic and thermodynamic climate change over
the Great Lakes, and how can they be integrated into risk-based simulation
frameworks? 2) How do these climate mechanisms influence the hydrologic and
ecological response of the Lake Ontario system and the diverse interests of
stakeholders, and how predictable are these impacts at sub-seasonal to decadal
timescales? and 3) How should adaptation pathways for lake level management and
coastal resilience be designed to cope with these mechanisms of climate change?
These questions will be addressed alongside a co-production model of community
engagement and knowledge sharing with Great Lakes communities, students, and
other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will impact hydroclimatic
modeling for eco-hydrologic systems by developing physics-informed machine
learning techniques for feature identification, spatiotemporal modeling,
emulation, functional dependence, and synthetic data generation, with the
ability to propagate physically meaningful features through sequentially linked
systems while accounting for uncertainty. The goal is to develop a
computationally efficient and probabilistic modelling framework for risk-based
simulation and forecasting needed to develop robust climate adaptation pathways.
Expected outcomes include six major scientific advancements: 1) a diagnostic
understanding of historical and projected future thermodynamic and dynamic
climate processes relevant to eco-hydrologic systems; 2) the development of
stochastic models that can reveal how those physical processes shape future
climate risk to water infrastructure; 3) enhanced predictability of eco-
hydrologic response to climate across sub-seasonal to decadal time scales; 4)
credible emulation of system objectives to support uncertainty propagation in
adaptation planning; 5) endogenous learning strategies to detect mechanisms of
climate change from projections and noisy observations; and 6) the
identification of general principles for how to develop adaptation pathways in
water systems exposed to multi-scale climate variability and different
mechanisms of climate change. This project will integrate research, teaching,
and service missions through a pedagogic and scholarly model of community
engagement that promotes knowledge co-production and translation between
students, academics, extension and education specialists, Great Lakes
communities, and an international board of water managers. Undergraduate and
Graduate Education: Models and partnerships developed through this work will
enhance community-engaged project experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students in courses on hydrologic engineering, climate change, and machine
learning. Active learning modules will embed data science literacy directly into
these educational experiences. Student Training: This project will provide an
interdisciplinary training experience for 1 PhD student, and undergraduates will
also be recruited to participate through course-based research. Public Forums
and K-12 Education: Through collaborations with the Sciencenter of Ithaca NY and
New York Sea Grant, this work will develop public forums to educate and learn
from Lake Ontario communities, particularly those in rural, low-income areas,
about water level variability, management, and impacts on community resilience.
These collaborations will also support middle school curriculum development,
disseminated widely across the Great Lakes shoreline. Real-World Decision-
Making: By collaborating with the International Joint Commission, this work will
enhance the adaptive management plan of one of the largest managed, freshwater
lakes in the world that is undertaking one of the largest wetland restoration
efforts in North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.