* 2144328
* CAREER: Understanding the Size Effects on Spin-mediated Thermal Transport in Nanostructured Quantum Magnets
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Xi Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2027
* USD 449,746.00

Magnetic heat conduction, a highly efficient mode of heat conduction in some
magnetic materials with unique crystal structures, is promising for thermal
management, energy conversion, and emerging quantum technologies. However,
experimentally probing the microscopic heat transport processes in these
materials has been challenging. The overarching goals of this project are to
develop a fundamental understanding of the heat transport mechanisms in magnetic
materials and to educate the next generation of scientists in quantum science.
Using a combination of advanced nanomaterial synthesis and nanoscale thermal
characterization, this project seeks to reveal important length scales of
magnetic heat conduction. The knowledge gained will potentially enable the
development of magnetic materials as effective heat transport channels for
thermal management in microelectronic devices, as well as a data-bus for quantum
science-based devices. The integrated education plan will promote the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines and inspire
students—K-12 to graduate level—to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To shed light on the mechanisms that govern
the thermal transport of spin excitations (i.e., thermal excitations of
electrons’ spin structure), this project effectively combines controlled bottom-
up synthesis of magnetic nanostructures, advanced nanoscale four-probe thermal
transport characterization, and theoretical analysis. By investigating the
thermal transport properties in nanostructured quantum magnets, the proposed
research will verify the predicted ballistic thermal transport of spin
excitations, which can lead to a divergently increasing thermal conductivity
with the system’s length. Furthermore, the effect of lateral size confinement on
spin-mediated thermal transport will be established experimentally. This project
will generate fundamental knowledge about energy transport in quantum materials
at the nanoscale, as well as train and inspire the next generation of STEM
workforce. The scientific findings from this project will impact a wide variety
of applications that require transport of spin excitations, including thermal
management, thermal energy conversion, and quantum information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.