* 2144352
* CAREER: Advancing the Many-body Band Inversion Paradigm for Correlated Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jorn Venderbos, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2027
* USD 192,096.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the rapidly developing field of materials physics
known as quantum materials. Quantum materials have properties and exhibit
phenomena deeply rooted in the laws of quantum physics, thus providing a key
resource for future quantum-based technologies. This project specifically
focuses on a particularly prominent example of such materials, the topological
materials. The remarkably robust electronic properties of topological materials
can be understood with the help of abstract mathematical concepts derived from
the study of geometry and shape. When the electrons in these materials are
strongly interacting, surprising and exotic phenomena can occur. Understanding
these phenomena and the fundamental principles that govern them is a key step
towards new energy and computing technologies. The goal of this project is to
advance a new paradigm for describing and understanding such strongly
interacting materials, and thereby to provide a new perspective for materials
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will build on recent
work of the PI, which introduced a formalism for describing systems of
interacting electrons that fall outside the currently predominant paradigm for
understanding strong interactions. This formalism opens the door to new insight
into fundamental properties and behavior of matter, in particular the properties
of exotic quantum states, and serves to identify materials in which these are
realized. This project will systematically develop and extend the proposed
formalism, focusing on systems and materials in two and three dimensions with
different structure, chemistry, and symmetry properties. Conceptual advances
will be leveraged to provide new pathways to materials prediction and discovery,
with the aim of enabling experimental progress on the frontier of correlated
topological quantum states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials appear to be
at the epicenter of next-generation technological innovation, while at the same
time offering unique insight into the fundamental building blocks of matter.
This award also supports activities in the areas of education and outreach
designed to increase the visibility of quantum materials research and to broaden
participation in condensed matter physics. These activities contribute to the
workforce in quantum materials and technologies. Supported initiatives include:
(i) building a professional development certificate program in quantum
technology open to non-physicists, (ii), launching an in-house quantum materials
summer school as incubator for collaboration (iii), offering diverse and
inclusive pre-graduate research opportunities and (iv) expanding the reach and
visibility of condensed matter physics through an outreach program for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education in the rapidly developing field of quantum materials, with a specific
focus on strongly correlated topological quantum materials. Topological
materials are a new class of quantum materials which have exposed a deep
connection between abstract mathematical concepts, for example the topology of
wave functions, and physical material properties, for example the presence of
intrinsically robust transport channels. Our understanding of topological
materials relies on one of the central pillars of the modern band theory of
solids: the notion of a band inversion. Given its remarkable success in
advancing our knowledge of metals and insulators, the goal of this project is to
develop a generalization of the band inversion paradigm to strongly interacting
topological quantum states. This many-body band inversion paradigm offers a wave
function-based approach to studying the structure, properties, and function of
strongly correlated topological quantum phases in quantum materials. It
overcomes limitations inherent in the flat-band paradigm inspired by the quantum
Hall effect and offers a new materials perspective for identifying materials
which may realize exotic correlated quantum states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities are organized in three interrelated and complementary
research thrusts. The first thrust will focus on systems in two dimensions.
Computational methods will be employed to map out the phase diagram in model
systems for real materials near a correlated band inversion transition. In
addition, existing experimental work on correlated topological semimetals will
be examined. The second thrust is concerned with systems in three dimension, in
particular band-inverted topological semimetals with higher angular momentum and
presents a pathway to generalizing the many-body band inversion to three
dimensions. The third thrust is informed by the insight of the first two thrusts
and suggests a materials platform for realizing strongly correlated topological
ground states at a band inversion transition. These thrusts advance the common
goal of uncovering new correlated topological phases outside of the current
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports activities in the areas
of education and outreach. These activities are tightly integrated with the
proposed research and harness the ascendance of quantum materials as a key
resource for future technology. Supported initiatives include: (i) building a
professional development certificate program in quantum technology open to non-
physicists, (ii), launching an in-house quantum materials summer school as
incubator for collaboration (iii), offering diverse and inclusive pre-graduate
research opportunities and (iv) expanding the reach and visibility of condensed
matter physics through an outreach program for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.