* 2144570
* CAREER: CAS: Properties of Degradable Carbon Dioxide/Olefin Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* James Eagan, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2027
* USD 273,085.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer sustainability is impacted
by both the chemical feedstocks used in its production and the disposal of the
material. The majority of plastics are synthesized from olefins, feedstocks
which can be derived from petroleum or renewable resources. However, these
polyolefins are durable materials and have contributed to an accumulation of
plastic waste, thereby threatening the global environment and national
interests. This work describes the inclusion of carbon dioxide into the polymer
structure and the impacts this manipulation has on the durability and properties
of the materials. By using carbon dioxide as a feedstock, the polymers have the
potential to consume greenhouse gas as opposed to generating emissions. In
addition, the incorporation of carbon dioxide into the polymer chain imparts
degradability and chemical recyclability. The fundamental issue this project
addresses is the development of an in-depth understanding of how the structures
of these polymers affect their performance. Furthermore, the project expands
research participation by engaging various student age groups and demographics
with targeted graduate, undergraduate, and high school research projects.
Educational programs on recycling will be implemented with local public schools
in order to improve public understanding of plastic waste management and
sustainable practices. These activities will include why plastics are used, how
they are recycled, and also enable students to design and make repurposed
plastic objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this sustainability-focused
project is to address the challenges in controlling the thermal and mechanical
properties of copolymers derived from olefins and carbon dioxide. The results of
this project will advance the synthesis of degradable copolymers of
1,3-butadiene and carbon dioxide in order to manipulate the microstructure,
stereochemistry, and functionality. The branching of the polymer microstructure
will be varied as a function of the conjugate-addition and ring-opening
propagation mechanisms. Stereoselective catalysis will impart tacticity to the
polymer chains which will be characterized spectroscopically. Orthogonal post-
polymerization modification of the densely functionalized structure is proposed
to generate a diverse range of products from a single material platform.
Systematic synthesis of the above materials and quantifying their thermal and
mechanical properties will enable a detailed understanding of the structure-
property relationships. The research plan merges methods of polymer synthesis
with spectroscopic and computational techniques in order to acquire a holistic
understanding of the polymer chain dynamics and surface interactions. The
outcomes will empower control over the thermal and mechanical properties for
designing useful polymeric materials closely relevant to
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.