* 2144410
* CAREER: Make Them Pay! Algorithms for Securing Wireless Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Maxwell Young, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2027
* USD 156,709.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless systems are often
populated by energy-constrained devices, and communication occurs over a shared
channel. These features make such systems especially vulnerable to jamming,
whereby an adversary disrupts the shared channel, forcing devices to expend
significant energy in order to mitigate the attack. The goal of this research is
to design and analyze novel defenses that are energy-efficient, while still
providing performance guarantees against a powerful jamming adversary. The
outcomes of this research have the potential to secure systems against these
attacks, whose severity is likely to escalate with the continued adoption of
wireless technology. This project integrates its objectives with curriculum
development and research opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate
students at Mississippi State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach
taken by this project differs from much of the prior work on jamming mitigation,
which has focused solely on the energy cost incurred by correct devices. In
practice, adversarial devices must also expend energy to jam the channel, and
the aim of this research is to design defenses that exploit this aspect.
Specifically, this project aims to develop algorithms that 1) guarantee correct
devices can accomplish computational tasks despite jamming, 2) are energy-
efficient in the absence of attack, and 3) impose an asymptotically-higher cost
on the adversary relative to the correct devices when an attack is underway;
such algorithms are called resource-competitive. Broadly, this project focuses
on communication and coordination tasks that serve as fundamental building
blocks for many wireless protocols. By providing a resource-competitive
treatment of these tasks, this research addresses theoretical problems that have
the potential to improve the security for a range of
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.