* 2144027
* CAREER: Understanding the Routinization of Mathematics Language Routines in Middle and High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sarah Roberts, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2027
* USD 384,752.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This is also funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interpreting and analyzing data provides
students problems that apply mathematics and statistics to their own
experiences. Mathematics teaching about data needs to include opportunities for
students to discuss and explain their mathematical reasoning and problem
solving. Particularly for data science, students need opportunities to
communicate and discuss their ideas. Mathematics teaching requires the ability
to support that learning experience with multilingual students and learn to
engage all students in mathematical problem solving. Data science presents a
context for middle and high school students to examine data that is personally
meaningful and relevant. The project would develop and investigate mathematics
language routines focused on data science topics in middle and high school. The
study will investigate teachers’ use of mathematics language routines and a
professional development model to support teachers’ learning. The educational
integration plan in the project will build mathematics teacher expertise and
create video cases to support teacher professional development. Graduate and
undergraduate researchers will also have opportunities to learn about education
research and mathematics teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on
core practices of mathematics teaching that are regularly incorporate in
teachers’ interactions with students. The project uses a studio day model for
teachers to have a professional learning experience closely connected to their
work and guided by a district instructional specialist. The central concept of
the study is the enactment of mathematics language routines (MLRs) in data
science. The three research objectives are: (1) to develop professional learning
materials organized around MLR studio day cycles for four grade-level vertically
articulated professional learning communities; (2) to execute and study
professional learning materials organized for grade-level vertically articulated
professional learning communities; (3) to understand and document students’ and
teachers’ day-to-day classroom enactments of MLRs to understand their adaptive
expertise related to MLRs; and (4) to create educational video case materials
for in-service and preservice teachers on the use of MLRs. The research
activities focus on studying how teachers develop adaptive expertise as they use
MLRs, to be able to flexibly use the MLRs. The data collection focuses primarily
on qualitative analysis of the professional learning communities, studio days,
classroom observations, and artifacts of the mathematics learning routines. The
data analysis uses an adaptive expertise framework to interpret and describe the
teachers’ learning and enactment of the mathematics language routines. The
educational activities attend to video case materials developed using research
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.