* 2144219
* CAREER: New Frontiers in Quantum Protocols, Operator Algebras, and Property Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Henry Yuen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2027
* USD 324,710.00

Over the past decade, the study of quantum multiprover interactive proofs
(QMIPs) has deepened the understanding of the power of quantum entanglement as
an information-processing resource. This research led to a recent quantum
complexity result, known as MIP* = RE, which characterizes the computational
power of QMIPs. Surprisingly, this characterization yields answers to
longstanding problems in mathematical physics and operator algebras. Motivated
by this, this project aims to explore the fascinating connections between
complexity theory, quantum information, and pure mathematics. The overarching
theme is to investigate how classical users can test and characterize complex
quantum objects, with applications ranging from cryptography to operator
algebras. These investigations will spur interdisciplinary research across
computer science, physics, and mathematics. In addition to leading the research,
the PI will disseminate this subject matter to a wide variety of communities
(both academic and industrial). The PI will also participate in outreach and
education activities, both in-person and online, to promote interest in quantum
information science in high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue three main directions.
First, the PI will develop novel protocols that allow a classical user to verify
complex quantum entanglement in untrusted quantum devices, with applications to
entanglement theory and testing of noisy quantum computers. Second, the PI will
further develop the techniques used in the proof of MIP* = RE to address
unsolved questions in mathematics related to the resolutions of Tsirelson’s
problem and Connes’ embedding problem. Third, the PI will initiate the
systematic study of a noncommutative model of property testing, which will
examine how local classical tests can constrain complex, quantum objects. This
research will build upon prior work of the PI on interactive protocols for
testing quantum entangled devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.