* 2144243
* CAREER: Quantifying the Effects of Liquid Water Content on the Spectral Albedo of Snow
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Alden Adolph, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 564,178.00

The highly reflective nature of snow means that it plays a critical role in the
climate system; snow reflects solar energy and regulates global temperatures.
Snow processes are especially relevant in the Arctic system, where temperatures
are rising more rapidly than the global average, partially because of feedback
processes that take place as snow melts. As air temperatures increase, snow
begins to melt, which lowers the snow’s reflectivity and increases the amount of
sunlight it absorbs. The absorbed light leads to further temperature increase,
and this warming process can have far-reaching implications for our climate.
Although snow is one of nature’s most reflective materials, the exact
reflectivity can be quite variable. Several factors darken snow, such as larger
snow grain sizes and impurities in the snow like dust, soot and algae. One
factor that is not well understood is how the liquid water content in snow
reduces reflectivity. This presents significant uncertainty in determining how
changing snowpacks will impact the climate system, particularly in the Arctic,
as wet snow becomes more prevalent due to more frequent rain on snow events and
larger extent and duration of surface melt on ice sheets and glaciers. This
project will enhance our understanding of wet snow reflectivity through field
measurements in Minnesota and Colorado, lab experiments, and modeling. Our
results will probe fundamental physical relationships and therefore, broadly
apply to cold regions. As part of this work, undergraduate students will be
engaged in the research projects. They will collect and analyze data in an
Engineering Thermodynamics class and will design and build instrumentation for
this work and to support other faculty projects in a new Engineering Fellows
Program. The investigator will also share teaching materials about snow
reflectivity and climate online and at a workshop for faculty at minority
serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The naturally high albedo (or
reflectivity) of snow provides a strong control on earth’s surface temperatures.
Because of this critical role, accurately reproducing snow albedo is essential
for effective climate modeling. Even in the Arctic, the already prevalent
periods of wet snow are increasing because of more frequent rain on snow events
and increased extent and duration of glacial surface melt; however, nearly all
existing snow albedo models employ albedo schemes designed for dry snow. These
models play a key role during snow melt because of the amplifying effects of the
snow albedo feedback process, where melting snow leads to lower albedo, higher
temperatures, and further snow melt. Therefore, explicitly incorporating the
effects of liquid water content on snow albedo is a critical next step in
improving model accuracy. The proposed work aims to quantify the effect of
liquid water content on snow albedo, combining several approaches. 1) The
investigator will conduct field-based measurements of albedo, liquid water
content, grain size and snow impurities in Minnesota and at Niwot Ridge in
Colorado to determine the effects of individual physical properties on the
overall snow albedo. Wet snow conditions at these locations represent those that
are increasingly common in the Arctic. 2) Through a new course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) implemented in the Engineering
Thermodynamics class, students will conduct laboratory measurements of the
reflectance of artificial snow with controlled grain size and liquid water
content. 3) The investigator will complement this work with two different
modeling approaches to calculate wet snow albedo to investigate an array of snow
conditions and inform potential changes to physically based snow albedo models.
Studying these phenomena in different landscapes, in the laboratory, and in
simulations will allow us to extrapolate our understanding of wet snow albedo to
cold regions more broadly, particularly in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
project will support the development of students through multiple avenues by
providing opportunities to engage in research and build their scientific
identities. The investigator will develop an Engineering Fellows Program in
which students work with faculty over the course of the year on a design
project, in addition to enrolling in a professional development seminar course.
The investigator will also partner with the Ice Drilling Program Education team
to serve as a visiting scientist in the School of Ice workshop and create an
online Virtual Field Lab on snow albedo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.