* 2144973
* CAREER: Dislocation-level Understanding of Shear Banding in Magnesium and Magnesium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Yu Kelvin Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 179,015.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnesium (Mg) is a light-
weight metal that is nearly four times lighter than steel, making it very
attractive for automobile and aerospace applications. However, pure Mg and Mg
alloys tend to crack fairly easily at room temperature. When Mg is stretched, it
does not evenly distribute the strains it experiences. Instead, Mg tends to
concentrate strains in localized zones called "shear bands". These shear bands
become locations where Mg most often breaks and are responsible for why Mg
cracks more easily than other metals. This project relates shear banding to the
atomic level defects that occur in metals when they are stretched or deformed.
These atomic level defects are called "dislocations". A greater number of
dislocations that are more spread out are expected to promote more uniform
deformation, or stretching of a material, and thereby delay shear banding. The
insights gained from this work will help identify new Mg alloys that exhibit
delayed shear banding, increased crack resistance and a greater ability for
Magnesium metal to be formed into different shapes. The findings from this
research will also help promote increased use of Mg across a wide variety of
automotive and aerospace applications. Moreover, this project also produces
interdisciplinary educational opportunities to train students in metallurgy,
electron microscopy, and mechanics of solids. This project also provides a
platform for professors and graduate students to work closely with
underrepresented students through the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation program to expose them to the topics of this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnesium (Mg) alloys hold great potential for use
as lightweight energy-saving materials, but the structural applications of Mg
have been hindered by its low strain-to-failure properties at room temperature.
The comparatively lower strain-to-failure exhibited by Mg as compared to other
metals is chiefly related to the formation of localized shear bands. The goal of
this work is to advance the understanding of deformation and failure mechanisms
in Mg and its alloys and, in particular, discover pathways that trigger or delay
plastic instabilities in them. The hypothesis examined here is that increased
non-basal, &lt;c+a&gt; dislocation activities lead to more uniform deformation
and provide more homogeneous strain hardening throughout the microstructure,
hence delaying plastic instabilities by delocalizing shear bands in Mg and its
alloys. The objectives of this work are to 1) identify the role of &lt;c+a&gt;
dislocations on the formation of shear bands; and 2) identify the effect of
temperature (up to 75 degrees Celsius) as well as alloying on &lt;c+a&gt;
dislocation activities and shear band characteristics (e.g. size, number
density, and stored plastic strain) in quasi-statically deformed Mg and Mg
alloys. These objectives will be accomplished by experimentally measuring i) the
stresses needed to operate dislocation sources, ii) the dislocation glide
distances produced under given stresses, and iii) the related cross-slip
frequency. These latter measures will then be directly correlated to the shear
band characteristics mentioned in the second objective. The broader impacts of
this project are two-fold. First, identifying pathways to more ductile and
malleable Mg and Mg alloys will significantly enhance the opportunity and
likelihood for Mg alloy usage across a variety of applications resulting in
significant weight-savings and increases in energy efficiencies. Secondly, this
project will facilitate increased educational engagement and outreach to
students and persons within the collegiate environment and beyond through i)
hands-on experiences for undergraduate students, ii) a digital platform to
further undergraduate interest in materials science and iii) expansion of an
existing YouTube channel engaging the general public on matters and phenomena
related to materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.