* 2144823
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigations of Conformational Activation and Catalysis in Emerging CRISPR-Cas Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Giulia Palermo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2027
* USD 409,456.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Giulia Palermo
from the University of California, Riverside, to investigate the molecular
mechanisms underlying the catalytic activities of newly emerging CRISPR
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat)-Cas systems. Inspired
by the initial CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing tool, several novel CRISPR-Cas systems
have recently been developed that precisely manipulate DNA and RNA in a cell.
State-of-the-art of computational methods will be used to determine how these
new systems change the chemical composition of DNA bases, cut both strands of
the DNA double-helix, and target RNA. The results from this study are expected
to aid in the development of novel CRISPR-Cas-based biotechnologies, such as
nucleic acid detection and imaging. In addition, the applications of methods
development aspects of this project have the potential to extend from the
biosciences to fuel production and to the development of drought-resistant
crops. This project will integrate with an educational plan that mentors a large
cohort of pre-college and undergraduate students, including women and those from
underrepresented minority groups. Students will receive their first hands-on
experience in program coding and computation, building the technical skills to
succeed in the 21st century technological workplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPR-Cas is an integral part of a bacterial adaptive
immune response that has revolutionized life sciences as a genome editing tool.
This project will employ advanced computational methods to characterize the
mechanisms of conformational activation and catalysis in novel CRISPR-Cas
systems, including Cas12a and Cas13a and emerging Cas9-based complexes. Long
timescale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations will be combined with a variety of
enhanced sampling techniques and free-energy methods to thoroughly investigate
the conformational changes of the Cas proteins that prompt nucleic acid
cleavages. Mixed quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approaches and
ab-initio MD will be used to elucidate details of the chemical mechanisms
driving the catalysis of nucleic acids, with the potential to enhance catalytic
efficiency and guide enzyme design. The computational studies will be
coordinated in collaboration with experimentalists to assist with the
interpretation of experimental data and enable testable predictions. Overall,
this study will help elucidate the biomolecular function of these emergent
CRISPR-Cas systems, bridging the gap between understanding molecular mechanisms
and engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.