* 2144147
* CAREER: From the Cloud to the Crowd: An Enabling Solution for the Internet of Federated Things
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Raed Al Kontar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will help the US to
maintain a leading position in manufacturing by leveraging the Internet of
Things, the multitude of computing and data collection devices such as machine
tool controllers, cell phones and remote sensors connected by the Internet, to
achieve improved analytics and decision-making capability, referred to as the
Internet of Federated Things (IoFT). The rapidly increasing computational power
and data storage capabilities of these interconnected devices allow the
development of decentralized, privacy-preserving analytics tools that can
enhance fairness, privacy, cost-effectiveness and reduced computational burden
through parallelization, standing in contrast to the prevalent paradigm of
collecting and processing data in centralized data centers in the cloud. The
accompanying educational plan supports community-level involvement in emerging
technologies, helping to prepare future engineers to interact with and develop
IoFT technologies. This is achieved through an outreach program oriented towards
the American public and middle-school students in the greater-Detroit
communities underrepresented in STEM fields and on college
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build a data-driven,
decentralized analytics framework for the IoFT capable of providing customized
decision-making and control at the individual device level. A predictive
framework allows devices to retain their local data-driven models while
leveraging results and data from similar, though non-identical, devices. A key
feature of the predictive framework is its ability to account for data
heterogeneity, as devices are often operated under different operating and
environmental conditions. Bayesian theory and distributed inference are then
adopted to enable decentralized uncertainty quantification for the predictive
models at the individual device level. The predictions are then used in an
optimization framework to realize target output at the individual device level
by optimizing controllable system input. The techniques developed will be
evaluated using an IoFT prototype for distributed 3D printing, and will provide
public data for other researchers to further investigate IoFT within
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.