* 2144614
* CAREER: Structures and Properties of Bone at Multiple Length Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Jing Du, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2026
* USD 218,744.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Bone is a typical mineralized biological tissue that exhibits
superior mechanical properties. It is strong, tough, yet lightweight, which can
be attributed to its hierarchical structures, i.e. structures at multiple length
scales. However, the structures in bone at the sub-micron and nano-scales are
still not well understood. In this project, the PI proposes to study the
relationship between the structure and property of bone across multiple length
scales, particularly in the sub-micron and nano-scales. A deeper understanding
of bone can provide insights to fracture prediction and benefit the aging
population and people with bone disorders. 10.2 million American people aged 50
and over have osteoporosis, which may lead to an increased risk of fracture. The
new knowledge about bone will also provide inspirations for the design of more
robust manmade materials, enable the advancement in biomedical materials, be
extended to the research of other natural biocomposites, and significantly
impact the broad range of applications in transportation, buildings, defense,
biomedicine, and energy. The education and outreach activities in this project
will build a pipeline to include more people from underrepresented groups,
especially females, into STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understandings of bone can shed light on the
challenges of developing synthetic materials that are both strong and tough
through a combination of mechanisms across multiple length scales. The research
objective of this proposal is to determine the composition-structure-property
relationships in bone, at multiple length scales using integrated experiments
and models. The central hypothesis is that the bulk properties of bone
(strength, toughness, adaptation) are related to the composition, structure, and
properties in its microscale structures (cement line and sub-lamellae) and
nanoscale ultrastructure (mineralized collagen fibril (MCF) and extrafibrillar
matrix (EFM)). The PI will first develop correlative microscopy techniques to
characterize composition, structure, and properties for ultrastructure and
microstructure of bone. Then in cortical bone and trabecular bone, the
composition-structure-property across multiple length scales will be determined,
respectively. Finally, the peri-implant bone adaptation will be investigated in
terms of its extrinsic morphology and intrinsic properties. The education and
outreach objective is to broaden participation from underrepresented groups,
especially females, in STEM through education and outreach activities on bone.
The PI is partnering with a local science museum in summer camps and after-
school programs for K-12 students, especially girls, to learn about bone. Also,
undergraduate and graduate students will be educated and trained on
interdisciplinary (materials and medicine) bone research. The PI will also
create more online video series of females in STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.