* 2144240
* CAREER: Integrin-Mediated Mechanotransduction of Articular Chondrocytes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Scott Wood, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2027
* USD 701,713.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will focus on elucidating
the molecular mechanisms associated with the development of osteoarthritis.
Osteoarthritis is the type of arthritis that occurs with age or injury.
Mechanical force is a key contributing factor to the development of
osteoarthritis. However, substantial gaps remain in our understanding of the
mechanisms by which mechanical forces lead to biological behaviors can lead to
osteoarthritis. This work will focus specifically on cells in cartilage, which
are called chondrocytes. This project will elucidate molecular mechanisms by
which articular chondrocytes determine cartilage tissue health. Specifically,
this work will examine the relation of mechanical inputs to biological outputs
mediated through the transmission of forces across specific mechanoreceptors
that connect the fibrous environment outside the cell with the structural
components inside the cell. This research will have eventual application to
future biomechanical or pharmaceutical interventions to prevent or reverse
osteoarthritis. The research from this project will also be integrated into an
educational and outreach program based on graduate and undergraduate curriculum
development, promotion of graduate and undergraduate research opportunities, and
K-12 and regional underrepresented minority outreach through the development of
educational story books and hands-on summer camp
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
determine the integrin-mediated mechanotransduction mechanisms by which
articular chondrocytes regulate cartilage homeostasis, and thus to advance
understanding of the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. The research objectives
include: (1) establishing a baseline catabolic threshold for tensile force
applied to chondrocyte integrins, (2) determining the degree to which actin
dynamics drives chondrocyte preference for dynamic force, and (3) establishing
surface glycoproteins as modulators of chondrocyte integrin tension dynamics via
application of prestress. The overarching focus will be on leveraging mechanical
concepts developed initially for civil and mechanical engineering to investigate
mechanisms of outside-in mechanotransduction, inside-out mechanotransduction,
and molecular tensegrity to obtain a better understanding of integrin-mediated
mechanotransduction in articular chondrocytes. Education and outreach components
will integrate research results into graduate and undergraduate coursework and
research opportunities, storybooks introducing Native American elementary
students to principles of cellular mechanobiology, and hands-on summer camp
activities for middle and high school students. This project will advance the
knowledge base in cellular vibrational analysis, molecular tensegrity, and
cellular mechanobiology and establish his long-term career at the intersection
of nanoscience, nanoengineering, and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biomechanics and Mechanobiology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.