* 2144556
* CAREER: Multiscale Photodynamics Simulations in Solvated and Crystalline Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Steven Lopez, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2027
* USD 705,329.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Steven
A. Lopez of Northeastern University is using computational techniques to
discover new light-promoted (photochemical) reactions. Photochemical reactions
are attractive to several research sectors because they avoid the need for
extensive heating and expensive catalysts to access complex, high-energy
molecules. Photochemical reactions occur on very fast timescales, typically less
than one-millionth of a second, making observation of intermediate structures
with experiments very challenging. This project aims to use computational and
machine learning techniques to understand the reactivities and selectivities of
these photochemical reactions. Research in the Lopez group will enable
computational predictions in realistic, complex chemical environments (e.g.,
solvent and crystalline phase) towardsmore accurate predictions and design
principles. This work is at the intersection of data science, organic, and
physical chemistry and will support the interdisciplinary training of young
scientists at all levels. Dr. Lopez and his team will create "pandemic-proof"
Summer Research Experiences for community college students across the United
States and engage with the Alliance for Diversity in Science and Engineering to
parallelize the outreach impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steven A. Lopez and his
research group plan to apply and develop computational and machine learning
techniques to predict photochemical reaction outcomes, mechanisms, and
stereoselectivities in complex environments (e.g., molecular solids and solvated
systems). Unlike thermal reactions, structure-property relationships are more
complex and difficult to understand for photochemical reactions. The general
lack of excited-state structural information has limited structure-reactivity
relationships and slowed the discovery of high-yielding, selective reactions.
Experimental and computational techniques cannot resolve dynamic excited-state
structures of short-lived molecular excited states (nano- to femtosecond scale).
This project will enable the comprehensive exploration of the reactivities and
stereoselectivities of gas-evolving reactions with multiconfigurational quantum
chemical calculations and machine-learning-accelerated non-adiabatic molecular
dynamics simulations. The research group will focus on parent and substituted
triazolines, pyrazolines, and diazirines. This project aims to resolve the
mechanisms and structures of molecular excited states, thusly targeting a
knowledge gap towards structure-reactivity relationships. A second phase will
evaluate the role of the chemical environment on the excited- and ground-state
components of these reactions, enabled by an open-access machine learning code
Python Rapid Artificial Intelligence Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics (PyRAI2MD).
The anticipated mechanistic insights have the potential to enable future design
of light-responsive frameworks (e.g. covalent organic frameworks and metal-
organic frameworks, COFs and MOFs) and molecular machines in the longer
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.