* 2144169
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: Advancing Water Sustainability and Economic Resilience through Research and Education: An Integrated Systems Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Landon Marston, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2027
* USD 405,445.00

Water-related economic risks and unsustainable water uses will accelerate under
the combined pressures of climate change, antiquated infrastructure, and
competition for scarce water. In an increasingly interconnected economy, water-
related risks can spread through linked river, trade, and electricity networks
to other areas. Yet, traditional approaches to U.S. water management and science
do not consider multi-scale interdependencies within the hydrologic and economic
systems. Efforts to ameliorate water risks and use water more sustainably within
the economy will require an understanding of (i) the drivers of water use within
different industries, (ii) the source and location of water uses, and (iii) the
infrastructure that enables water use and creates dependencies within supply
chain networks. This project will address fundamental questions regarding how
water can be used more sustainably within interconnected hydrologic, economic,
and infrastructure networks. More specifically, this research will (i) determine
the economic, environmental, technological, and regulatory determinants of
industrial water uses; (ii) conceptually and analytically connect aquifers,
rivers, and supporting infrastructure to the irrigated croplands that underpin
the nation’s food supply; and (iii) reveal local and nonlocal vulnerabilities
and opportunities for improved sustainability within the interconnected
hydrologic, infrastructure, and supply chain networks. The scientific advances
and student training stemming from work will support a pressing national need
for more resilient supply chains and infrastructure to support a more
sustainable economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific question of
this research is: How do infrastructure, hydrologic, and economic systems
converge to shape water use and risks within the U.S. economy? This work will
harness large- scale data with machine learning, multilayer network analysis,
and geospatial tools to uncover the drivers of industrial water use, water
infrastructure dependencies within the economy, and the water scarcity risks and
opportunities embedded within the hydro-economic system. Building on recent
research and through unique data access, this project aims to produce
infrastructure-level insights regarding where, for what purpose, and from what
source water is used within the U.S. economy. Research advances will be
integrated within an education plan that will generate new knowledge regarding
the efficacy of different sustainability and systems science instructional
methods within undergraduate and K- 12 settings. Undergraduate students,
scientists, and middle school science teachers will utilize research findings to
co-develop interactive webtools, in-person demonstrations, kid-reviewed
scientific publications, and lesson plans for K-12 students. Using these
educational tools, the PI and undergraduate students will engage with local and
regional elementary and middle school students. The U.S. Geological Survey’s
Water Science School (7.5M+ unique annual visitors) will make educational tools
available for use in traditional and virtual classrooms
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.