* 2144288
* CAREER: Bottom-up construction of re-configurable entanglements toward polymer networks with switchable toughness
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Aleksandr Zhukhovitskiy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2027
* USD 299,275.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer networks are ubiquitous in our world,
manifested and widely utilized in the form of adhesives, rubbers, and gels. The
ability of such materials to resist fracture is critical to their performance
and longevity in many applications. Indeed, images of fields covered with
discarded tires illustrate the prospect for mechanically damaged polymer
networks. Improvements in the toughness of polymer networks hinge on a deeper
understanding of the fundamental relationship between how polymer chains are
connected at the molecular level and the fracture resistance at the macroscopic
level. Specifically, entanglements -- i.e., polymer chains tangled within a
network -- have been reported to protect materials against fracture; however,
molecular underpinnings of this phenomenon remain unclear. This project aims to
develop precise methods to install, understand the effects of, and manipulate
trapped entanglements in polymer networks to ultimately improve their fracture
resistance and advance the fundamentals of polymer
science.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, through a combination of course-based research
experiences for undergraduates, demonstrations for local schools, and remote
research experiences for teachers, this project will educate the public on the
fundamentals of polymer science in general, and the significance of polymer
networks in particular. These efforts will nurture in future generations of
students an appreciation for materials science research and will help them to
consider careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central objective of this project is to
develop molecularly-precise control and understanding of trapped entanglements
and their effects on the mechanical properties of polymer networks. Trapped
entanglements -- topological crosslinks among polymer chains in a polymer
network -- represent a consequential frontier in polymer science: they have been
correlated with dramatic enhancement of fracture resistance, critical for
applications of soft materials, as well as their lifespan, and therefore with
sustainability. Yet, detailed entanglement topology-property relationships and
effective strategies to engineer and manipulate entanglements are lacking, which
limits one’s ability to tailor the fracture resistance of polymer networks. This
project addresses these unmet needs via a three-pronged approach: (1)
development of a bottom-up strategy to construct trapped entanglements by using
templates based on supramolecular metal-ligand complexes, (2) systematic
investigation of entanglement-mechanical property relationships by varying the
template topology, and (3) coupling the entanglement template strategy with
stimulus-responsive dynamic covalent chemistry to switch the entanglement
topology -- and therefore mechanical properties of materials -- on demand. Key
mechanical properties investigated in this project include modulus, ultimate
strength, toughness, and threshold fracture energy. The project employs a
combination of experimental and theoretical tools to accomplish the stated
goals: synthesis and characterization of novel gel materials with templated
entanglements, mechanical testing of these gels, molecular dynamics simulations
and theoretical derivations. Advances in the fundamental understanding of
trapped entanglements derived from this work will translate to improved
longevity of polymer network materials and thereby help to reduce their
accumulation in landfills. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.