* 2144451
* CAREER: Order-induced heterogeneities in the deformation behavior of FCC concentrated solid solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Matthew Daly, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 231,075.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization of new, stronger materials is a
critical element to the success of emerging technologies in a diverse set of
application areas including civil infrastructure, automotive, and aerospace. For
example, the ranges of electric vehicles can be improved with stronger alloys
(i.e., mixtures of metals and additives), by enabling lower weight vehicle
components without a compromise to passenger safety. One key pathway to
improving strength is through an understanding of how alloys deform (i.e.,
respond to loading). Traditional understanding emphasizes the importance of
additive chemistry and concentration in directing deformation. However, this
rationale has shortcomings in explaining the behavior of alloys with unusually
large concentrations of additives. These concentrated alloys include many
technologically important materials such as high strength steels. To address
these shortcomings, this research effort explores the following question: How
does the atomic-scale organization of additives in concentrated alloys influence
how the alloy bends? This question is motivated by the hypothesis that, in
addition to chemistry and concentration, the additive organization play an
important and under-recognized role in directing bending. To reveal this link,
forefront mechanical testing techniques and computational models are developed
and used. In addition to advancing tools for materials testing, this effort
provides new fundamental insights for how these special class of alloys bend,
that provides a foundational understanding to engineer materials with improved
strength. More broadly, the outcomes of this effort deliver key datasets and
methodologies, which enable new investigations within the research community,
and contribute to the competitive advantage of America’s advanced manufacturing
industries. These findings are the basis of virtual reality-based learning
materials for undergraduate education, and middle- and high-school outreach. The
objective of these instructional activities is to broaden participation in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by leveraging virtual
reality (VR) as a tool to convey materials scientific concepts to a broad range
of students. Another intended outcome of these activities is the recruitment of
students, including those from underrepresented groups, to participate in the
research tasks of this effort, and thereby enhance the STEM pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses on the following question: How does the length scale of solute
organization drive the deformation behavior of concentrated solid solutions?
Within the context of concentrated systems, the motivation for this effort is
the observed fluctuations in solute potential energies that emerge at the length
scale of dislocations. These fluctuations underpin the central hypothesis of
this investigation – that is, chemical short-range order gives rise to
predictable, statistical heterogeneities in the potential energy landscape of
concentrated solid solutions that influence the competition between various
deformation mechanisms. To answer the question above, complementary
experimental, including a nanobending testing technique, and computational
research tools, such as scale-bridging kinetic Monte Carlo simulation, are being
developed and utilized. The face-centered cubic CrCoNi system is selected as a
benchmark for this investigation, yet the approach can be generalized to other
concentrated systems of scientific and technological interest. Specific outcomes
from this effort include 1) deformation mechanism maps that chart the trends in
mechanism competition using chemical ordering as a structural parameter; 2)
statistical relationships that link chemical short-range order with the length
scale-resolved fluctuations in the potential energy barriers of deformation
processes; and 3) a new experimental-computational approach to measure mesoscale
deformation that bridges the temporal and spatial gap between simulations and
theory. More broadly, the outcomes of this effort provide the research community
with new tools to explore multiscale relationships in complex alloys, and key
experimental datasets to validate interatomic potentials. The education and
outreach activities feature virtual reality (VR) modules in order to illustrate
concepts such as atomic packing, solid solution formation and
slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.