* 2144703
* CAREER: An Ultra-low Power Analog Computing Hardware Design Framework for Machine Learning Inference in Edge Biomedical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Aatmesh Shrivastava, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2027
* USD 499,947.00

Wearable and implantable biomedical devices have advanced healthcare through the
development of continuous sensing, monitoring, and timely medical interventions.
Their growth has been enabled by innovation in technologies and low-power system
design. We are also seeing a rapid adoption of machine-learning (ML) techniques
in healthcare applications. However, a significant technological gap exists when
it comes to adopting ML techniques for wearable and implantable biomedical
hardware because of the relatively high power consumption and chip area
requirements associated with ML solutions. This project aims to develop ML-based
hardware solutions for wearable and implantable biomedical devices. To realize
power and device size goals, analog computing will be used to develop the ML
hardware platform. The proposed analog computing platform will be used to
develop ultra-low power ML hardware for detecting arrythmia and obstructive
sleep apnea. The research outcomes from this project will be integrated into
education to develop new graduate and undergraduate courses on ML and power
management. Undergraduate and high-school students will participate in the
research through the Young Scholar Program (YSP) and REU outreach activities.
The project will provide a platform for training graduate and undergraduate
students on biomedical devices, circuit and chip design, and ML hardware design.
Outreach activities will involve K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is centered around the realization of ultra-low power (ULP) machine
learning (ML) system-on-chip (SoC) hardware with inference capability for
wearable and implantable biomedical applications. Power consumption and device
size requirements make it challenging to integrate ML solutions in mobile health
devices. To realize the power consumption and device size minimization goals,
robust sub-threshold analog computing circuits will be developed while
overcoming variability issues previously associated with analog computing. A new
analog system modeling and simulation tool will be created to associate power
consumption, noise, linearity, and other performance goals of analog circuits
with the classification accuracy of a given ML network to realize area, power,
and performance optimized ML hardware. The analog computing hardware framework
will be developed with a new constant transconductance-based sub-threshold
design to realize high energy efficiency and robustness goals. The approach will
also support multi-layer analog computing designs without the need for
interfacing amplifiers or converters for signal conditioning. The resulting
modeling and simulation tool will associate circuit design goals with ML
classification accuracy. It will further help in reducing power and area to
develop tailored analog circuits for ML networks with specific power and
performance goals while maintaining the required classification accuracies. To
exemplify the design approach, the analog system modeling tool and robust analog
computing circuits will be utilized to develop an ultra-low power analog SoC to
demonstrate ML applications for ECG and pulse oximetry, with the goal to show up
to 50-times reduction in power consumption while maintaining a high
classification accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.