* 2144309
* CAREER: Interactive Decision-making and Resilient Planning for Safe Legged Locomotion and Navigation.
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Ye Zhao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2027
* USD 595,383.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to bridge
fundamental gaps between state-of-the-art robot task and motion planning and the
ultimate goals of safe and autonomous robot locomotion. This work will resolve
major computational hurdles that have hindered the use of symbolic planning and
decision-making methodologies on the highly nonlinear, hybrid, and under-
actuated legged systems, reducing their ability to reliably operate in
unstructured environments, efficiently collaborate with robot teammates, and
safely interact with humans. Specific long-standing challenges to be addressed
are robustness to contact terrain uncertainty, locomotion task generalization,
navigation safety coupled with complex locomotion dynamics, and proactive
interaction with pedestrians to avoid collisions. This project will move legged
robotic systems from the research laboratory, and into challenging application
domains such as disaster first responders, surveillance in civil and mechanical
infrastructures, and planting in agricultural environments. The research is
complemented by education activities to (i) integrate undergraduate students
into a new experiment-focused research program through the multi-semester
Vertically Integrated Program (VIP) at Georgia Institute of Technology; (ii)
host high school students from Atlanta minority-serving public schools to
perform research and enhance underrepresented population participation in the
greater Atlanta area; and (iii) broaden the societal impact by disseminating the
integrated robotics research through an interactive workshop.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel task and motion planning framework
for bipedal locomotion interacting with complex environments. In particular, it
will retain and augment the strengths of full-body-dynamics-aware trajectory
optimization (TO) with the complementary capabilities of symbolic planning and
policy learning for environment abstraction, formal task specification design,
and robust decision-making. This project has a large focus on experimental
evaluations to enable transformative new legged navigation functionalities in
real-world environments. The research outcome will enable (i) safe navigation in
partially observable environments and proactive interaction with pedestrians
while incorporating low-level locomotion dynamics constraints, (ii) versatile
contact behavior planning and robustness reasoning through risk-sensitive TO and
adversarially regularized policy learning, and (iii) real-time locomotion
failure recovery capability via behavior trees to address unexpected environment
interventions. This project will advance the state of the art in safe and
autonomous navigation of legged systems and pave the road for future studies of
heterogeneous robot teaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.