* 2144938
* CAREER: Surface Chemistry of Crystalline Coordination Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Fangyuan Tian, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2027
* USD 129,957.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, the principal investigator, Prof. Fangyuan Tian, and her research
group study two-dimensional conductive and semiconductive porous crystalline
thin films. Electrically conductive materials have led a range of applications
in energy storage, chemical sensing, electrocatalysis, and fuel cells. It is
critically important to explore the electron transfer behaviors observed on
these ultrathin porous materials and this project provides an in-depth
understanding of surface and interface chemistry of two-dimensional conductive
and semiconductive materials, which aligns well with the mission of NSF to
promote the progress of fundamental science. The research is beneficial to
advancing the semiconductor industry. Moreover, this project integrates research
and education to train undergraduate students in surface sciences and educates
high school students about materials chemistry. Another educational effort is to
promote diversity in materials science by providing research opportunities to
students from diverse cultural backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
investigates the electron transfer processes in two-dimensional conductive and
semiconductive crystalline coordination networks, including metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and their composites with
conductive polymers. Specifically, research activities include the study of
lateral and vertical charge transport, as well as electron transfer between
conductive polymer and its host MOF/COF material in a heterogeneous structure.
The project enhances the scientific understanding of surface and interface
interactions between crystalline coordination networks and semiconductors with
combined analytical methodology and materials design, thereby guiding future
crystalline coordination-based device design. By providing early research
opportunities to a diverse cohort of undergraduate students at the California
State University Long Beach, the project targets on increasing diversity in
materials science. Meanwhile, outreach activities involve local high school
students and the general public by improving scientific awareness and interest
in materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.