* 2144360
* CAREER: Rational Design of Nanoporous Catalysts for Carbonylation Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Peng Bai, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2027
* USD 431,091.00

Annually, millions of tons of alcohols and carboxylic acids (used to create
polymers, food additives, solvents, and pharmaceuticals) are produced
industrially via catalytic carbonylation. Because this process makes use of
expensive rare-metal catalysts and requires corrosive chemical agents to promote
the desired reactions, the result is stringent and costly reactor designs,
complex catalyst recycling schemes, and environmentally unfriendly waste
streams. This project aims to discover effective porous solid-acid catalysts as
a technologically and environmentally appealing alternative. Designing an
optimal solid acid, however, is a challenging task, as there are hundreds of
potential structures to choose from, each with unique, molecular-scale cavities
that can stabilize or prevent different reactions. This project will develop
computer models that allow us to make accurate predictions of which chemical
reactions will take place, enabling a computationally efficient approach to
catalyst design. These developments will positively impact manufacturing
processes based on carbonylation chemistry, and also many other large-scale
industrial processes that create the chemical products for our modern society.
The research efforts are closely integrated with educational and outreach
activities to serve our overarching goals of improving computational competency
in the training of the next-generation workforce and promoting diversity and
broadening participation of underrepresented students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental work has demonstrated that
nanoporous zeolites with 8-membered rings can potentially catalyze the
carbonylation reaction with high selectivity, providing a compelling alternative
to traditional rare metal-based catalyst systems. Despite the tantalizing
potential, fundamentally important questions remain, including: What are the
structural motifs that will make possible effective carbonylation of small
methoxy groups versus larger carbocations in different zeolite architectures?
How can acid-catalyzed side reactions be controlled by selectively suppressing
undesired reactions? What are the mechanisms that determine the function of
promoters and poisoners in these nanoporous solid acids? This research program
will address these questions by developing and applying computational tools that
integrate quantum chemical and forcefield-based molecular-scale simulations. The
project will generate fundamental insights into confinement effects in
nanoporous catalysts and will make possible the rational design of catalysts
that target reactions selectively. A successful outcome may not only lead to
industrially feasible, environmentally friendly solid acids for the synthesis of
ethanol and acetic acid, but also provide general strategies for using solid
acids in other organic syntheses and for controlling side reactions in many
existing, large-scale solid acid catalytic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.