* 2144080
* CAREER: Algorithmic Models of Adaptation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Andrew Sutton, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2027
* USD 460,007.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution is an inherently
algorithmic process: complex adaptations in living organisms emerge from the
basic forces of replication, variation and selection acting together on an
evolving sequence of genetic material. In the field of artificial intelligence,
this process has been leveraged at a high level to develop evolutionary
algorithms: computer programs that apply this framework to adapt solutions to
computationally hard problems. Despite their popularity on a wide range of
practical applications, relatively little is understood about their working
principles, or how the structure of problems might influence their
applicability. Moreover, there is a rich potential of untapped interdisciplinary
knowledge situated at the confluence of biological evolution and algorithms.
This project addresses this by establishing an Algorithmic Evolution Lab to
serve as an incubator of scientific ideas that explore the boundaries between
algorithmic evolution and mathematical models of evolving populations. The
principal aim of the Algorithmic Evolution Lab is to study evolution and
adaptation from the lens of computational complexity. The impacts of this
project include developing new insights into how different forces affect the
speed of adaptation in both natural and artificial settings. It will also yield
rigorous performance guarantees for optimization heuristics coming from the
field of artificial intelligence. As society becomes more reliant on techniques
from artificial intelligence, it is increasingly more critical that these
algorithms are rigorously analyzed. This is especially the case when human life
and safety is at stake, or when algorithmic processes can have dramatic and
unintended effects within broader systems. This project will help to publicize
and push forward the rigorous analysis of these kinds of algorithms. The
research is also tightly coupled to the educational and outreach goals of the
project. The Algorithmic Evolution Lab builds an environment for students to
conduct interdisciplinary research. Activities such as undergraduate research
workshops and guest lectures from prominent women in computer science will serve
the goal of improving the gender balance in computer science, and creating
pathways to STEM research opportunities for women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will apply tools from the theory of
parameterized complexity to explain how different evolutionary search operators
influence the speed of adaptation on combinatorial landscapes, and how landscape
structure in turn influences this speed. Evolutionary algorithms and other
optimization heuristics from AI are robust and general-purpose, yet often come
with many modules and design choices. Finding reasonable configurations requires
a costly, ad-hoc trial-and-error approach. The project will identify parameters,
both in problem structure and algorithm design, that isolate the source of
exponential complexity for the algorithm to provide a rigorous understanding of
the influence of different operators on running time. This will result in a
principled approach to designing and tuning these techniques in practice. The
project will also offer a fresh view on traditional theoretical work in
evolutionary biology by tackling an old problem from a new algorithmic
perspective. Wright's Shifting Balance Theory contends that stochastic processes
such as genetic drift are critical forces in the dynamics of adaptation. This
conflicts with the Fisherian view that adaptation is a simple hill-climbing
process. By applying tools from the running time analysis of evolutionary
algorithms, this project will attack these questions from a novel framework
based on computational complexity in which efficiency of adaptation can be made
rigorous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.