* 2144317
* CAREER: Exciton-Phonon Coupling in Quantum Materials: Atomistic Insight for Defects and 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* David Strubbe, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2027
* USD 242,884.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education activities
aimed at improving fundamental understanding of the interaction of light and
collective vibrations of atoms in materials. This interaction is important in
many different phenomena such as changes in atomic structure after absorption of
light or the changes in the energy of light due to interaction with atomic
vibrations. These interactions are particularly significant when electrons and
holes (the empty states left behind by excited electrons) are strongly bound.
Such cases include atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials, and defects
in materials where atoms are missing or added, which can also have unpaired
electron spins that are difficult to handle theoretically. This project will
develop more accurate and efficient quantum-mechanical computational methods to
study interactions of light and vibrations, which will be validated by
experimental measurements. The PI will then apply these methods to better
understand phenomena in 2D materials and defects, allowing better predictions of
which defects are promising for applications in quantum computing, and enabling
identification of the elusive atomic structures of defects in 2D materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will benefit society and
economic development by building the fundamental scientific knowledge for the
advancement of quantum technologies including computing, communication, and
sensing. The methods developed will be made available for wide use in the
condensed matter theory community by implementation and release in open-source
codes, and students and postdocs will be trained in best practices for code
development. This project will also innovate in undergraduate education by
introducing a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience as a lab activity
into the sophomore-level Modern Physics class at the University of California,
Merced. The activity will teach students the role of computation in physics and
show applications in current research. The template, evaluation data, and
results of this activity will be disseminated in papers and presentations, to
enable use in similar classes elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education activities aimed at improving fundamental understanding of
exciton-phonon interactions in materials. Important experimentally measured
phenomena involving exciton-phonon interactions include ultrafast motions after
light absorption, resonant Raman spectroscopy, and vibronic features in optical
spectra. In these phenomena, neglect of excitonic effects can give qualitatively
different results, but exciton-phonon coupling has not been studied in detail
theoretically due to lack of suitable approaches. Exciton-phonon coupling is
generally strong in defects and two-dimensional (2D) materials, which are of
great interest for quantum applications. Excitingly, developments in first-
principles theory and massively parallel computation are now enabling accurate
and efficient calculations of forces in the excited state for materials, via the
GW approximation and Bethe-Salpeter equation. This project will develop and
implement approaches for resonant Raman and vibronic spectra with excitonic
effects, which will be applied to study 2D materials and defects for quantum
information, including those with challenging triplet ground states.
Collaboration with two experimental groups will validate and apply findings from
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will benefit
society and economic development by building the fundamental scientific
knowledge for the advancement of quantum technologies including computing,
communication, and sensing. The methods developed will be made available for
wide use in the condensed matter theory community by implementation and release
in open-source codes, and students and postdocs will be trained in best
practices for code development. This project will also innovate in undergraduate
education by introducing a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience as a
lab activity into the sophomore-level Modern Physics class at the University of
California, Merced. The activity will teach students the role of computation in
physics and show applications in current research. The template, evaluation
data, and results of this activity will be disseminated in papers and
presentations, to enable use in similar classes
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.