* 2144547
* CAREER: Robust LSM-Based Data Stores
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Manos Athanassoulis, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2027
* USD 259,862.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human activity generates data at
an unprecedented pace. At the same time, these ever-increasing data sets are
used to harness information to make critical and everyday decisions. In that
setting, data systems support every aspect of human activity by offering
efficient ingestion of incoming data and quick access to perform analysis tasks.
To ensure efficient data ingestion and analysis, data systems developers and
administrators tune these systems based on the expectation (or knowledge) of the
workload; that is, the operations to be submitted. Further, data systems aim to
offer both fast and predictable performance; however, their deployment faces
several challenges. On the one hand, many applications are volatile because of
factors such as variations in access patterns or that the frequency of
operations submitted varies wildly throughout the day. Thus, it is hard to know
what workload to expect and, as a result, to tune them. On the other hand, data
systems are increasingly deployed in shared infrastructure like public and
private clouds, which brings a new set of challenges: the new, more diverse
hardware and infrastructure makes the execution environment even more
unpredictable, since compute, memory, and storage resource availability may also
vary. Further, storing data in shared infrastructure must comply with new
regulations, e.g., about privacy and data stewardship. The project will develop
data systems that offer high and predictable performance and make regulatory
requirements a first-class citizen. Ultimately, the project will make it easier
for non-expert users to deploy data systems in the
wild.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop a new breed of robust
log-structured merge (LSM) based data systems that can offer near-optimal
performance despite potential uncertainty in the execution setting and increase
performance predictability. The project focuses on LSM-based data systems, a key
technology used as the backbone of several data system designs today, including
SQL, NoSQL, key-value stores, and time-series management. In order to address
the execution setting volatility and provide an ideal LSM data system design,
the project takes a new radical approach, one that incorporates uncertainty in
tuning input (e.g., workload, resource availability) and addresses both the
unpredictability of key LSM operations (like compactions) and the inaccuracy of
cost-models. The proposal investigates techniques that combine state-of-the-art
tuning methods with robust optimization while building on recent algorithmic and
hardware advancements. This work will produce systems that depend less on the
specific execution instance and exhibit stable performance despite workload and
resource variability. As a result, robust LSM-based data systems will require
less human intervention, and they will be more appealing to both users and
administrators, allowing organizations to widely deploy reliable systems to
accelerate and support data-intensive scientific discovery and applications.
Such ease of deployment is timely as data management is increasingly becoming an
automatic service, where human experts cannot always be in the loop to hand-tune
and optimize data systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.