* 2144362
* CAREER: Catalytic Membranes for Integrated CO2 Capture and Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Casey O'Brien, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2027
* USD 424,675.00

Carbon dioxide (CO2) capture from air is considered an important negative
emissions technology to mitigate global warming. Current sorbent-based CO2
capture processes are prohibitively expensive because the sorbent must be
regenerated via an energy-intensive step to release the captured CO2. Once
released from the sorbent, the captured CO2 must also be compressed and
transported to sites for storage, which further reduces efficiency. An ideal CO2
capture technology would be both high-capacity and energy-efficient, while
simultaneously converting the waste CO2 stream into a value-added product. This
project will advance the fundamental science of integrating CO2 capture with CO2
conversion in a single unit process using a newly-envisioned bifunctional
catalytic membrane. The membrane would act as both the CO2 separation and
conversion medium, providing an energy- and atom-efficient alternative to
sorbent-based CO2 capture, compression, transport, and storage. Such a membrane
could revolutionize the way fuels and chemicals are produced, leading to
transformative change in the chemical process industries and long-term
stimulation of the United States economy. The students supported by this project
will receive interdisciplinary training in catalysis, membrane separations, and
advanced spectroscopic characterization. This CAREER project will also broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM through outreach activities
at Navarre Middle School in South Bend, Indiana, and research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project aims to advance the fundamental science underlying the
integration of CO2 capture and conversion into a single unit, membrane-based
process. The envisioned bifunctional CO2 capture and conversion membrane is
polymer-based with: (1) amine groups attached to the polymer chain to
selectively capture CO2 from air, or concentrated point sources, and facilitate
CO2 transport across the membrane; and (2) catalytic groups (e.g. amines,
halides, metals) to catalyze conversion of CO2 on the permeate side of the
membrane. The research goal of this project is to identify the key factors (mass
transport, reaction kinetics, and stability) that limit the overall rate of
integrated CO2 capture and conversion. The project will examine cyclic carbonate
synthesis as a model CO2 conversion reaction. Knowledge of the rate-limiting
factors will be used to develop strategies for circumventing these performance-
limiting processes. The project is innovative in its use of unique operando
spectroscopy techniques developed by the investigator to probe the structure,
performance, and dynamics of the catalytic membranes under realistic operating
conditions. The research outcomes will provide foundational knowledge of the
kinetics, mechanisms, and stability of the catalytic membrane, which will
provide a framework for developing a practical membrane system for integrating
CO2 capture with CO2 conversion to a wide range of fuels and chemicals. The
research will also advance the state-of-the-art of operando membrane
characterization, enhance membranes for CO2 separation, and enhance catalysts
for CO2 conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.