* 2144506
* CAREER: Advancing Equity in Middle School Mathematics by Engaging Students and Families of Color in Participatory Design Research
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Nicole Louie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2027
* USD 443,751.00

Schools and districts around the country seek to address racial inequities, yet
vast disparities in learning opportunities, outcomes, and experiences persist.
Furthermore, those who bear the heaviest burdens of racial injustice—namely,
students of color and their families—are rarely meaningfully included in
conceptualizing and implementing equity-oriented initiatives. Policymakers and
administrators have often treated curricular and pedagogical change as something
that should be done to or for these students and families, not with or by them.
The proposed project seeks to investigate the possibilities and challenges of
using a participatory approach to research and design, centering Black,
Indigenous, Latinx, and Hmong students and their families in imagining and
creating change. This approach has the potential to disrupt inequitable
practices of mathematics education as well as undemocratic processes for making
decisions about mathematics education. Further, it will be a catalyst for
developing racially just practices and processes in mathematics education. This
CAREER award is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This project is also supported by the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity), which supports
projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and workforce development
through research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate
new knowledge about the possibilities and limitations of participatory design
research (PDR) as a method for advancing equity in mathematics education through
PDR cycles at three middle schools over the five years of the project. These
cycles include families of color participating in mathematical activity, sharing
their experiences, collecting data germane to their experiences, and making
recommendations to create more equitable practices and policies in mathematics
education. Thus, PDR cycles provide a more democratic and egalitarian means of
understanding and addressing social problems than traditional research methods.
Educational activities culminating from this research include the development of
graduate-level curriculum related to PDR. This project will also contribute
groundbreaking evidence of how families, educators, and school leaders can use
PDR to shift power dynamics and make systemic change in mathematics education by
centering the voices and knowledge of students of color and their families. It
will add to the small body of literature regarding how students of color and
their families understand racial equity and justice in mathematics education.
Their perspectives are essential to inform equity- and justice-oriented research
and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.