* 2144701
* CAREER: The Regulation of Cytokinesis by Calcium
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Qian Chen, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2026
* USD 275,527.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions of rounds of cell
division are required for an embryo to become a fully developed human. How a
cell can divide so reliably with precise timing and spatial cues is a
fundamental biological question. One enduring mystery about cell division
remains the involvement of calcium. We have long known that two quick currents
consisting of calcium ions run through an embryonic cell during the last step of
cell division called cytokinesis. These transient currents could potentially
serve as the triggering signal, like a light switch, for the separation of two
replicated daughter cells. However, their origin and function remain poorly
understood due to technological challenges. This project will tackle this
question by taking advantage of two fairly recent breakthroughs. The first is
the conceptual advance of employing the simple fission yeast to study
cytokinesis. This yeast is easy to manipulate genetically, but its cytokinesis
is similar to that of the animal cells. The second is the technical advance of
quantitative microscopy that can measure calcium current in live cells with high
precision. The project will take advantage of these advances to uncover how
calcium works during cytokinesis. Broader Impact activities include the
intrinsic merit of the research as all eukaryotic cells likely utilize calcium
signals during division. Additional activities involve the training of high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students in research. The PI will extend the
experience for high school students with remote controlled microscopes during
the school year and he will also engage in activities to prepare and attract
economically disadvantaged students for college. American Rescue Plan funding
provides support for the investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators will build on early
advances to determine the mechanism of the calcium spikes. 1) The investigators
will determine how the calcium spike arises in dividing fission yeast cells. We
will test whether a special type of ion channels called mechanosensitive
channels initiate the calcium spike. Then they will test whether two calcium
pumps Pmr1 and Pmc1 clear out the excessive calcium so that the spikes are
transient. 2) The investigators will determine how the calcium spike regulates
the force-generator of cytokinesis the contractile ring. They will test whether
the calcium spike promotes the activity of calcium-sensitive molecule Ppb1 which
then proceeds to activate the motor protein type II myosins in the ring. They
will measure how Ppb1 is recruited and activated in the ring and determine the
activity and number of myosins in the mutant cells without Ppb1. This will be
followed by the experiment to determine whether the myosin regulatory light
chain is a substrate of Ppb1. 3) The investigators will determine how the
calcium spike regulates the last step of cytokinesis the cell separation. They
will determine whether the spike helps build the cell wall for yeast cells and
maintain the integrity of the membrane through the activity of the calcium-
sensitive molecule Cam1. They will employ yeast genetics, calcium imaging,
atomic force microscopy and quantitative microscopy in the project. The
investigators expect it will finally address the long-standing questions, where
these cytokinetic calcium currents come from and what are their
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.