* 2144356
* CAREER: Active Nonlinear Photonics with Applications in Quantum Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Mahdi Hosseini, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

The quantum internet promises to transform communication and sensing as we know
it today with potential to redefine information security. Quantum networks will
be complex and heterogeneous while being very sensitive to loss. There are
several outstanding challenges that need to be overcome before a large-scale
quantum network can meaningfully connect users, computers, and sensors. The lack
of low-loss and scalable quantum optical devices such as quantum optical sources
and memories is a major obstacle in building a large-scale quantum network.
Another challenge is efficient and multiplexed generation, storage and
distribution of quantum information (e.g. entanglement). Moreover, network
elements should be compatible in terms of operational modes, e.g. wavelength and
bandwidth. This CAREER proposal focuses on studying novel solid-state quantum
photonic devices and takes key initial steps towards multiplexed quantum
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate nonlinear
interaction of electromagnetic fields with engineered materials for quantum
network applications. Wafer-scale Lithium Niobate On Insulator (LNOI) materials
are proposed as novel hosts for optical centers in solids to create integrated
platforms and study linear and nonlinear light-matter interactions in the
quantum regime. Thulium (Tm) ions incorporated into LNOI crystals will be
considered as active media for controlling quantum optical information. Lithium
niobate as a host for Tm ions provides an opportunity for on-chip integration
and design of multifunctional devices where high-speed frequency tuning and
integrated nonlinearity creates a versatile platform for photonic information
processing. The integrated photonic platform based on LNOI together with the
broadband absorption spectrum of Tm ions can enable multiplexed (or multimode)
quantum information processing. To investigate the feasibility of this approach,
the PI will study multimode photon generation, coherent and reversible
absorption near 800nm wavelength. He will explore how the interaction
Hamiltonian can be engineered by controlling external electric/magnetic fields
and spatial coherence among atoms to optimize the quantum
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.