* 2144700
* CAREER: The Neural Basis of Memory for Visual Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Caroline Robertson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 745,000.00

As we navigate through our world, the visual scene in front of us is seamlessly
integrated with our knowledge of the broader spatial environment, helping to
form mental maps of our environment. The seamless nature of perception is quite
remarkable, especially considering that each view of our environment is discrete
and fleeting, separated by expansive eye movements that produce discontinuous
views of our spatial surroundings. Understanding how this is accomplished in the
brain is a major scientific puzzle. The goal of this project is to determine how
memory and perception interface in the human brain during real-world scene
perception. Using a combination of tools, including immersive virtual reality
and brain imaging, this project promises fundamental knowledge about how the
human brain constructs memories of a naturalistic environments and how these
memories influence everyday visual experience. This project also advances
inclusive STEM education by removing barriers for neurodiverse learners,
broadening participation of URM and female college students in neuroscience, and
contributing to scientific outreach in rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the nature of
memory for immersive, real-world environments in the human brain, and to shed
light on how mnemonic and perceptual signals interact during real-world
perception. To tackle these questions, this project leverages two distinctive
innovations: (1) a new technical approach to study human memory and perception
in naturalistic settings using head-mounted virtual reality, and (2) fine-
grained individual subject brain imaging (fMRI -functional magnetic resonance
imaging) analyses to characterize the nature of visuo-mnemonic representations
in the brain. This multimodal approach allows for controlled tests of which
neural systems support perception and memory for real world environments, and
direct manipulations of the content of learned environments to understand the
neural representation of familiar scenes. Finally, this project forwards a novel
theory of mnemonic-visual interactions in the brain and specifically tests
whether place memory is associated with a different brain area (shifted
anterior) relative to scene perception. This research will also determine how
this change in the location of the brain representation for place memory is
related to the amount of contextual information, participants’ memory
performance, and scene-specific processes. Finally, this project will also
explore whether such an “anterior shift” represents a general principle of how
mnemonic and high-level visual areas interact in the brain. Together, these
studies promise to generate fundamental knowledge about the nature of memory for
immersive, real-world environments in the human brain, and, more broadly, the
mechanisms by which stored knowledge about the world interfaces with perception
during naturalistic visual experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Cognitive Neuroscience Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.