* 2144372
* CAREER: Probing Multiscale Growth Dynamics in Filamentous Cell Walls
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Min Wu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2027
* USD 206,367.00

Various plants and fungi rely on filamentous growth to develop, reproduce, or
survive under environmental stress. For example, the growth of root hairs with
one-cell width effectively increases the surface area of the plant roots to
absorb water and nutrients. Although experimental approaches have been able to
track cell wall morphology and kinematics on the expanding cell wall surface for
more than a century, the regulation of cell wall growth needs further
elucidation. This project will develop mathematical models and computational
methods to simulate the cell wall expansion due to the spatial patterning of new
cell wall materials and mechanical interaction with the cell interior. Further,
inference methods will be devised to predict the spatial patterning of wall-
material trafficking from the cell wall geometry and quantify how volume growth
inside the cell wall is distributed and rearranged to sustain the cell wall
geometry during expansion and under mechanical constraints. The methods
developed in this research can be applied to filamentous growth systems such as
pollen tubes, root hairs, fungus hyphae, thus having significant implications in
advancing agriculture and improving public health. Complementary to the
research, the investigator will engage students, including K-12, undergraduate,
and graduate students, in research mentorship, journal clubs, and a new
interactive learning platform "Filaform”, to promote interest and
transdisciplinary understanding of this biological process by leveraging
geometry and other mathematics in conjunction with modern and emerging
experimental techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To reach the research and
education goals, two complementary mathematical models at different scales will
be developed. The first will be a thin-shell model approximating the cell wall
surface as a growing elastic boundary inflated by turgor pressure from the cell
interior. Cubic-spline solutions will be developed to simulate the evolution of
surface growth under the influence of turgor pressure and the distribution of
exocytosis, a process that distributes new cell wall material along the cell
wall interior surface. In addition, an inverse problem coupled with a subset of
the model equations will be formulated to infer the distribution of exocytosis
given the steady-state cell shape. Taking the exocytosis distribution as an
input, the second model will be a three-dimensional model that describes the
growth distribution and directionality (anisotropy) across the cell wall
thickness. An energy-based material-point method will be developed to simulate
the dynamics of the moving cell-wall domain. The investigator will infer the
spatial map of the volume growth and anisotropy in the cell-wall domain by
formulating optimization problems constrained by the three-dimensional model.
Theoretical predictions from both models will be validated by experiments
tracking the cell wall morphology, signals of protein complexes involved in
exocytosis, and new polymers in the cell wall. The investigator will create an
open-source interactive teaching and learning platform for outreach to K-12
educators and students based on the thin-shell model and its simulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Mathematical Biology
program of the Division of Mathematical Science and by the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology (BMMB) program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.