* 2144684
* CAREER: A Utility Aware Framework for Privately Sharing Individual Level Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Liyue Fan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 212,574.00

Individual level data can be collected and shared to benefit a wide range of
research studies and exploratory applications. However, most privacy protecting
data sharing solutions focus on well-defined aggregate analysis and do not take
into account the application’s utility goals. Furthermore, current solutions may
be limited in addressing the application-specific privacy needs, resulting in
overly strong or inadequate privacy protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops novel privacy protecting data sharing solutions by
incorporating an application’s privacy needs and utility goals in one
optimization framework. The framework is compatible with a variety of rigorous
privacy models. More importantly, it allows the application to customize the
privacy mechanism’s structure as well as fine-grained output utility. The
project shows the feasibility of customizing the framework to support real-world
applications, e.g., in health and behavioral domains. Furthermore, to facilitate
adoption in a wide range of domains, the project estimates the utility loss via
statistical interactions in the data and develops computationally efficient
techniques to solve large scale problems. Moreover, the project studies domain-
specific privacy risks, e.g., in rapidly growing applications, to formulate the
evolving privacy needs in the framework. The results of the project will benefit
research studies and applications in a variety of domains that rely on
individually contributed data, such as, behavioral and health studies. The
project also integrates research and education with a number of interconnected
activities, including curriculum development, student mentoring,
interdisciplinary collaboration, and K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.