* 2144698
* CAREER: The Overlooked Barrier –  Exploring How Engineering Education Research Teams Negotiate Epistemic Differences
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Courtney Faber, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2027
* USD 344,665.00

Engineering education is an interdisciplinary field that includes researchers
and practitioners from a range of backgrounds - engineering, sociology,
psychology, etc. Each of these disciplines have their own approaches that drive
the “rules” that guide how research is conducted and what research questions are
asked. These differences have led to tension and misunderstanding around the
process of knowledge generation and application, limiting the research that is
done and the impact of research on engineering education (e.g., K-12 engineering
education, undergraduate engineering instruction). Researchers often incorrectly
associate these tensions with ineffective communication or project management,
creating an overlooked barrier facing research teams. This project will begin to
address this overlooked barrier by first investigating how differences in
thinking are negotiated among members of an engineering education research (EER)
team. By gaining this understanding, this project will take an iterative
approach to develop workshops, asynchronous trainings, and course modules
focused on supporting EER researchers and teams to navigate barriers related to
differences in thinking and ultimately create transformative change in
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key outcomes of this proposal
will be (1) a conceptual model the incorporates epistemic culture and
individual’s negotiation of epistemic identities within EER teams; (2) four
workshops to expand the conceptual model and translate it for use by
researchers; (3) a guiding tool to facilitate the integration of different
research goals, approaches, and ideals (epistemic identities) within EER teams;
and (4) an asynchronous virtual training and two instructional modules to
support both established and emerging researchers. The outcomes of this work
will ensure that researchers and teams have the knowledge and tools to navigate
barriers related to differences in thinking. This project will achieve these
outcomes through three major plans that are fully-integrated. The Research Plan
will use a multimethod research approach to investigate 1) how researchers
negotiate differences in thinking and 2) the culture that defines how and why
teams select specific approaches to generate and apply knowledge. This
investigation will be guided by the following research question: How are
epistemic differences negotiated among members of engineering education research
teams? This project will answer this question by integrating an ethnographic
case study (Phase A) with approaches from grounded theory (Phase B). Phase A
will deeply explore the culture that defines how knowledge is generated,
expressed, and applied within a single research team. This deep exploration will
develop an initial conceptual model that represents one way EER teams generate
and apply knowledge. Phase B will expand this model by investigating how
researchers across a variety of EER teams negotiate differences in thinking and
define how knowledge is generated and applied. The Translation Plan will
integrate the Research and Education Plans by developing and conducting four
workshops. The first two workshops, called exploration workshops, will refine
the conceptual model by adding constructs and connections that will be further
explored through the Research Plan. Then, two development workshops will be used
to translate the research findings to practice through the creation of a guiding
tool to facilitate the integration of different research goals, approaches, and
ideals within EER teams. The Education Plan will equip researchers and teams
with the knowledge and tools to negotiate barriers related to differences in
thinking by developing an asynchronous virtual training and two instructional
modules. An iterative approach will be used to develop these training to ensure
that their structure and content meet the needs of researchers. The asynchronous
virtual training will be developed for established researchers. The
instructional modules will be developed for emerging researchers and will be
implemented within six engineering education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.