* 2144618
* CAREER:  Fostering Early STEM Exploration with Gifted and High Ability Black Girls and Their Elementary Teachers through Culturally Relevant Experiential Learning Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Brittany Anderson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 05/31/2027
* USD 349,505.00

There is limited scholarship on the experiences of gifted Black girls in STEM
Education. Black girls are underrepresented by almost 40% in gifted programs,
and under-referred for advanced course work, such as STEM-focused Advanced
Placement and other courses. This proposed CAREER project fills a theoretical
gap related to the intersections of race, gender, class, and cognitive ability
in gifted, urban, and teacher education. The researcher will develop and study
co-learning, community-engaged educational programs that center STEM education
pipelines and pathways for gifted Black girls. The central aim of this proposed
project is to bring about an actionable theory of change at the elementary level
to foster a sense of belonging in STEM, early STEM exploration and development,
and nurturing a STEM identity, through critical and culturally relevant
experiential learning. The project will also develop curricular materials for
gifted Black girls and their families (See Me in STEM) as well as professional
development materials for teachers (Teachers as Talent Catalysts) as part of the
educational integration plan. This CAREER award is funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will provide 20 elementary
teachers with professional learning based on relevant literature and the
expressed needs of gifted Black girls in STEM using community and familial
input. Teacher participants will be immersed in culturally relevant experiential
STEM teaching processes to enhance their pedagogy. A mixed-methods research
design will inform the development and implementation of two components of the
project, the teacher development program, Teachers as Talent Catalysts, and the
curriculum developed for use with 40 Black girls identified as gifted and their
families, See Me in STEM. The intended research outcomes include: (1) increased
understanding of the experiences of elementary-aged gifted Black girls with
respect to STEM identity via experiential learning; (2) development of a theory
that centers the voices, historical legacies, and interests of gifted Black
girls, their community interests, and families as partners; (3) a co-developed
model for partnership development that supports a shared vision for talent
identification and development in elementary STEM for gifted Black girls; and
(4) increased understanding of how the co-learning model and collaborative
approach informs the STEM talent identification and development of gifted Black
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.