* 2144171
* CAREER: Solvent-Free Synthesis of Polymeric Nanostructures with Targeted Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Rong Yang, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2026
* USD 649,997.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will support research that enables advances in the
manufacturing science of polymer nanoparticles. The manufacturing of polymer
nanoparticles is motivated by the socioeconomic impact on the US economy which
spans both medical and commercial activities. Polymer nanoparticles are
currently synthesized via a solution-based batch processes, which can limit
their broad deployment and constrain the available nanoparticles to a spherical
shape with solid internal morphology using a limited selection of chemical
compositions. To overcome these challenges, this research provides the needed
knowledge for the development of a new scalable manufacturing paradigm that
produces polymer nanoparticles with programmable shape, size, porosity, and
chemistries. The programmable polymer nanoparticles could find important uses as
injectable implants or in programmable drug delivery, transforming the impact of
nanoparticles on the economy and employment. The methodology for synthesis of
programmable nanoparticles can be adopted for the design of a broad range of
nanomaterials, accelerating the growth of this multi-billion-dollar industry in
the US. The manufacturing technique is scalable and modular, providing parallel
paths for both centralized and decentralized manufacturing. Education and
outreach activities will be integrated throughout the duration of this award
through a common theme that is focused on active learning and broadening the
participation of women in STEM and technology transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research develops a methodology for the continuous
production of programmable polymeric nanoparticles via a non-equilibrium
manufacturing process utilizing chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The CVD process
is solvent-free and can be a scalable manufacturing process for organic-based
nanoparticles potentially extendable soft materials such as a variety of
polymers. This project addresses that challenge for nanostructure formation
based on non-equilibrium phenomena, including dropwise condensation, solvent-
free polymerization, dynamic dewetting, evaporation, and flow-directed structure
formation enabled by the process. The research addresses the fundamental
questions that are key to achieving this methodological advance: (1) kinetics of
condensation and polymerization of nonpolar nanodrops for controlled particle
size and size distribution; (2) non-equilibrium dewetting on an
engineered/patterned interface to define the particle geometry; and (3)
molecular complexes and interfacial flow to enable porous internal morphologies
for the nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.