* 2144977
* CAREER: Manufacturing Semiconducting Nanoparticles at the Aerosol/Vapor-Phase Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Julio D'Arcy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Robust energy storage is critical for our nation’s future. Manufacturing
semiconductor nanomaterials for energy storage possessing high electronic
conductivity and high energy storage capacity could translate into batteries
possessing larger “fuel tanks” and is critical to the US economy. The current
state-of-the-art in manufacturing of organic nanoparticles for energy storage
applications produces particles of low electronic conductivity resulting in poor
energy storage performance. Among nanomaterials, organic semiconducting
nanoparticles are especially attractive for batteries due to solution processing
properties that enable cost-effective implementation of these particles. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research
seeking to enable scalable production of organic nanoparticles using an aerosol
process through investigation of the interplay of aerosol formation and vapor
phase chemistry. This research will determine the combined transport and
chemical kinetics needed to control the synthetic pathways for the manufacturing
of highly conductive particles in aerosol-based synthesis with controlled
composition and size. The successful development of these new synthetic pathways
would impact energy storage technologies by lowering costs for energy storage in
devices and enabling development of light-weight batteries for transportation
applications. The integrated educational program will contribute to the training
of underrepresented high school, undergraduate and graduate students for careers
in science, engineering, mathematics, and technology by leading project-based
workshops that study aerosol science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing the
next generation of active materials for batteries will require developing
synthetic technologies competitive in an economy of scale. There is a lack of
knowledge regarding molecular variables and experimental conditions that promote
reactivity between aerosols of water droplets and vapors of organic molecules
undergoing oxidative radical polymerization. This research aims to discover
molecular correlations that enable control of polymerization kinetics and
reaction mechanisms by investigating production and desiccation of water droplet
aerosols with concomitant vapor-based polymerization within a flow reactor. Data
produced by this research will inform manufacturing protocols that lead to
kilogram-per-day production of organic semiconducting nanoparticles. This
project will investigate organic-inorganic nanoparticle composites using Fe2O3,
V2O5, Nb2O5, and MnO2 to produce particles characterized by intimate electronic
contact between organic and inorganic components. This research aims to: 1)
achieve mechanistic understanding at the aerosol water droplet/vapor interface
to pinpoint steady-state polymerization kinetics responsible for high electronic
conductivity, 2) investigate residence time of suspended aerosols of water
droplets under reaction conditions to design nanoparticles possessing long
conjugation length and high crystallinity, and 3) probe synthetic conditions
that tailor mass transport of reactant vapors to trigger rapid polymerization
and high throughput batch processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.