* 2144270
* CAREER: Mechanisms and evolution of defensive microbial symbiosis in insects
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Matthew Ballinger, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2027
* USD 805,682.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All organisms face threats from
parasites and pathogens and have evolved specialized immune responses for
protection. Parasites respond in turn with modifications to their own genetic
weaponry to more effectively avoid or disable host defenses. Recent research has
emphasized the importance of a third player in infections, the host’s microbial
allies, which can provide strong protection against invaders. However, central
question about the activities and effects of symbionts on hosts and parasites
remain to be answered. For instance, how do symbionts target and disable many
different types of parasites without harming the host? How do defensive genes
influence the back-and-forth “arms race” between host defenses and parasite
resistance? A goal of this research is to answer these open questions through
molecular and genetic investigations of an exemplar symbiosis between the fruit
fly, Drosophila, and Spiroplasma, a bacterial partner that defends it against
internal parasites. The project will also collaborate with Mississippi State
University students and school teachers, providing training in bacterial
evolution and cutting-edge genome sequencing technology while investigating
symbiont-parasite interactions in natural insect populations. As research
organisms, insects offer ideal systems to experimentally investigate fundamental
questions about these partnerships and the genes that support them, and as
pollinators, consumers, pests, and disease vectors, insects are deeply connected
to their natural ecosystems, and to human health and food security. Therefore,
this research will contribute to advancing knowledge in the areas of parasite-
host interactions, bacterial evolution, and insect
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conflict between parasite and host is a key driver
of natural selection, reshaping life history strategies, immune systems, and
virulence factors across all biological organisms. While defensive microbial
symbionts are increasingly recognized as fundamental contributors to host
ecology, the molecular evolutionary context underlying their place in the
parasite-host arms race is not well understood. This project aims to address
this gap through functional genetic studies of a model insect defensive
symbiosis. Bacterial toxins encoded by Spiroplasma help defend Drosophila hosts
against parasitic wasps and nematodes, and exhibit rapid molecular evolution,
frequent recombination, and conjugative mobilization across the symbiont genus.
Multiple origins of resistance within wasps complements these dynamic patterns
of toxin evolution, suggesting arms race-like coevolutionary processes may
underlie symbiont-parasite interactions. This project’s research goals are to 1)
determine the molecular basis of parasite-specific defenses by Spiroplasma, 2)
characterize novel genotype and phenotype diversity of defensive strains, and 3)
identify mechanisms of resistance to Spiroplasma-mediated defense. These
research goals will be extended through an educational partnership with students
at Mississippi State University to investigate symbiont toxin evolution and
parasite resistance dynamics in local field populations. Finally, this award
will support development of a bacterial genomics laboratory module for biology
teachers in Mississippi and neighboring states as part of their graduate degree
training. These activities will enable and promote a deeper understanding of
molecular evolutionary mechanisms, biotechnology, and bioinformatics in
classrooms throughout the state and region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program in the Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate of Biological Sciences and
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.