* 2144295
* CAREER: QUANTUM MATERIALS IN SQUARE-NET BASED COMPOUNDS
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Leslie Schoop, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2027
* USD 260,032.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;So-called "Quantum-materials" are materials that do
not follow the laws of classical physics. Examples are superconductors, complex
magnets, or topological materials. Topological materials are a class of quantum
matter that show promise to enable future technologies such as new devices for
data storage or quantum computing. Not much is yet understood, however, about
the materials chemistry of topological matter. With this CAREER award, Professor
Leslie Schoop at Princeton University aims to understand how the discipline of
solid-state chemistry can impact the understanding of topological matter.
Towards this goal, the team will focus on a particular class of crystalline
compounds: those in which atoms arrange in a square-net fashion. In these
materials, electronic properties can be understood on the basis of the chemical
bonds in the square lattice. Understanding the nature of the chemical bonds then
allows the intentional modification of these bonds and how this effects physical
properties, such as electronic and magnetic properties. Ultimately, Prof.
Schoopâ€™s team will create a recipe for discovering quantum properties in
materials with square nets. This proposal also includes outreach to community
colleges by providing support for students from New Jersey-based community
colleges to spend a summer in the Schoop lab to learn more about quantum
materials synthesis. The PI will visit these community colleges to give lectures
targeted to a general audience to provide basic insights to the complex and
exciting field of quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, Professor Leslie Schoop at
Princeton University aims to establish predictive power for the development of
new quantum materials based on a class of compounds with a common structural
motif - a square net. In this class of materials, a topological electronic
structure can be linked to the type of chemical bonding within the square net.
This delocalized bonding has been classified as hypervalent and is in direct
competition to a charge density wave-type lattice distortion. The aim here is to
understand the effect of such distortions on the topological band structure.
Charge density waves in topological materials have recently gained attention
because they provide a pathway for the creation of multiple new correlated
topological phases that still have yet to be discovered. This project addresses
the current challenges from a chemical angle. The second aim is to use the
structural distortions as a tool to create materials with complex magnetism.
Magnetism has the potential to add electron-electron correlation to a
topological material. Such correlated topological materials are believed to
result in the discovery of yet unknown physics, which could lead to new quantum
devices. The goal will be reached by synthesizing and structurally
characterizing multiple square-net materials, as well as by varying their
composition. The structural data will be used to derive chemical rules for
structural distortions. Finally, the magnetic and electronic properties of the
synthesized compounds will be investigated. The Broader Impacts consists of
student education; a commitment to diversity; service to the community; and the
potential for advancing technology. The PI will provide opportunities to New
Jersey community college students to work in her lab while reaching out to these
campuses with public lectures to help underrepresented minority students
understand different possible STEM Career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.