* 2144296
* CAREER: Enabling High-performance Na-ion Battery Cathodes Via Structural Pillaring
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Hao Liu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2027
* USD 446,119.00

The transition to renewable energy sources calls for large-scale energy storage
solutions to cope with the intermittent energy generation by renewables, such as
solar and wind. While lithium (Li)-ion batteries are widely used in portable
devices and electric vehicles for energy storage, the high cost of lithium
resources poses barriers to their adoption in large-scale applications, such as
electric grid energy storage. Sodium (Na)-ion batteries are promising
alternatives to Li-ion batteries for large-scale deployment because of the
ubiquity of sodium. However, current Na-ion batteries are plagued by several
deleterious processes, which compromise their performance and undermine their
deployment for grid energy storage. Strategies to overcome these shortcomings
must be developed to realize high-performance Na-ion batteries. The research
project will investigate structural pillaring as an effective strategy to
address the challenges of Na-ion battery electrodes. The research program will
train both undergraduate and graduate students for the clean energy workforce in
the United States. The educational and outreach programs will implement an
interactive pedagogy in teaching and promoting the science of electrochemical
energy storage to an audience at all levels. This will involve the development
of educational games as a platform to engage learners at all levels. These
educational kits will be integrated into the curriculum development on
electrochemical energy storage and various outreach programs targeting both K-12
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to
elucidate the fundamental material descriptors for the ion-ion and ion-lattice
interactions, which underpin a range of deleterious phase transitions of layered
transition metal oxide electrodes for not only the Na-ion intercalation but also
other beyond-Li-ion, such as K- and Ca-ion, chemistries. The fundamental
contribution of this research is the identification of the material descriptors
for the interactions of the layered metal oxide, which will allow for the
rational design of the property and the intercalation chemistry of the layered
transition metal oxides. Adopting the Na-based layered transition metal oxide as
the model compound, the research will elucidate how changes in the ion-ion and
the ion-lattice interactions, which is realized by varying the composition and
nature of the intercalant ions, affect the layer-gliding phase transition, Na-
ion/vacancy ordering, Na-ion diffusion, and the chemical and electrochemical
stability of the layered oxides. These properties and processes will be
characterized by a suite of complementary electrochemical, structural, and
thermal analytical techniques. The outcome of this research will lead to a
rational solution to overcome the barriers for the reversible Na-ion
intercalation at high voltages. The practical implication is the development of
“designer materials” that suppress/mitigate the deleterious phase transitions
and processes in the intercalation reaction, thereby enabling high-performance
energy storage materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.