* 2144383
* CAREER: Towards rational design and control of oxygen migration in oxide thin films for nano-ionic technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Ryan Need, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 01/31/2027
* USD 247,352.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information storage and data processing has
traditionally relied on moving electrons back and forth between different
materials. In contrast, several emerging technologies rely on moving oxygen ions
in and out of thin materials to change their properties, like electrical
resistance or magnetism, by changing the materials chemistry. The expected
advantages of this latter approach include greater energy efficiency, longer
information storage lifetimes, and the ability to support new computing
approaches like quantum computing. However, accurately measuring oxygen
diffusion in very thin films remains challenging and creates a bottleneck in our
ability to understand how different materials hinder or facilitate oxygen ion
movement at small length scales. This CAREER project, supported by the Ceramics
program in the Division of Materials Research, addresses this bottleneck by
developing a new measurement technique to accurately measure oxygen migration
through stacks of different thin films and from that extract information about
the barrier to oxygen migration created by each layer and the interfaces between
them. This knowledge can then be used to design technologies based on ion motion
with the same precision that enables silicon-based electronics today. In
addition, the educational outreach component of this program creates low-cost
activity kits and free training videos to help K-12 teachers introduce students
to materials science concepts and teach them about several key electronic
devices. These kits are supported by free online videos that reinforce the
activity concepts and connect them to ongoing research. Such experiences help
create a pipeline of enthusiastic young scientists with an early knowledge of
materials science principles and how they can be used to create greener
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Controlling nanoscale oxygen migration in thin
film heterostructures is important to harnessing the unique functional
properties found in strongly correlated oxide materials for the next generation
of information technologies. As a step towards improved ionic migration control
in oxide films, this CAREER project, supported by the Ceramics program in the
Division of Materials Research, creates new measurement capabilities and
knowledge in the field of nanoscale ion diffusion. Specifically, this program
develops a new in-situ scattering approach to quantify oxygen concentration
profiles and extract quantitative diffusion coefficients and activation energies
from different heterostructure geometries. Combining this approach with thin
film engineering techniques enables the isolation of individual structure-
property relationships between elements of the heterostructure design (e.g.,
strain, layer thickness, layer stacking) and their effect on oxygen migration in
prototypical perovskite structures. By coupling these spatially resolved
scattering studies with temperature-dependent impedance spectroscopy, this work
provides insight into the active diffusion mechanism(s) operative in various
heterostructure designs and temperature regimes. In conjunction with these
research efforts is an educational plan that creates and distributes electronic
materials activity kits designed to support state learning standards and are
themselves supported by a database of lay-audience videos connecting core ideas
from each activity to ongoing research. Graduate students engaged with the
project gain experience in electronic materials synthesis, state-of-the-art
characterization methodologies, and scientific communication to a variety of
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.