* 2144283
* CAREER: Decision Making, Learning, and Incentive Design in Multilayer Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Parinaz Naghizadeh Ardabili, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2027
* USD 201,896.00

Networks are prevalent in all aspects of society. They play a central role in
information transmission, social interactions, economic transactions, and the
spread of diseases, to name a few. Moreover, many networks, including this
underlying critical infrastructure such as communication, power, and
transportation networks, are highly interdependent. While there exists
considerable research on the modeling and analysis of isolated networks, the
study of interdependent and multilayer networks, particularly in the presence of
strategic and self-interested decision makers, confronts many open challenges.
This proposal will leverage tools from optimization, game theory, machine
learning, and graph theory towards building an analytical framework for the
study of multilayer networks. The findings will have impact on the design and
operation of self-organizing multi-agent systems in complex network
environments, as well as in securing interdependent critical infrastructure.
Integrated with the proposed research, the education plan will broaden
participation in the proposed research areas and provide audiences at all levels
with applied and hands-on experiences through collaboration with outreach
programs at the Ohio State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of this
proposal is the study of multilayer networks using game-theoretic modeling and
analysis. This project will propose and analyze a new class of multi-network
games for the study of decentralized decision-making and learning over
interconnected networks. This framework will account for the multi-modality of
information and communication channels available to entities in multi-agent
systems and identify the potential sources of inefficiency in decentralized
decision making in multilayer network environments (as compared to both
centrally operated and single layer networks). It will also propose and evaluate
the impact of incentives or interventions to shape the outcomes of decentralized
decision making and distributed learning on these networks, through mechanism
design and targeted interventions. These findings will be used to show how the
holistic study of multilayer networks, as opposed to focusing on each network
individually, enhances our ability to design and evaluate economic and
regulatory interventions, and prevent unwanted equilibria or learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.