* 2144751
* CAREER: Efficient, Dynamic, Robust, and On-Device Continual Deep Learning with Non-Volatile Memory based In-Memory Computing System
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Deliang Fan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2026
* USD 177,735.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over past decades, there have
existed grand challenges in developing high performance and energy-efficient
computing solutions for big-data processing. Meanwhile, owing to the boom in
artificial intelligence (AI), especially Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), such big-
data processing requires efficient, intelligent, fast, dynamic, robust, and on-
device adaptive cognitive computing. However, those requirements are not
sufficiently satisfied by existing computing solutions due to the well-known
power wall in silicon-based semiconductor devices, the memory wall in
traditional Von-Neuman computing architectures, and computation-/memory-
intensive DNN computing algorithms. This project aims to foster a systematic
breakthrough in developing AI-in-Memory computing systems, through
collaboratively developing ahybrid in-memory computing (IMC) hardware platform
integrating the benefits of emerging non-volatile resistive memory (RRAM) and
Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) technologies, as well as incorporating IMC-
aware deep-learning algorithm innovations. The overarching goal of this project
is to design, implement, and experimentally validate a new hybrid in-memory
computing system that is collaboratively optimized for energy efficiency,
inference accuracy, spatiotemporal dynamics, robustness, and on-device learning,
which will greatly advance AI-based big-data processing fields such as computer
vision, autonomous driving, robotics, etc. The research will also be extended
into an educational platform, providing a user-friendly learning framework, and
will serve the educational objectives for K-12 students, undergraduate,
graduate, and under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance knowledge and produce scientific principles and tools for a new paradigm
of AI-in-Memory computing featuring significant improvements in energy
efficiency, speed, dynamics, robustness, and on-device learning capability. This
cross-layer project spans from device, circuit, and architecture to DNN
algorithm exploration. First, a hybrid RRAM-SRAM based in-memory computing chip
will be designed, optimized, and fabricated. Second, based on this new computing
platform, the on-device spatiotemporal dynamic neural network structure will be
developed to provide an enhanced run-time computing profile (latency, resource
allocation, working load, power budget, etc.), as well as improve the robustness
of the system against hardware intrinsic and adversarial noise injection. Then,
efficient on-device learning methodologies with the developed computing platform
will be investigated. In the last thrust, an end-to-end DNN training,
optimization, mapping, and evaluation CAD tool will be developed that integrates
the developed hardware platform and algorithm innovations, for optimizing the
software and hardware co-designs to achieve the user-defined multi-objectives in
latency, energy efficiency, dynamics, accuracy, robustness, on-device adaption,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.