* 2144760
* CAREER: Engineering-Centric Thunderstorm Hazard and Loading Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Franklin Lombardo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2027
* USD 541,516.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research focused
on advancing thunderstorm risk assessment for structural and wind engineering.
Winds generated from thunderstorms (i.e., thunderstorm winds) are responsible
for a significant proportion of windstorm losses. Buildings and other structures
are designed based on full-scale measurements in atmospheric boundary layer
(ABL) flow. The limited wind speed data collected on thunderstorm winds near the
ground show they possess different properties than the ABL, which in turn
influences wind loading on structures. Due to the lack of full-scale wind speed
data, the results of numerical and experimental simulations are difficult to
validate. This research will obtain comprehensive field measurements that will
fill critical gaps in spatial and temporal scales and include joint measurements
of wind speed and wind loading. These measurements will be assimilated into new
and updated engineering models and frameworks for thunderstorms. To increase
broader knowledge of thunderstorm importance, collaboration with the National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) wind engineering facilities at Florida International
University and the University of Florida will commence to stimulate research in
computational and experimental wind engineering where field measurements are a
critical need for simulation. Engaging and educating the public will take place
through citizen science, K-12 outreach programs on wind hazards, and local media
interviews. This award will contribute to the NSF role in the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). Project data will be archived in the NHERI
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
currently no ABL analog for thunderstorm winds, due in part to the large
variability observed in characteristics relevant to engineering such as vertical
profiles of the wind. This project will focus on collocated and 4-D measurements
of wind speed and wind loading near the ground at high spatiotemporal resolution
that places engineering as the central focus. Specifically, the first task of
the project will be to measure wind and wind loading characteristics of
thunderstorm winds at a fixed site in Illinois, which will include widely and
densely distributed sensors. This objective will be complemented by the second
task, which is the measurement of wind and wind-induced loading through field
deployments using mobile instrumentation, and the third task, which is the
inference of thunderstorm wind characteristics from post-event damage surveys.
The fourth task will build new empirical functions and thunderstorm wind field
models based on the data collected. These functions and models will incorporate
different thunderstorm wind types (e.g., derecho and isolated downburst) and
will improve understanding of observed variability. Collection of new and unique
datasets will promote new and fundamental discoveries for thunderstorm winds.
This research aims toward a comprehensive engineering-based thunderstorm model
similar to those developed for tropical cyclones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.