* 2144454
* CAREER: Multifunctional electrolyte design and descriptors for lithium metal batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Chibueze Amanchukwu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2026
* USD 616,363.00

There is a pressing need to accelerate worldwide decarbonization efforts to
support a sustainable energy economy. Due to the intermittency of renewable
energy technologies such as solar and wind, energy storage is required.
Batteries are highly promising because they can be portable and energy-dense
(energy stored per mass). Lithium metal electrode batteries can store up to two
times the energy of currently available Li-ion batteries but have not been
commercialized because of the lack of suitable electrolytes (salts dissolved in
solvent). This fundamental research project will determine relevant electrolyte
properties that are important to predict lithium metal electrode behavior and
use those insights to develop novel electrolytes that allow for lithium metal
batteries that last longer. The educational plan will focus on using battery-
related programming events (e.g. drama performance and battery experiments) as
part of an annual “Battery Day” event to broaden the participation and
persistence of underrepresented minorities in STEM both locally in Chicago and
internationally in Nigeria. The project’s integrated research and educational
plan will lead to energy-dense lithium metal batteries that bring the US closer
to achieving decarbonization goals, expand the number of underrepresented
minority students pursuing STEM, and enable a diverse and globally competitive
US workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium metal batteries have theoretical
energy densities, but lithium metal deposits in a high surface area mossy and/or
dendritic morphology that is highly dependent on electrolyte composition. With
continuous cycling, uneven lithium deposition and stripping leads to the
accumulation of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) components and
electrochemically inactive (or ‘dead’) lithium leading to permanent capacity
loss. One approach with great promise to address lithium metal challenges is
electrolyte design. However, electrolyte requirements are complex as they must
be nonvolatile and nonflammable and have high ionic conductivity, high lithium
transference number, and high electrochemical stability. Hence, physical
mixtures are often used in an edisonian approach that makes electrolyte
development highly combinatorial. To solve these electrolyte design challenges,
this project will have the following objectives: to (1) quantify electrolyte
solvation properties and develop relevant electrolyte descriptors (2) design a
modular multifunctional electrolyte platform that covalently combines disparate
electrolyte properties into a single molecule and (3) evaluate multifunctional
electrolyte influence in lithium metal batteries and probe dynamic lithium metal
changes in situ and ex situ. The research will chart a new path forward for
quantitative electrolyte science and novel electrolytes for a broad range of
electrochemical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.