* 2144997
* CAREER: Stimuli-Responsive Self-Assembly of Supramolecular Block Copolymers: Hierarchical Structures and Kinetic Pathways
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Dong Meng, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2027
* USD 334,008.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research integrated with education to investigate how complex
polymers assemble and contribute to developing design principles for complex
polymer materials. Self-assembly is a process in which molecules or atoms
organize as building blocks into ordered structures because of interactions
among the components. This process occurs in the assembly of molecules or
monomers into molecular building blocks that can themselves assemble in
sequences to form long chain-like molecules known as polymers. Polymers are
literally everywhere – they make up plants, plastics, the food we eat, and even
our own bodies. Through increasingly precise control over the monomer sequences
and molecular architectures, polymers have been transformed from large-scale
commodity plastics into precision self-assembly building blocks that can undergo
pre-programmed organization into materials with more complex structures. It is
likely that further expanding the scope of polymers over a broad spectrum of
possible bonding among monomers, new self-assembly processes can emerge, which
will bring about functions that are unrealizable with conventional covalent
polymers. The focus of this project is to study the process of self-assembly of
the so-called supramolecular block copolymers -- a class of the “hybrid bonding”
polymers made of structural units of covalent polymers connected into well-
defined architectures through temperature-responsive reversible bonds. The PI
aims to understand the fundamental connection between the reversibility of bonds
at the molecular level and the temperature-responsive feature in the self-
assembly process, both at equilibrium and in dynamical processes. By using
computer simulations and quantifying the influence of the reversible bonds on
the self-assembly process, this project is aimed to identify new pathways for
making materials and for materials design. A goal is to formulate rules to
incorporate predictable structural and kinetic properties into polymeric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the educational component of the
project, the PI aims to integrate classroom learning, research projects, and
community service by developing a Community-Engaged Learning course
“Introduction to the Mesoscale Simulations of Polymers for Engineering
Applications" for senior undergraduates and graduate students. This effort will
be in collaboration with the local water facility to test/develop wastewater
treatments based on recyclable polymers. The goal of the Community-Engaged
Learning course is three-fold: (1) to promote community awareness in training of
the next-generation work force; (2) to cultivate and foster lasting partnership
between the university and the city of Starkville; and (3) to develop
technologies that are potentially beneficial to the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research
integrated with education to investigate self-assembly of supramolecular block
copolymers and contribute to developing strategies for the design of new
polymeric materials. It is of central importance to expand the scope of
polymeric materials over a broad spectrum of possible bonding energies among
monomers, for not only creating novel structures but most importantly access to
previously unknown functions. Supramolecular block copolymers represent a class
of such hybrid bonding polymers in which structural units of covalent polymers
are connected into well-defined architectures via supramolecular bonds. Assisted
by the reversible supramolecular interactions, it is envisaged that
supramolecular block copolymer self-assemblies may exhibit more diverse
morphologies, stimuli-responsivity and dramatically reduced annealing
times/temperatures comparing to their covalent analogues. In terms of the
fundamental aspects, it is however unclear through what mechanisms these
envisaged functions and properties will be brought about. It becomes
particularly relevant for self-assemblies under nonequilibrium conditions, where
the dynamic nature of supramolecular block copolymers may lead to dramatically
different self-assembly pathways. A lack of understanding of these fundamental
aspects had restricted efforts of experiment to develop hybrid bonding polymers
with predictable structural and kinetic properties to case-by-case attempts
within narrow parameter ranges. This project aims to address these unmet needs
from a computational perspective, by revealing the link between reversibility of
the supramolecular interactions and the structural and kinetic behaviors of
supramolecular block copolymers self-assemblies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will consider the supramolecular comb-coil
diblock copolymers made of covalent diblock copolymer backbone and low-molar-
mass oligomer additives end-attached to the backbone via supramolecular bonds.
The self-assembly of supramolecular comb-coil deblock copolymers is known to
produce thermo-responsive hierarchical structures with built-in functionality.
The focus of this project is to understand the effects of the strong yet
reversible supramolecular bonds on the thermodynamic stability of microphases,
the kinetics of structure formation during processing, and the kinetic pathways
for stimuli-responsive structure transitions. To provide the base for the
kinetics studies, the equilibrium morphologies of the self-assembly of
supramolecular comb-coil deblock copolymers will first be determined. The
kinetics of the structure ordering process during the thermal annealing may then
be investigated and kinetic pathways of the thermo-responsive order-order
transitions will be determined. The minimum free energy path will be identified
using particle-based coarse-grained computer simulations; it will also enable
the influence of supramolecular bonds on the free-energy landscape of the self-
assembly to be quantified. The predicted behaviors of the self-assembly based on
the minimum free energy path will be verified in experiments as part of a
collaboration with experiment groups. Results from this project will enable
strategies for the design of new polymeric materials with adaptable structural
and kinetic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Materials Research through the Condensed Matter and Materials
Theory program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.