* 2144208
* CAREER: Incentives, Fairness, and Efficiency without Monetary Transfers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Christos Psomas, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 256,546.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet and the vast increase
in the availability of data have transformed algorithm design, as well as
computer science in general. From computational resources and advertising space,
to food donations, loans, kidneys, and vaccines, algorithms are increasingly
being used to decide how scarce resources are allocated. As opposed to
traditional optimization, the input to these algorithms must be solicited from
strategic agents, with their own, private preferences over the algorithm's
output. And, from resource allocation in the cloud and spectrum auctions to
tournaments in major sporting events (such as the Olympics), it is well-
understood that these strategic entities will behave to optimize their own
benefit to the extent possible while still “following the rules,” leading to
unpredictable final outcomes. At the same time, unlike traditional optimization,
in many of these modern applications, system designers must also consider
whether their system is equitable among its participants. Classic work in
Economics, as well as extensive work in the intersection of Computer Science and
Economics, provides a rich toolkit for designing algorithms that are immune to
strategic manipulations as well as algorithms that balance fairness and
efficiency. This project aims to advance and develop this theory with a focus on
domains where monetary transfers are not allowed, by taking aim at several
fundamental open questions. The project also contains plans to design, develop,
and deploy a system that is based on the proposed theoretical research and that
serves the local community by enabling local non-profit organizations that fight
hunger to allocate their food donations in a more efficient
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand the reach of theory into
areas where there is a major gap in current understanding, by taking aim at
several key theoretical questions in the following three complementary thrusts.
(1) Foundations of mechanism design without money. The project takes aim at
fundamental questions in this space, with the goal of developing tools for
designing truthful mechanisms for a number of paradigms: divisible and
indivisible goods, static and dynamic environments, worst-case and Bayesian
objectives. (2) Mechanism design with imperfect rationality. There are important
domains in which protecting against fully rational, expected utility-maximizing
participants is overly cautious. This project puts forward and explores several
possibilities for modeling imperfect rationality. (3) Mechanism design with
imperfect expressivity. Eliciting complex utility functions is often infeasible,
e.g., because of agents' cognitive limitations. The project explores the trade-
off between expressiveness and ease of elicitation in mechanism design without
money.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.