* 2144896
* CAREER: Emissions and Chemical Impacts of Atmospheric Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) from Western United States Wildfires
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Lu Hu, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2027
* USD 471,774.00

This CAREER project will improve knowledge about the sources and atmospheric
impacts of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from western U.S. wildfires.
Biomass burning is estimated to be the second-largest primary sources of VOCs
globally. VOCs play a key role in the atmosphere as precursors of ozone (O3) and
secondary organic aerosol (SOA), and affect hydroxyl radical (OH) levels, that
in turn control the lifetime of most air pollutants. This project will combine
data from laboratory experiments, and previous and new field measurements from
aircraft and ground stations, with a 3D chemical transport model to examine the
regional and global impacts of VOCs from wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research includes tasks that: (1) carry out laboratory experiments to improve
the analytical approach for identifying and quantifying atmospheric furans using
Proton Transfer Reaction Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry; (2) perform new
ground measurements for VOCs and other trace gases at a long-term monitoring
site in Missoula, MT, to better quantify critical controls on the abundance and
variability of fire-related VOCs in the western U.S.; (3) incorporate new
chemistry and emissions for furans and two other VOCs in the GEOS-Chem chemical
transport model (CTM); and (4) use the GEOS-Chem with improved fire VOC
representation to interpret the previous and new in-situ measurements from
recent aircraft and ground campaigns. The project will provide quantitative new
constraints on VOCs' sources and chemical impacts from wildfires on a regional
to global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach plan includes
the development of a wildfire smoke exhibit with a mini air quality monitoring
station at a hands-on science center to enhance K-12 student learning about
wildfire smoke and air pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.