* 2144624
* CAREER: Resilient Low-Cost Robot Teams for Autonomous Aquatic Exploration
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Alberto Quattrini Li, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2027
* USD 232,727.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project’s main objective is to
study and develop low-cost multirobot systems for aquatic environments
exploration, towards democratizing aquatic autonomous robotics. With water
covering 70 percent of the Earth, a large part of the economy, called “Blue
Economy” and valued to be at least US$24 trillion, relies on a healthy aquatic
world, requiring its study and monitoring. Robots could automate these tasks.
However, to date, aquatic robots deployed in practice are expensive (in the
order of US$100k-US$1M). Current multi-robot exploration algorithms are not
robust underwater, as the intrinsic limitations posed by the aquatic domain and
inexpensive robot configuration are not explicitly considered – such as absence
of global localization and communication infrastructure (e.g., GPS and cellular
network) and limited communication bandwidth (bits per seconds). This project
will produce resilient cooperative exploration algorithms for teams of
inexpensive Autonomous Surface and Underwater Vehicles, that explicitly consider
those limitations. This project outcomes will advance the state of the art on
low-cost mobile robot autonomy in extreme environments. More broadly, the
project will contribute to lower the barrier to entry in aquatic robotics and
catalyze a broader educational outreach and support tasks for a healthy aquatic
world. This project integrates research activities with educational and outreach
plans; example include targeting environmental monitoring tasks with real
deployments, organizing a summer camp for K-12 students, and involving
undergraduate/graduate students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will intellectually contribute on novel algorithmic developments to three
fundamental robotics research themes and on a comprehensive system integration
with real low-cost robots in real aquatic environments: (1) resilient
cooperative multirobot 3D exploration by probabilistic modeling of localization
and communication constraints, optimizing multiple conflicting objectives, and
reasoning in a probabilistic representation to find a safe optimal path; (2)
resilient communication by tightly coupling state estimation and planning to
calculate information value and designing an optimization framework to minimize
the use of the low-bandwidth communication channel, but ensure situational
awareness; (3) graceful recovery by designing algorithms that calculate a non-
myopic rendezvous trajectory based on explicit modeling of localization and
communication and allow for adaptive coalition formation to avoid loss of the
single robot and of the whole system; (4) integration of the algorithms with a
team of inexpensive custom-made ASVs and AUVs, which will be rigorously tested
in simulations, real pool and lake/ocean environments. The research expected
outcomes are new algorithms for low-cost aquatic robots that will augment their
exploration capabilities and allow simpler
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.