* 2144787
* CAREER: Control of Intramolecular Long-Range Charge-Transfer Emission
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Tomoyasu Mani, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WIth support from the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division,
Tomoyasu Mani of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Connecticut is
developing strategies for producing and controlling intramolecular long-range
radiative charge recombination or charge transfer (CT) emission in a condensed
phase. Molecules that exhibit efficient intramolecular long-range CT emission
have the potential to: (1) transform existing tools such as organic light-
emitting diodes and biomedical imaging probes and (2) lead to new quantum
technologies that leverage their unique responses to a magnetic field and
chirality. Educational activities are slated to develop experimental
photochemistry modules that introduce the basic concepts of chemistry to high
school and lower division undergraduate students. The modules will be
implemented in various programs, including an international workshop for high
school students and undergraduate general chemistry laboratories, to encourage
such early stage students to consider pursuing careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reports of CT
emission from long-range intramolecular analogs are scarce; therefore, the
necessary knowledge to produce efficient long-range CT emission is lacking. This
CAREER project uses a series of well-defined donor−bridge−acceptor (D−B−A)
molecules and a multitude of spectroscopic and computational methods to generate
a comprehensive dataset for assessing the validity of the current theoretical
framework, thus providing an opportunity to extend existing formalisms further.
This work seeks to address knowledge gaps present in the fields of electron
transfer, spin chemistry, and materials design for applications that employ CT
emission, creating new opportunities for advancement. The specific objectives
are: (1) to establish strategies to maximize long-range CT emission in D−B−A
systems by clarifying the key parameters like energy levels and geometry; (2) to
control long-range CT emission by external stimuli such as magnetic field and
chirality; and (3) to develop interactive photochemistry modules for high school
students and lower division undergraduate students, to introduce students to
chemistry concepts associated with recent advances in photochemistry and
photophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.