* 2144416
* Collaborative Research: Cyber-secure and Resilient Supervisory Control of Networked Discrete-Event Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephane Lafortune, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,867.00

With the rapid development of computer, communication, and control technologies,
modern engineering systems consist of many distributed and networked physical
plants, control units, and other devices. These networked systems are vulnerable
to cyber attacks. The principal objective of this project is to develop formal
methodologies to synthesize control logic for cyber-secure and resilient control
of networked dynamic systems subject to attacks on their communication, sensing,
or actuation infrastructure. By providing formal methodologies to detect cyber
attacks and synthesize provably-resilient control logic for networked systems,
this work will enhance the reliability and performance of advanced control
systems that embed complex control logic in their control structure. The
developments in this project will be model-based, thereby ensuring their
applicability to a large class of technological networked systems subject to
cyber attacks. In particular, power grids with high penetration of renewable
energy sources and electric vehicles will be considered, a technological area of
considerable societal importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific foundation
of the proposed approach to synthesizing cyber-secure and resilient control
logic at the supervisory layer of the control system is the theory of control
and diagnosis of event-driven systems developed in control engineering.
Networked control systems will be modeled in the framework of transition systems
with discrete state spaces and event-driven dynamics, or discrete event systems.
Supervisory control at the higher layer of complex control systems will be
designed to ensure that the discrete model satisfies a set of given logical
specifications related to safety properties and liveness properties and are
resilient to cyber attacks on the communication infrastructure or on sensors and
actuators themselves. To detect cyber attacks and other faults, the theory of
diagnosability of discrete event systems will be extended to networked systems
subject to joint sensor and actuator attacks. The research plan blends
supervisory control techniques from formal methods in control engineering with
algorithmic techniques from discrete games in theoretical computer science. In
addition to the theoretical and algorithmic components of this project, the
researchers will investigate the application area of smart power grids with high
penetration of renewables and electric vehicles, where the control and diagnosis
problems formulated herein are highly relevant. Work in this application area
will involve modeling, testing of the synthesis methodologies developed on these
models, and construction of a simulation testbed for performance evaluation of
the developed methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.