* 2144365
* CAREER: Probing and Controlling Acidic Electrocatalytic Oxidation Mechanisms and Catalyst Degradation Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Linsey Seitz, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2027
* USD 603,221.00

As our global energy landscape evolves to incorporate a greater fraction of
renewable electricity from sources such as wind, solar, and hydroelectric
technologies, electrochemical processes will become a major source of fuels and
chemicals. Hydrogen is a critical component of many fuels and chemicals, such
that hydrogen demand in the US is projected to increase 2-5 times over the next
30 years. Proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers are a promising
technology for large-scale, sustainable production of hydrogen from water, but
development of efficient and stable catalysts for water oxidation in acidic
conditions has been a longstanding roadblock for widespread implementation. The
project will 1) investigate a class of precisely tuned catalyst materials that
are designed to withstand the harsh oxidative and acidic conditions of PEM
electrolyzers with minimal use of expensive and strategic precious metals, and
2) characterize critical relationships between catalyst structures and reaction
mechanisms, as related to reaction rates and efficient utilization of electrical
energy. The scientific outcomes of this work will lead to improved technological
feasibility of sustainable processes for production of fuels and chemicals from
renewable electricity sources. Furthermore, the research will be integrated with
a sustainable plan for collaborative development and implementation of new
curriculum and classroom activities that emphasize student engagement to improve
retention of students from diverse backgrounds and fulfill Next Generation
Science Standards, via work with Chicago Public High School
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on water oxidation in acidic
conditions as a critical, yet comparatively simple, electrochemical oxidation
reaction for fundamental study of reaction mechanisms, surface structure
evolution, and deactivation processes for perovskite oxide catalysts as a
function of their electronic and geometric structure properties. Perovskite
oxide structures provide a tunable platform for systematically modulating
properties of catalysts both at the surface and in the bulk, while utilizing
lower loadings of iridium compared to IrO2 and Ir/C benchmark catalysts. In situ
spectroscopy and kinetic isotope studies will probe trends in reaction
mechanisms and assess extent of catalyst surface reorganization with relation to
material properties (oxidation states, metal-oxygen bond covalency, metal-
oxygen-metal bond angle, etc.) and reaction conditions. Microscopy,
electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance, and impedance spectroscopy will
monitor morphology, mass changes, and charge transport effects as a result of
long-term testing to provide insights to various deactivation processes. This
work will also establish intrinsic catalyst material stability metrics to
complement more ubiquitous performance stability metrics to guide development of
high performance electrocatalytic systems. Fundamental mechanistic insights and
structural understanding arising from this work will fill major knowledge gaps
for design and systematic control of metal oxide catalysts that drive a wide
range of selective electrochemical oxidation
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.