* 2144591
* CAREER: Understanding Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Chemical Behavior of Pollutants in Heterogeneous Environmental Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Emanuela Gionfriddo, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2027
* USD 756,354.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program and the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Emanuela
Gionfriddo at the University of Toledo and her team will study the partitioning
of organic pollutants in multi-phase environmental systems. Organic pollutants
are continuously released to the environment by industrial and agricultural
activities and use of pharmaceuticals. These pollutants can alter environmental
processes and have far-reaching effects on humans and wildlife. Upon their
release, organic pollutants partition with natural and anthropogenic substrates
in the environment, establishing complex multiphasic equilibria that affect
their chemical behavior. This research focuses on characterizing the molecular
interactions that drive these partition equilibria. This research has the
potential to improve understanding of the transport, distribution, and fate of
organic pollutants in the environment and biota. The Gionfriddo team uses micro-
extraction methodologies to probe the distribution of organic pollutants in
heterogeneous systems. Of particular interest are emerging classes of organic
pollutants, such as pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and perfluoroalkyl substances
and their degradation products, and how they partition and interact under
naturally occurring environmental conditions. These research objectives are
integrated with efforts to promote public engagement in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Summer research activities will
introduce members of underrepresented minority groups to scientific research and
career opportunities through mentoring and hands-on
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emanuela Gionfriddo and coworkers will
study the molecular behavior of organic pollutants partitioning onto natural
polymers using task-specific micro-extraction devices. This will improve our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of organic pollutants and
microplastics interactions under naturally occurring environmental conditions.
Partitioning phenomena of organic pollutants among anthropogenic polymers,
aqueous media, and aerosols will be quantified. The use of tunable micro-
extraction methodologies is expected to enable precise assessment of the
dynamics of partitioning processes in multicomponent systems without disturbing
the equilibria under investigation. This aims to provide solutions for the study
of environmental chemistry processes and separation science strategies to
evaluate phenomena of transport and magnification of organic pollutants in
distinct environmental compartments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.