* 2144373
* CAREER: Confinement Induced Structural Evolution of Calcium- and Magnesium- Carbonates in Architected Siliceous Nanochannels
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Greeshma Gadikota, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2027
* USD 460,864.00

Advancing gigaton-scale solutions to capture, convert, store, and remove carbon
dioxide (CO2) from gas emissions and air is crucial to limit the detrimental
environmental impacts of climate change. Carbon mineralization is a scalable and
thermodynamically favorable approach for converting anthropogenic CO2 into
calcium or magnesium carbonates using earth-abundant nanoporous silicates. The
carbonate products are stable, water-insoluble inorganic compounds, ideal for
CO2 storage applications. However, our limited understanding of the pore-scale
interfacial mechanisms that influence the carbon mineralization process
challenges our ability to predictively control carbonate formation. To address
this scientific challenge, this research project will develop architected
siliceous nanochannels with ordered porosity to investigate carbonate
crystallization mechanisms in confinement. The fundamental knowledge gained from
these studies will inform the design of new technologies that harness carbonate
crystallization mechanisms for the reactive separation of gases, recovery of
high-value metals, and predicting the fate of CO2 injected into geological
reservoirs. The research program is closely integrated with educational and
outreach activities focused on training the future STEM workforce and co-
creating community-level carbon removal solutions by engaging members of
underrepresented groups in STEM and members of underserved rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the crystallization
mechanisms of calcium and magnesium carbonate crystallization in confined fluids
within architected siliceous nanochannels with sizes ranging from 2 to 20 nm.
Carbonate crystallization mechanisms in confined fluids will be investigated in
less reactive silica interfaces and more reactive calcium and magnesium silicate
surfaces. Morphological and compositional controls on siliceous pores will be
achieved via sol-gel synthesis in anodic alumina membranes with ordered pores.
Non-invasive and dynamic characterization of carbonate crystallization will be
realized through operando X-ray scattering and advanced spectroscopy
measurements. The experimental results will be used to investigate the validity
of classical and non-classical mechanisms of carbonate formation and propose new
mechanisms if needed. These research activities will serve as an educational and
outreach platform for engaging underrepresented K-12 students in science
education and communication through illustrative workbooks, mentoring videos in
collaboration with PBS, and hands-on experimental modules supported by Expanding
Your Horizons and Sciencenter. Undergraduate students will be recruited and
mentored through the NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
program using research activities related to carbon transformations as a
platform. Topics related to decarbonization in the context of science and
engineering for climate, energy, and environmental technologies will be made
more accessible through blended learning formats for undergraduate and graduate
students. Insights from research activities will be used to co-create carbon
removal solutions through mineral weathering with local farmers. The closely
integrated research, outreach, and educational activities are designed to foster
enthusiasm for and engagement in sustainable climate, environment, and energy
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.