* 2144853
* CAREER: Using Advanced Organizational Technology to Communicate Compassionately
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ashley Barrett, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2027
* USD 182,741.00

Using advanced information technologies (AIT) in the workplace can expedite
information sharing and improve cost efficiency, but can also cause a social
disconnection that encumbers compassionate communication, which is vital to
health care. Compassionate communication involves noticing the need for
compassion and the details of patients’ lives, connecting emotionally and
cognitively though empathy and perspective-talking, and responding with
effective (non)verbal strategies. AITs can inhibit (non)verbal communication
with patients, and although AITs enable more online interaction, establishing
compassion within these venues can be taxing. This project examines how health
care workers innovate their communication practices following AIT implementation
to practice compassionate communication and patient perceptions on best provider
practices. Because compassion is especially important when serving vulnerable
populations, this project studies compassionate AIT use in (a) a federally
qualified health center providing care to a poverty-stricken population (b) a
high-tech hospital serving higher income patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the problem technology poses for compassionate health care
communication by interviewing and observing providers and surveying patients to
understand their perspectives on how new AITs both constrain and afford patient-
provider communication and relationship-building. Semi-structured, in-depth
interviews will allow providers to reflect on and explain their AIT behaviors,
and video observation tools will expose providers’ AIT behaviors and patients’
responses. The researcher will complete 100 video observational hours at two
health care organizational sites, 100 hours observing current in-person
communication workshops at these sites, 60 provider interviews, and 300 patient
surveys. Results will be used to create a compassionate communication
intervention for providers at each research site, to design an online continuing
medical education, and to generate an undergraduate course for pre-health
students, equipping each respective group with skillsets to embrace the
increasingly complex interpersonal challenges posed by health AITs. This project
also offers healthcare leaders practical recommendations regarding: (a)
(non)effective AIT communicative strategies for serving both low and normal/high
literacy populations, and (b) improved AIT designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.