* 2144836
* CAREER: Integrating research and education to evaluate Neoproterozoic-Cambrian tectonism and sedimentary basins in western Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Emily Smith, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 547,982.00

This project aims to improve understanding of the timing and nature of the
breakup of the Neoproterozoic supercontinent of Rodina, a contentious topic that
has important implications for coeval changes in ocean chemistry and life. The
results of this project will include integrated stratigraphic, geochronological,
and geochemical datasets from several regions in western North America. These
original datasets will, in turn, be used to generate new subsidence curves for
each of these areas. Combined, these products can be used to discriminate
between different models that have been proposed for Neoproterozoic–Cambrian
rifting on the western margin of the paleocontinent of Laurentia. The
synergistic educational plan will focus on improving access to Outdoor Field
Work in research and coursework through a tiered mentoring system, development
of inclusive field-based courses, and a field forum. The Broader Impacts of this
project will focus on empowering underserved populations and broadening
participation in the geosciences within Baltimore City through collaboration
with the Baltimore Ingenuity Project, a local non-profit which recruits and
cultivates middle and high school students with high potential and interest in
STEM and from historically underserved populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The timing and nature of the breakup of the Neoproterozoic
supercontinent of Rodinia has remained contentious, with major inconsistencies
existing between paleogeographic reconstructions and the geologic records
preserved along the western margin of Laurentia, the paleocontinent at the core
of Rodinia. Evaluating these divergent interpretations for the tectonic
histories of Laurentia’s margins requires significant improvements to the
tectonostratigraphic context and age models for Neoproterozoic–Cambrian basin
subsidence, rift-related tectonism, and volcanism in western Laurentia, which
demand new geochronological constraints and better calibration of unconformities
within these sedimentary basins. The research goal of this proposal is to
discriminate between different proposed tectonic models for western Laurentia by
strategically focusing on the geologic histories of specific
Neoproterozoic–Cambrian sedimentary basins located in the western USA, northern
Mexico, and British Columbia. These regions are chosen because of their key
geographic locations along the margin and because of identified and described
bimodal volcanic rocks in these successions. The goals of this project will be
achieved by integrating geologic mapping, regional stratigraphy, shale
geochemistry, U–Pb geochronology, and subsidence modeling to resolve some of the
long-standing debates about rift dynamics in western Laurentia and to improve
temporal and geographic models for late Neoproterozoic supercontinent breakup.
The proposed scientific research agenda is synergistic with the proposed
educational and mentorship plans, which focus on improving access to Outdoor
Field Work through: 1) a tiered mentoring system, 2) development and teaching of
inclusive field-based courses, 3) a Death Valley Field Forum, and 4) integrated
research, mentoring, and Broader Impacts. The project will support cementing a
foundation for a career of integrated research and field-based education on
studying tectonism, sedimentary basin development, and Earth-life changes in
western North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.