* 2144980
* CAREER: Generalizing Deep Learning for Wireless Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Aveek Dutta, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2027
* USD 215,049.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless channels in Next
Generation (xG) cellular, vehicular (V2X), air-borne, millimeter wave (mmWave)
networks are crippled by time-varying impairments that limit their utility in
practice. Current art employs spatial multiplexing at the transmitter which is
computationally expensive and brittle under statistically non-stationary xG
channels, complicating the receiver as well. At best, these methods are only
able to achieve a modest error rate that is inadequate to support high data rate
wireless applications like mobile AR/VR/XR, aerial communications and 4K/8K HDR
video streaming services. This CAREER research generalizes the architecture of a
Deep Learning (DL) based wireless transceiver that will consistently operate
with low error rate in all types of wireless channels, but especially outperform
the state of the art in future xG channels. Overall, it is envisioned to achieve
3-5 orders of magnitude improvement in reliability across all types of channels
and applications. The education plan focuses on a web-learning platform that
augments traditional textbooks with interactive elements, multimedia and
adaptive content to promote self-learning. Further, an extended reality platform
is envisioned for virtual laboratory experience that currently limits the hands-
on aspect of engineering education. Collectively, the education plan broadens
the participation of students beyond the boundaries of the PIâ€™s home
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands the understanding and
applicability of deep learning (DL) for practical wireless transceivers in four
fundamental areas: 1) Reliability: It takes a mathematically principled approach
towards understanding the generality of DL models for wireless communications
that can adapt to changing wireless environment without compromising
reliability; 2) Generality: Current art often lead to over-optimized models that
are brittle when exposed to non-stationary changes in the channel state. This
research takes a holistic approach by innovating adaptive algorithm for accurate
spatio-temporal decomposition of the channel state and pre-condition the
waveform for error free communications; 3) Complexity: Low computational
complexity of the proposed methods will make DL transceivers easy to reconfigure
with minimal to no retraining and operate with guaranteed error performance; and
4) Adaptability: Data dependent, inverse model design and transfer learning will
ensure the DL models can adapt quickly to ephemeral channel states without
compromising on reliability and complexity. Finally, the research is made
practical by prototype hardware implementation of the transceiver architecture
and validated with extensive over-the-air experimentation. Overall, the
transmitter and receiver work together to adapt in any and all channel
conditions that balances model complexity and error
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.