* 2144739
* CAREER: Invariants and Entropy of Square Integrable Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Benjamin Hayes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2027
* USD 28,637.00

Entropy is a quantity arising in thermodynamics and information theory. It
quantifies the state of randomness or uncertainty of a physical system and has
numerous applications in machine learning, data compression, and quantum
mechanics. In this project entropy is studied in two settings. In the first the
entropy of a dynamical system is considered. Dynamical systems describe the
state of a certain physical system (e.g., amount of a certain gas inside a room,
spread of viruses) as it changes in time. It is useful and natural to make
“time” abstract and replace it with a discrete system of symmetries called
“groups.” Dynamical entropy was originally defined through an information theory
viewpoint, and recent developments show that this perspective allows one to
expand entropy theory to evolution under a certain class of groups called “sofic
groups.” In this new framework, entropy describes how many finitary
approximations an infinitary system has; a fundamental question of scientific
inquiry. The second setting for entropy is in the context of von Neumann
algebras (specifically in free probability), which arise naturally as the
setting for quantum mechanics and provide a precise framework for quantum
computing. Potential applications in cryptography are vast. Investigating
entropy in this setting amounts to understanding the disorder of a quantum
mechanical system. These problems have links to functional analysis, ergodic
theory, operator algebras, random matrices, and geometry, some of which will be
explicitly addressed. The educational component is directly aimed at broadening
participation in mathematics and the sciences. This includes starting a teaching
and diversity seminar at the University of Virginia to create a more diverse
inclusive environment in the department and running a summer school to bring
researchers in different fields together. An expansion is planned for the role
of the bridge program at the University of Virginia, as well as the department's
involvement with the math alliance. These two endeavors are explicitly aimed at
increasing the representation of underrepresented groups in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal revolves around two
main projects. The first is the study of entropy in algebraic actions, which are
actions of a discrete group on a compact group by automorphisms. One goal is to
completely settle the connections between f-invariant entropy for algebraic
actions of free groups and a generalized torsion theory (in the sense of
topology) for noncompact Riemannian manifolds defined via Hilbert spaces.
Planned is an extension of our current understanding of which algebraic actions
are isomorphic to Bernoulli shifts. In von Neumann algebras, the principal
investigator will expand on his recent joint work showing that Property (T) von
Neumann algebras have few finite-dimensional approximations. These concepts will
be generalized to groups with vanishing first cohomology with values in the left
regular representation, as well as to inner amenable groups. Expansion of these
results is planned to twisted group von Neumann algebras, and compact quantum
groups, provided such objects have vanishing first cohomology in natural
analogues of the left regular representation. Lastly, the term mean dimension
will be adapted from the ergodic theory setting to the von Neumann algebraic
setting with the ultimate goal of settling the famous generator problem for von
Neumann algebras in the negative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.