* 2144940
* CAREER: Repurposable Devices for a Greener Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Bradford Campbell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2027
* USD 305,345.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensors and actuators that
comprise the Internet of Things (IoT) must be physically deployed in-situ to
enable new applications. These locations are often difficult or expensive to
access, such as throughout a large farm for precision agriculture or within an
operating factory. Ensuring the IoT devices are useful and productive long after
they are deployed reduces their overall cost and increases their utility.
However, many computing devices today are designed with short, fixed lifetimes,
and hardware advances continuously render old devices obsolete. This project
proposes the necessary developments to ensure deployed IoT devices remain
usable, efficient, and secure decades after their initial commissioning. The
result will be new self-powered energy-harvesting IoT devices that can adapt to
changing environments, new application requirements, and updated security
requirements without being removed and replaced. Enabling this are several
foundational advancements, including (i) fine-grained hardware and compiler
enforced software modularity that enables energy-efficient software updates,
(ii) memory-efficient reinforcement learning algorithms for long-term energy
prediction and management, and (iii) transparent application offloading to
support future software running on already deployed IoT device hardware.
Ultimately, this will equip IoT devices with lifespans similar to the
infrastructure they are attached to.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pursuing data-driven
approaches to reduce energy use and greenhouse gas production is essential for
combating climate change. This project will develop long-lasting and scalable
sensors to provide actionable data over multi-decade lifetimes. Ensuring long
operational lifetimes will help avoid exacerbating a growing e-waste problem
from billions of otherwise disposable IoT devices. The techniques from this
project will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses, training
new engineers who understand the intersection of IoT, cross-disciplinary
applications, and ethics. Underrepresented minority graduate students and first-
year undergraduates will collaborate on this project to develop new fundamental
scientific techniques and learn the connections between technology, the built
environment, and the associated stakeholders. The outputs of this work, both
teaching and research, will be open sourced and disseminated
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.