* 2144136
* CAREER: Designer Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals with Controlled Light-Matter Interactions for On-Demand Quantum Light Sources
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Farnaz Niroui, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2027
* USD 268,175.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Quantum principles offer new paradigms of computing,
communication and sensing that outperform the current technologies. Central to
developing many of these next-generation platforms are light sources that can
uniquely generate identical single particles of light (photons) on-demand.
Achieving such sources with optimal performance and easily integrable design has
been a long-standing challenge. This research focuses on developing and studying
such an optimal platform using emerging classes of materials, in the form of
nanoscale particles in solution. This research will be closely integrated with
education and outreach activities. The objective is to make nano and quantum
science education more effective, inclusive and accessible, and in line with the
growing cross-disciplinary framework of the emerging applications. This will be
achieved by developing new interactive course materials, educational activities
through virtual reality, and outreach videos for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;This project
combines deterministic control of individual halide perovskite quantum dots with
engineering of their local electromagnetic environment and lattice structure to
design, study and enhance the photophysical properties of the emitters with
controlled light-matter interactions for stable, deterministic and
indistinguishable single photon generation. The research will be driven by four
main objectives: 1) Develop designer perovskite quantum dots with control at an
individual emitter level. 2) Investigate and identify the structure-composition-
property relationships underlying a stable, high purity and coherent single
photon generation. 3) Tailor the photophysical properties using an emitter-
nanocavity coupled system for indistinguishable photon emission. 4) Investigate
the effects of controlled lattice strain on the emission characteristics.
Collectively, this research will lead to a comprehensive understanding of the
prospects of halide perovskite nanocrystals as on-demand sources of quantum
light. By enabling a colloidal emitter platform with deterministic single photon
emission, and controlled yet scalable processibility, the results help address
the much-needed technology gap of easily integrable on-demand single photon
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.