* 2144860
* CAREER: Towards a Rigorous Methodology for Engineering Robust Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Eunsuk Kang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2028
* USD 214,049.00

Modern software systems are deployed in a highly dynamic, evolving environment
that may occasionally deviate from its expected behavior. For example, a
therapist interacting with a radiation therapy machine may inadvertently perform
a sequence of critical actions in an incorrect order; a communication network
may experience a disruption and fail to deliver messages in time; or a malicious
actor on the web may evolve and obtain a wider range of exploits over time.
Ideally, a system that is robust would ensure that its most critical
requirements are satisfied even under possible deviations in the environment.
This project aims to systematize the development of robust software by elevating
robustness as a first-class quality attribute that can be explicitly analyzed
for and designed into a system. To this end, the project will lay a rigorous
foundation for software robustness and develop a set of fundamental analysis and
design techniques to support methodologies for engineering robust systems. The
results of this research will be incorporated into software engineering and
formal method classes at Carnegie Mellon University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate (1) a formal notion of robustness for software systems
and (2) specification and verification techniques to support activities for
developing robust systems. In particular, the project will develop techniques
for formally reasoning about the robustness of a system as an explicit property,
to answer questions such as: How robust is the system against possible
deviations in the environment? What deviations could result in the system
violating a critical requirement? Given a pair of alternative designs, which one
of them is more robust under what deviations? In addition, given a model of a
system that is incapable of tolerating certain deviations, the project will
develop techniques for robustifying the system, by automatically transforming
the existing design into one that is robust against those deviations. Finally,
the project will demonstrate the applicability and utility of robustness across
multiple domains, in particular through two innovative applications of the
proposed techniques: (1) robustness testing of security protocols and (2)
robustification of a safety-critical interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.