* 2144094
* CAREER: Decoding Crystal Growth and Phase Transformations of Complex Structures With Minimalist Self-Assembly Models
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Julia Dshemuchadse, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2027
* USD 217,389.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research integrated with education to advance understanding of the
process of how crystals grow. Crystalline materials account for a large variety
of functional constituents in modern and historic technology. The structure of
crystals refers to how the atoms or other microscopic building blocks arrange
themselves in a periodic and symmetric way, like the rows of desks in a
classroom or tiles on a bathroom floor. Materials with different crystal
structures have different properties and the study of their structure–property
relationships lies at the core of materials science and engineering. While
crystal structure analysis is an extremely well-developed technique, the process
of crystal growth itself is much more difficult to study. Often, the simplest
examples of crystal structures are investigated in order to illuminate the
ongoing processes in more depth. However, understanding the formation of
different kinds of crystalline order will enable the prediction of the diverse
structures that will form in different systems at various compositions,
pressures, and other parameters external and internal to the crystal, and
therefore will allow for the targeted design of new functional materials. This
project aims to elucidate the self-assembly processes that govern the growth of
both simple and complex crystal structures, as well as phase transformations
between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach and education are integral to this
project and are intended to empower populations historically underrepresented in
the sciences. The research team will invite teachers from rural areas in Central
New York to campus for an annual, student-organized summer workshop, and will
teach math and science at New York state prisons through the Cornell Prison
Education Program. The principal investigator will assign Wikipedia editing in
engineering classes and host Wikipedia edit-a-thons for the scientific
community, both improving the students’ scientific writing and communication
abilities, as well as Wikipedia’s technical content and the representation of
Black, Latine, women, LGBTQ+, and other underrepresented
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational research and education on the formation and
transformation of diverse crystal structures from simple building blocks. A
plethora of structures can be self-assembled from simple, short-range
interactions, spontaneously forming long-range ordered crystalline structures
with varying complexities, symmetries, and chemical equivalents. These crystal
structures correspond to types of order observed both on the atomic level, as
well as on the nano- and mesoscale, in soft condensed matter composed of
nanoparticles, polymer micelles, or colloids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
goal of this project is to elucidate the self-assembly processes that govern the
growth of both simple and complex crystal structures, and phase transformations
between them. Specifically, the research team will study the growth of different
crystal structures, how different particle attachment patterns depend on the
symmetry and complexity of the structure type, and how they vary with the
chemistry of the system and constituents. Through bottom-up knowledge of how
ordered structures arise from building-block properties, this project will
advance the field of materials design by establishing encyclopedic knowledge
about the self-assembly of different structures and types of order in materials,
and by implicitly taking into account both thermodynamic and kinetic effects. By
using abstract, “agnostic” models for particle interactions, the generated
findings will become generalizable across materials systems and length scales,
so that this comparative study will yield insights into the fundamentals of
crystal growth and solid–solid phase transitions. Machine learning methods will
be applied to gain insights from simulation data created from particle-
interaction models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education goal of this project is
to empower populations historically underrepresented in the sciences. The
research team will host student-organized summer workshops for teachers from
rural areas in Central New York. Additionally, members of the research team will
teach math and science at New York state prisons through the Cornell Prison
Education Program. The principal investigator will assign Wikipedia editing in
engineering classes and improve the students’ scientific writing and
communication abilities and Wikipedia’s technical content. The principal
investigator will also host Wikipedia edit-a-thons within the scientific
community to improve the representation of Black, Latine, women, LGBTQ+, and
other underrepresented scientists on Wikipedia, and to empower students and
academics to contribute to Wikipedia for both science communication and
advocacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.