* 2144913
* CAREER: Deformation by surface loading from ocean tides and continental water on a 3-D Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Hilary Martens, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2027
* USD 557,373.00

Circulations of fluids in the oceans, in the atmosphere, and over land cause the
shape of the Earth to deform on time scales due to changes in surface pressure.
The pattern of deformation depends on the weight and distribution of the fluids
as well as on the structural properties of Earth’s interior. Thus, observations
and models of Earth deformation caused by repeated cycles of surface loading and
unloading can shed light on important Earth-system processes, including mantle
dynamics, the water cycle, and changes in climate. For well-known loads, such as
the ocean tides, investigations of surface loading can place key constraints on
allowable models for the density structure and mechanical behavior of Earth’s
crust and mantle, which can advance understanding of mantle convective processes
that drive plate tectonics and surface hazards. Furthermore, tracking load-
induced Earth deformation allows for the quantification of changes in freshwater
storage over the continents, which can aid in drought monitoring and water-
resource management. This project aims to advance both observational and
computational methods for analyzing how the Earth deforms under the weight of
water and air at the surface. Recent studies suggest that the observational
precision of state-of-the-art satellite positioning systems, including the
Global Positioning System (GPS), may now exceed the predictive capabilities of
current Earth-deformation models that commonly assume spherically symmetric
Earth structure. Thus, a major objective of this project will be to leverage new
advances in computational technologies and geophysical software to investigate
the impacts of three-dimensional (3-D) variations in Earth structure (i.e.,
topography, polar flattening due to rotation, and lateral variations in internal
structure) on load-induced Earth deformation. By making predictive models of
surface loading more accurate, and by packaging computational tools in a way
that the broader scientific community can use with greater ease, this project
aims to refine existing models of Earth structure, improve estimates of
freshwater storage over the continents, and promote collaborative efforts that
drive innovation in geophysics. With computational methods becoming more
sophisticated, resources that support and enhance the computational literacy of
early-career scientists will become ever more critical to workforce development
and sustained innovation. This project will produce a series of computational
short courses that can be delivered to students, postdoctoral scholars, and the
broader scientific community in flexible formats. This project will also
facilitate graduate-undergraduate mentoring and professional-development
programs as well as generate open educational resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
primary objective of this project is to quantify the influence of 3-D variations
in solid-Earth structure, including topography and internal contrasts in
material properties, on surface displacements caused by ocean tidal loading and
continental water loading. This project will analyze data products from Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) and develop models to predict the response
of a 3-D Earth to cycles of surface loading and unloading. Research products
will include: (1) sensitivity and resolution analyses that quantify the ability
to constrain 3-D Earth structure using GNSS; (2) quantitative assessments of the
impacts of 3-D Earth structure on estimates of ocean tidal loading and
continental water storage; (3) empirical estimates of load tides from GNSS data;
(4) open-source software tools that facilitate tidal analysis and the inversion
of geodetic data for Earth structure; and (5) refined models for Earth structure
constrained by GNSS observations of load tides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.