* 2144750
* CAREER: Expanding Our Understanding of Freshwater Salinization Through Data-Driven Limnology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Hilary Dugan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 07/31/2027
* USD 746,188.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater is a critical resource
needed for drinking water, agriculture, and industrial use. In some regions of
the United States, freshwater resources are threatened by increasing salt
levels. The use of water softeners, spreading salt on roads in winter, and some
agricultural activities add salts to lakes, rivers, and groundwater. This
project will study where the salt is coming from, how it moves through rivers
and lakes, and what impacts it has on freshwater habitats in Wisconsin. The
overarching goal of the project is to protect our freshwater resources from
further salt pollution through improved scientific understanding, education, and
public engagement. Researchers will work with community-based organizations
whose missions are to protect water quality and promote awareness of salt
impacts through community activities and social media. Resources for teaching
and analyzing data will be made publicly available to encourage greater
awareness and further study of salt impacts on freshwater resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research themes of this project focus on understanding
salt cycling in freshwater environments at a range of spatial scales. At the
local scale, this project will establish a long-term salt observatory in the
Yahara Watershed, Wisconsin. There, scientists will track salt pollution from
source to outflow, studying the impacts on freshwater ecosystems dynamics, and
modeling the role of river networks on salinity regimes. Findings will be
expanded to the regional scale to investigate the role of lakes in larger river
networks and machine learning approaches will be used to transfer knowledge of
well-monitored systems to unmonitored systems for better spatial and temporal
prediction of salinity dynamics. This work aims to advance the use of machine
learning approaches for conducting data-driven ecological science. Globally, the
risk of lake salinization exists for a broad range of lakes beyond the United
States. Project members will collaborate with the international limnological
community to establish a global database of lake salinity and ion concentration
data. This resource will be used to advance our global understanding of
salinization trends, drivers, adaptation, and management
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.