* 2144794
* CAREER: Unraveling Diverse Mechanisms of Heme Degradation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Piotr Mak, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2027
* USD 695,000.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry, Piotr Mak from Saint Louis
University will study fundamental principles that govern the reactivity of heme
iron-dependent enzymes, that play crucial roles in living systems and also have
potential industrial applications. The proposed activities will have a
significant societal impact on understanding human physiology as well as
environmentally safe biotechnological processes. It is expected that the
proposed combination of powerful research tools will provide vital information
regarding the structure and function of heme proteins that is otherwise unlikely
to be revealed. Another important aspect of the proposed work is to actively
involve graduate and undergraduate students in multi-disciplinary research
projects that will provide them with a wide range of exciting training
opportunities. Additionally, the proposed outreach efforts will improve
inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) fields by developing and implementing a program called “Seeing
the Invisible”, which will enable high school students from socioeconomically
disadvantaged communities to participate in the process of scientific discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heme oxygenases, besides their role in heme catabolism,
have many other important physiological functions in eukaryotes and pathogens.
Heme degradation is a complex, multi-step process and despite many years of
study, significant questions remain regarding the nature of the reactive
intermediates involved in the catalytic activity of canonical heme oxygenases.
Additionally, some recently discovered noncanonical enzymes catalyze a new type
of heme degradation chemistry, leading to entirely different metabolites which
imply new and unique reaction pathways. While it is of great importance to
elucidate factors that dictate reactivity patterns of these proteins, such as
the nature and structural dynamics of their reactive intermediates, progress has
been thwarted by the extremely rapid decay of these unstable species for
reactions conducted in solution. This application proposes that the combination
of resonance Raman spectroscopy with cryo-radiolysis and nanodisc sampling
methodology will allow for generation, stabilization, and characterization of
these elusive species under conditions that mimic their natural environment.
This unique approach has the potential to provide information regarding
structure-function relationships in heme proteins that would be inaccessible by
alternate methods. The significance of these studies lies in their contribution
to the understanding of oxygen activation chemistry, which is an essential
function of a wide array of dioxygen-utilizing heme enzymes and various other
metalloproteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.