* 2144878
* CAREER: Identifying the Role of Tandem Repeats in Great Ape Adaptation through Undergraduate Team Research Using a Novel Statistical Framework
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Rorianne Rohlfs, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2023
* USD 483,199.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially
expand our ability to study rapid trait evolution. Rapid trait evolution results
in dramatic differences between closely related species, such as chimpanzees and
humans. The way genes are used (gene expression) has been implicated in such
differences, but the genetic basis for altered gene expression is poorly
understood. Until recently, because of limits in DNA sequencing techniques, a
major source of genetic variation (tandem repeats) has been difficult to study.
While sequencing technology has advanced so that we can produce these data, we
still lack a way to analyze it. This project will create a new analysis tool and
will demonstrate its use by studying great ape evolution, addressing
longstanding biological problems such brain evolution. Further, this project
will support the professional development of undergraduate and masters student
scientists, mostly persons excluded due to ethnicity, race, and gender,
improving the diversity, rigor, and relevance of science in the long term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will complete the following
objectives: (1) create TREVA, a statistical tool that uses tandem repeat (TR)
variation data between and within species to test evolutionary hypotheses, in
particular to identify TRs under balancing or directional selection; (2) apply
TREVA to empirical data to determine how TR variation underlies adaptation in
great apes; (3) identify genes impacted by TRs under selection and determine the
downstream biological processes and traits under selection. This project will
integrate education into research using three mechanisms. (1) The research will
primarily be carried out by San Francisco State University (SFSU) undergraduates
and masterâ€™s students. (2) The project will create the Computational Research
Introductory Summer Program where SFSU masters students will be supported to
mentor teams of novice SFSU undergraduates to learn computer science skills and
apply them to original research projects. (3) Students performing the research
will create video abstracts describing their work, which will be used in science
classes nationally to engage students with diverse
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Biological
Anthropology program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.