* 2144842
* CAREER: Salt, Experiments, and Mass Transfer in Subduction Settings
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Colin Jackson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2027
* USD 285,961.00

Subduction zones are fundamental engines for chemical reactions in the Earth. In
a subduction zone, one tectonic plate dives beneath another and is heated during
its descent into Earth’s deep interior. With heat, the hydrous minerals in the
down-going plate breakdown to produce water-rich fluids. These fluids are
buoyant and rise back to the surface, driving chemical reactions along their
path. Important geological phenomena driven by these fluids include the violent
volcanoes that dot the Pacific Ring of Fire, the economic concentration of
critical elements along the edges of continents, the production of continental
crust, and the addition and replenishment of gasses in Earth’s interior.
Research efforts of this project center on experimental investigations of how
the halogen elements trace the path of fluids through subduction zones and
modify the chemical properties of water-rich fluids at depth. Educational
efforts of this project include developing curricula to better engage students
interested in STEM and training students in cutting edge research techniques at
the graduate and undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support three specific research tasks. The first task is to experimentally
measure the elemental partitioning of halogens between slab minerals and water-
rich fluids under applicable pressure and temperature conditions. These data
will be applied towards predicting the halogen chemistry of fluids and residual
minerals for different slab conditions. Predictions will then be compared to
observations from arc volcanoes and mantle sources to constrain how halogens are
mobilized through subduction zones. The second task is to measure how
efficiently chlorine increases the solute concentrations of water-rich fluids
under conditions applicable to slab-fluid interactions. The collected data will
inform how the chemistry of subduction zone fluids are determined. The third
task is to quantify how the fluid-saturated melting point of rocks is increased
by the addition of chlorine. Results will be applied towards understanding the
thermal structure of subduction zones and the associated propensity for slab
melting. The combined efforts of the research tasks will yield a systematic
investigation for how halogens trace and modify mass transfer in subduction
settings. This project will also support major educational efforts. The first is
to develop an introductory class focused on planetary science. The class will be
offered through the Tulane Science Scholars Program, a program that targets
southern Louisiana high school students and enables a diverse cohort of ~150
students to take a STEM class over the summer for college credit. No geosciences
class is currently offered through this program, and the newly developed
planetary science class will fill this crucial hole in the current curriculum.
The second is to revamp the laboratory activities of the Earth Materials class
at Tulane to introduce students to a wide range of analytical techniques
commonly applied within geochemistry. The impact of this revamping will be
enhanced by partnering with other institutions that teach Earth Materials
courses to help refine the laboratory activities. The refined activities will be
posted to community repositories for curricula. The third educational effort
will provide training for three PhD students in materials synthesis and
materials characterization techniques. Within this effort, undergraduate
students will be recruited from the New Orleans metro area to join the research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.