* 2144015
* Electromagnetic Attachment of Assistive Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Alexandra Stavrakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 04/30/2025
* USD 442,603.00

Reduced movement ability is linked to devastating health effects, including
obesity, heart disease, and depression. There has recently been an exciting
surge in technology aimed at restoring lost mobility; prostheses, orthoses, and
exoskeletons are more reliable, precise, and biomimetic than ever.
Unfortunately, the impact and clinical acceptance of these assistive devices is
limited by an inability to attach them safely and comfortably to the body. This
is a particular challenge for the nearly two million Americans living with limb
amputation. Current prosthetic attachment systems are uncomfortable, restrict
motion, and require regular clinical adjustment. To address these limitations,
this project will advance a new attachment system that improves the mechanical
interface between arm prostheses and the body. The projectâ€™s goal is to create
prosthetic suspension systems that are safer and more comfortable, fit better,
and require less frequent adjustment in the clinic. In addition to the direct
impacts of this research, the project team will seek to increase disability
awareness among undergraduate students and medical trainees, by incorporating
principles from the proposed work into formal course curricula and inviting
undergraduates and medical trainees to participate in research, clinic visits,
and relevant surgical procedures. The PI Team will also work closely with a
student-led professional organization called the Society for Engineers
Experiencing Disabilities, which was founded by one of lead graduate students on
the project; this student plans to present their progress in the proposed
research at seminars to undergraduate and K-12 students to emphasize the crucial
role of people with disability in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this work is to establish an adaptive fixation strategy for
assistive devices that effectively transmits forces to the human body, while
preventing large soft-tissue strains and eliminating relative body-device
motion. Toward this end, this project will advance a new system that uses
electromagnetics to transmit loads from a prosthetic limb directly to the
residual bone of persons with limb amputation. The research goals are to i)
measure and model attachment force requirements for above-elbow prostheses
during activities of daily living, ii) determine the relationship between
electromagnet design parameters and system performance, and iii) evaluate large-
gap electromagnetic force control strategies. These experiments will elucidate
the biomechanical and operational requirements for electromagnetic suspension of
limb prostheses. The proposed work is also expected to produce technical
knowledge that applies to other assistive devices, as well as to non-
rehabilitation applications involving large-gap electromagnetic control. This
research has the potential to advance the field of assistive technology by
improving the comfort, safety, and effectiveness of chronic load transfer from
prosthetic devices. Additionally, the proposed approach challenges the
conventional design paradigm for assistive devices, emphasizing parallel
engineering of body and machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.