* 2144439
* CAREER: Harnessing Snapping Instabilities for Shape-Reconfigurable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kawai Kwok, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2027
* USD 500,486.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research in understanding and utilizing snapping instabilities for designing
mechanical structures with shape reconfiguration. Shape reconfiguration induced
by instabilities is repeatable, fast, extensive, triggered on-demand, and
consume minimal energy input. These remarkable characteristics present
tremendous potential for a variety of adaptive structures and autonomous
machines ranging from small medical robots to giant deployable spacecraft.
Current shape-reconfigurable structures are limited in their achievable shapes,
motions, and stiffness, making them unsuitable for some functional and load-
bearing applications. The outcome of this research will provide theoretical
models, experimental data, simulation tools, and new design methods for
achieving structures that can extensively vary their shapes while maintaining
stiffness as well as volume and mass efficiency. The knowledge generated will
expand the capabilities of vehicles to adapt in remote and unknown environments
and advance the frontiers of space exploration, targeted drug delivery, and
robotic systems. For example, reconfigurable sensor and antenna structures
equipped on swarms or constellations of small satellites could enable low-cost,
large-scale measurements for inquiry in geospace and atmospheric science. The
project has an integrated education plan that aims at engaging students in
active learning through organically integrating theory, coding, experiments, and
design experience in a self-contained course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to bridge the knowledge gap in stability principles of thin-
shell structures with non-uniform curvature distribution and the role of
stimulus-responsive material behavior on the overall stability landscape.
Accordingly, the lines of inquiry in this project include: (1) Temporal
variation, creation, and disappearance of meta-stable shapes due to material
viscoelasticity. (2) Programming of multi-stability by thermo-mechanical load
paths in viscoelastic thin-shells. (3) Stability analysis of thin-shells with
curvature and twist distributions relevant for aerodynamic and hydrodynamic
surfaces. (4) Switching between continuous and creased discrete thin-shell
structures via control of relaxation time mismatch. The primary educational
initiative is to redesign the Solid Mechanics course to enhance learning through
coding, hands-on experimentation, and design projects by leveraging student
clubs, additive manufacturing, and online computer resources. This project will
allow to PI to push the boundary of understanding on stability of active
structures and demonstrate the feasibility of a new model of teaching mechanics
in the undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.