* 2144412
* CAREER: Unfolding the Cortex: Biomechanics-informed Analysis of Cortical Thickness
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Maria Holland, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/28/2027
* USD 537,625.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will transform our understanding of the role of
mechanics in the form and function of the human brain. The outer layer of our
brains, the cortex, varies in thickness throughout its wrinkles and folds. This
is partly determined by the forces generated during the process of cortical
folding. Because of this effect of folding on cortical thickness, it is
difficult to make comparisons of thickness across different folding patterns.
For example, differences during development in the womb or between different
species. In this project, the PI will investigate a new metric that removes the
effect of folding on cortical thickness, called modified cortical thickness.
This research will facilitate more precise and meaningful comparisons of
cortical thickness. This is useful for the purposes of identifying evolutionary,
developmental, and pathological changes in brain morphology. This mechanics-
informed analysis will complement other research on developmental and
degenerative diseases and disorders of the brain. Thus, it has the potential to
lead to new pathways for early diagnosis and effective treatment. In addition,
the PI will develop the Biomechanics in the Wild project to foster science
literacy and science communication in undergraduate students. Sharing exciting
stories about biomechanics with the public and promoting student interest in the
field of biomechanics will be key outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To analyze
local cortical thickness in the context of the mechanical environment, the
researchers will develop a method to determine the modified cortical thickness.
A Graph Convolutional Network will be calibrated by advanced finite element
simulations of brain development to predict modified cortical thickness from 3D
reconstructions of brain morphology. Then, this method will be used to
investigate how modified thickness varies throughout mammalian evolution (in
over 50 species) and human development (in utero through 2 years). This work
necessitates the development of 3D reconstructions of the pial and white
surfaces for each subject, which will be shared publicly with other researchers,
opening new avenues for further morphological, phylogenetic, and developmental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.