* 2144099
* CAREER: Impact of Plasma Species, Mixing and Ionization Fraction on Drift-Wave Turbulence and Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Saskia Mordijck, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 517,336.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). This CAREER award supports a study of plasma turbulence using a
combination of experimental and computational approaches. 99% of all visible
matter in the universe is a plasma, a state of matter commonly created when a
gas is heated to high enough temperatures to strip electrons away from the
atoms, creating a cloud of electrically charged particles. Experiments and
observations have shown that plasmas can be turbulent, demonstrating similar
dynamics to that observed in fluids. When studying the turbulence in plasmas, it
is often assumed that plasmas only consist of electrons and one ion species, and
these clouds are 100% ionized. However, in reality, plasmas are not fully
ionized and the presence of neutral particles can influence the dynamics of
turbulence. Moreover, plasmas often contain multiple ion species, which means
that the individual ions can have a different mass and charge. Even small
concentrations of multiple ion species can have non-linear effects on turbulence
and these aspects are often neglected in current models and experiments. Better
understanding of the role of mixed-ion species plasmas as well as the influence
of neutral particles can provide insights into space weather and the design of
nuclear fusion power plants. In addition to the scientific scope, this award
supports creation of a sustainable K5 program built to introduce topics related
to plasmas and turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the LArge
Plasma Device (LAPD), a linear magnetized plasma device within the Basic Plasma
Science Facility at the University of California - Los Angeles, to study drift-
wave plasma turbulence. LAPD has the possibility to change the neutral pressure
as well as the plasma density and temperature, thus effectively allowing
alteration of the ionization ratio and the neutral to plasma fraction. Through
dedicated scans of electron temperature, density and neutral density, the
experiments will measure the changes in turbulence and plasma flows. These scans
will be repeated for different plasma species and eventually mixed plasma
species. To better interpret experiments, a fluid plasma code HERMES will be
used to self-consistently calculate turbulence and plasma profiles in the
presence of neutral species. The combination of modeling and experiments will
allow a better understanding of whether the models can capture the dynamics of
various (mixed) plasma species and neutrals, or whether the models need to be
further developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.