* 2144918
* CAREER: Modeling and Quantification of the Interdependent Power Grid Uncertainties
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Sara Eftekharnejad, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to address the challenges introduced by the
increasing power grid uncertainties. The expected increase in intermittent
sustainable energy resources will introduce inevitable uncertainties to the
power grids. At the same time, the severe weather patterns in recent years have
significantly increased the grid outages and component failures. There is a
critical need for new techniques that model and quantify these highly
interdependent uncertainties. Such techniques will better prepare future grids
for the impending surge in uncertainties and facilitate grid reliability. This
project will bring transformative changes to real-time tools that model and
quantify the impacts of interdependent grid uncertainties, namely, renewable
generation and outages. The intellectual merits of the project include the
introduction of new knowledge on modeling and quantification of power grid
uncertainties and their causal impacts on grid operations. The broader impacts
of the project include more efficient and reliable grid operations under
uncertainties, tackling barriers for the integration of sustainable energy
resources, and addressing the challenges of climate change. The integrated
research and education objectives of the project will train students from
diverse groups, including undergraduate and high school students. The education
and outreach activities promote the participation and retention of the
underrepresented groups in engineering through collaborations with industry
experts, public libraries, and local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop efficient and adaptive techniques to model and quantify
interdependent grid uncertainties while considering their fast-evolving nature.
The existing efforts on grid uncertainty quantification have been limited due to
the complexity of analyzing the nonlinear dynamics of power systems and large-
scale historical data, particularly in near real-time. This project will fuse
tools from cascading failure modeling, machine learning, and statistics to
develop a scalable and efficient quantification framework to understand the
interdependencies among generation and outage uncertainties and allow for near
real-time analysis. For a more realistic quantification of the grid
uncertainties, the data-driven models and physical power flow equations will
inform each other to yield hybrid stochastic models. Building upon these models,
new causal models will be developed to demonstrate how individual uncertainties
impact grid operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.