* 2144763
* CAREER: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Periodically Structured Bubbling Phenomena in Dense Suspensions and Fluidized Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Christopher Boyce, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2027
* USD 487,727.00

Flows in which bubbles rise through fluids that contain solid particles are
ubiquitous in nature and industry. Examples range from bubbles rising through
lava in active volcanos to bubbles feeding air to bioreactors. The dynamics of
these bubbles are critical to the overall flow behavior and reactor performance,
but the dynamics of these systems are difficult to predict owing to the complex
properties of the fluids. Specifically, (1) the opaque nature of these fluids
prevents imaging of bubble dynamics in 3D, and (2) the chaotic motion of bubbles
prevents model development and optimization of industrial equipment. The CAREER
award seeks to advance magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques to study
bubble dynamics inside complex fluids in ways similar to how MRI has
revolutionized medicine by imaging the interior of the human body. The project
will utilize vibration and controlled gas flow to structure the bubble dynamics,
such that they follow periodically repeating dynamics, to advance
characterization and modeling, and, ultimately, to optimize industrial device
performance. In addition to benefits for industry, this project will use the
visually fascinating nature of bubbly flows to inspire the next generation of
scientists, especially students from historically underrepresented groups, to
study STEM fields. The research team will engage students with these visually
interesting flows and their underlying science through both in-person outreach
and a video production program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will
support coordinated experiments and modeling to advance understanding of bubbly
flows in granular materials and dense suspensions and develop mechanisms to
control these flows. Optical imaging and MRI will be coordinated with
computational modeling of both the flow dynamics and MRI protocols to
synergistically develop characterization capabilities while identifying ways to
structure bubble dynamics. The periodically repeating nature of the bubbly flows
will allow direct comparison of images obtained using different MRI techniques.
Comparison of optical images in 2D systems and MRI in 3D systems will reveal how
complex rheology governs flow behavior in 3D multiphase systems and mechanisms
that can lead to different bubble structuring in 3D. Direct comparison of 2D and
3D simulations with experiments will test the ability of rheological and overall
computational flow models to capture fluid-solid transitions which lead to
bubble structuring. Manipulation of vibration and gas flow conditions will
create design rules for controlling bubble structures. Overall, the investigator
anticipates that this combined approach will provide important fundamental
insights into complex flows and MRI while also providing characterization and
flow manipulation pathways to optimize existing practice and generate new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.