* 2144443
* CAREER: Integrating Resilience and Social Vulnerability into the Management of Civil Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Abdullahi Salman, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2027
* USD 505,313.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will advance our
understanding of the influence of socioeconomic factors on differential impacts
of infrastructure disruptions to different populations. The impact of the damage
caused by natural hazards to critical civil infrastructure systems differs for
various population groups because of social-vulnerability factors such as
income/class, age, health status, and disability. However, such disproportionate
impacts are typically not considered in existing resilience assessment methods.
Consequently, infrastructure-management decisions based on the existing methods
ignore the differing needs of the most vulnerable populations in communities.
This project will explicitly integrate social-vulnerability factors into
infrastructure resilience models so that the needs of the most vulnerable
populations in communities can be adequately considered in resilience
improvement decision-making processes. The award will also support an
educational program to train a diverse group of future civil engineers to tackle
the challenges faced by the built environment and provide them with the
knowledge they need to be effective decision-makers. The community outreach
component of the project will increase awareness of issues related to the impact
of natural hazards on infrastructure systems and motivate communities to support
resilience-improvement policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal
of the project is to formulate infrastructure-resilience models and metrics that
integrate social-vulnerability factors to guide pre-disaster resilience
improvement and post-disaster recovery planning. Specific research objectives
include: (i) formulate a new resilience assessment model and system-performance
metrics considering social vulnerability, (ii) create a multi-criteria decision-
making framework to guide resilience improvement, (iii) formulate a multi-
objective resilience-driven optimization model for post-disaster recovery
planning, and (iv) evaluate the new methods using testbeds to appraise their
ability to inform pre-disaster resilience improvement and post-disaster recovery
planning. The new methods will go beyond current resilience models by
considering social vulnerability. The project will also provide new resilience-
based component-importance metrics to help identify infrastructure components
that should be the focus of resilience-improvement actions. Additionally, new
knowledge about the effectiveness of various resilience-improvement measures
will be gained, which will inform decisions on selecting appropriate measures.
Further, the project will help ensure that decision-makers are aware of the
social inequities brought by disruptions to infrastructure systems. Such
awareness is the first step in ensuring that infrastructure managers explicitly
consider social vulnerability in infrastructure systemsâ€™ design, operation, and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.