* 2144333
* CAREER: Low-Loss Spintronic Devices with Vertically Engineered Magnets
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Satoru Emori, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

In personal computers and data centers, information is often stored in magnetic
films where the two digital states (“0” and “1”) are represented by opposite
magnetization directions. Switching the magnetization with low loss (minimal
wasted energy) is key to developing energy-efficient digital memory devices. In
recent years, an effect called “spin-orbit torque” has been envisioned as a
promising way to switch next-generation magnetic memories. However, the
outstanding problem is that stronger spin-orbit torques require extremely thin,
lossy magnetic films, in which switching involves a large amount of wasted
energy. The proposed research will resolve this longstanding problem by
developing a new family of magnetic films with tailored chemical composition
profiles, which simultaneously enable strong spin-orbit torques and low loss. A
successful outcome of this research will improve the energy efficiency of spin-
orbit-torque magnetic memories by more than a hundredfold. In addition, research
will advance the basic understanding of how spin-orbit torques and losses arise
in magnetic materials, with broader applications in not only digital memories
but also brain-inspired and quantum computing technologies. Moreover, it is
proposed to develop a hands-on in-class activity for elementary school students
to build audio speakers with inexpensive materials. This activity will help
students develop a long-lasting appreciation for how the physical concepts of
electricity, magnetism, and sound apply to everyday technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin-orbit torque (SOT) devices for memory and computing
applications are typically bilayers, consisting of a magnetic film interfaced
with a spin-orbit material. The problem with this device structure is that
stronger SOTs require thinner magnets with thicknesses down to ~1 nm, but
thinner magnets exhibit higher damping that results in high power consumption
and poor performance. The proposed research will address this longstanding
problem by simultaneously engineering strong SOTs and low damping in several-nm-
thick, single-layer magnetic metal films. The research will take a fundamentally
different approach to symmetry breaking, which is an essential ingredient for
the emergence of SOTs. Specifically, in contrast to the conventional bilayers
where symmetry is broken at film interfaces, the proposed approach deliberately
breaks symmetry within the magnetic film itself – via a continuous compositional
gradient along the thickness axis. Such bulk symmetry breaking is hypothesized
to yield strong SOTs directly within a thick, low-damping magnetic film. The
objectives of this research are to: (1) grow and characterize vertically graded
magnetic films and determine how their compositions and structures impact SOTs
and damping; and (2) quantify how the SOTs and damping of vertically graded
magnets impact the performance of spintronic memories, oscillators, and spin-
wave channels. A successful outcome of this research will enable transformative
advances in SOT-driven devices – including two-orders-of-magnitude lower power
dissipation, along with higher stability, higher signal output, and excellent
compatibility with commercial fabrication processes. More broadly, this research
will catalyze device development that leverages spin-orbit phenomena in graded
materials, which have the potential to supersede heterostructures relying on
atomically sharp interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.