* 2145922
* CAREER: Bilevel Optimization for Accountable Machine Learning on Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sihong Xie, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2027
* USD 108,670.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphs represent real-world
entities and their connections, found in diverse disciplines, such as computer
science, civil engineering, and bioinformatics. Machine learning is a useful
technique that can make decisions on large-scale graph datasets to help prevent
cyberattacks, reduce energy waste, invent new cures for diseases. Unfortunately,
complicated graph structures reduce the accountability of machine decisions,
which can be 1) hard for human users to comprehend, and 2) discriminative
against certain subpopulations or individuals. The project will incorporate
prior human knowledge about graphs as transparency and fairness constraints over
machine decisions. With diverse desiderata, the project will comprehensively
discover useful trade-offs of multiple competitive transparency and fairness
objectives to help humans make sense of and adopt machine decisions. Due to
graph variations, volatility in machine decisions can jeopardize their
accountability, and the project will discover the conditions of variations under
which robust transparency and fairness can and should be expected. Governments,
regulators, and organizations can rely on the invented techniques to audit civil
infrastructure operations, online social networks, and commerce. Scientists
working on materials, drugs, and human brain networks will benefit from the
accountability through the constraints designed by them. Via publications,
tutorials, courses, and workshops, the project will train undergraduates and
graduates, many of whom are underrepresented. K6-12 students will be educated
about machine learning on graphs, using an interactive role-playing computer
game, and lectures designed for the lay users, through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, this project identifies
new challenges in accountable ML and addresses them under the BLO (bilevel
optimization) framework. Unlike accountability without domain-specific
constraints, the project will design human-in-the-loop constraint generation
methods to help specify relevant constraints for graph data. Constraints can be
numerous and uncertain, and accordingly, the project invents differentiation-
through-optimization, hierarchical proximal methods, and chance-constrained
optimization. Unlike scalar optimization of accountable ML, the project aims at
efficient multi-objective trade-offs and proposes constrained vector
optimization and continuous exploration of local Pareto fronts under the BLO
framework. The project will investigate stable learning-to-precondition to
exploit the smoothness of the BLO updates to speed up the optimization. To
quantify the robustness of the decision accountability, the framework searches
the usually undefined boundary between robustness and sensitivity of accountable
models. The project proposes a trust-region search with complementary
reinforcement learning policies to surgically and differentially balance
robustness and sensitivity. The BLO framework provides provenance and meta-
explanations for the optimal explanations and fair models. The project will also
address the computational efficiency of BLO on large graphs through graph
partition, first-order approximation, and advanced linear algebra techniques.
Lastly, the project will analyze the convergence, uniqueness, and trade-offs in
the BLO problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.