* 2145802
* CAREER: Rationale Design of Autonomous Biomimetic Wearable Sensor for Personalized Molecular Monitoring of Long COVID
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Wei Gao, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2027
* USD 482,150.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has upended the lives of billions of people, spreading
globally to hundreds of million cases. Recent studies show that a large number
of recovered patients (even those with initially mild or no symptoms) will have
prolonged post-COVID complications (long COVID). Many types of biomarker
molecules in our body are reported to be closely linked to these post-COVID
conditions. As the current COVID-19 pandemic remains uncontrolled around the
world, there is a pressing need for developing wearable sensors to monitor an
individual’s health status at home. Most of the medical examinations are
currently based on blood tests that require invasive blood draws and physical
clinic visits. Human sweat contains a wealth of chemicals including that can
reflect the body’s physiological state. Compared with blood tests, sweat
analyses could serve as a non-invasive and more attractive candidate for
continuous health monitoring in daily life. Wearable sweat sensors could allow
personalized monitoring of long-COVID-related biomarkers in people’s daily
activities. Such technology could help people better understand post-COVID
conditions and how to treat the patients with these longer-term
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a wearable biosensor
platform that can efficiently extract and sample sweat across activities, and
perform in situ, non-invasive molecular analysis of a broad spectrum of
biomarkers toward personalized molecular monitoring of long COVID. This project
will address multiple research challenges in the wearable sensor field. Firstly,
to enable wearable monitoring of a variety of trace-level sweat biomarkers
related to long COVID, a unique wearable molecular sensing strategy will be
developed based on artificial bioreceptors. This biosensing approach will be
optimized with both computational and experimental approaches. Secondly,
considering that current wearable sweat sensors mostly rely on exercise to
access sweat and are not suitable for daily at-home uses or for sedentary
individuals, this project will develop the fully integrated microfluidic
wearable system for autonomous sweat induction, efficient sweat sampling, and in
situ multiplexed analysis across activities. Lastly, in vivo evaluation of the
wearable senor will be performed in patients with long COVID for retrospective
and prospective monitoring in post-COVID complications. The currently
unavailable molecular information collected continuously by the wearable sweat
biosensors could have a profound public health impact and greatly facilitate our
fundamental understanding of the roles of circulating biomarkers in long COVID
to reduce susceptibility to post-COVID complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.