* 2145665
* CAREER: Accelerating Real-time Hybrid Physical-Numerical Simulations in Natural Hazards Engineering with a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)-driven Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Barbara Simpson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2023
* USD 598,450.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will advance fundamental understanding of the risks
posed by natural hazards to the built environment by laying the algorithmic
foundation for high-fidelity simulations using graphics processing units (GPUs).
High-resolution simulation of complex structural systems requires that detailed
models be solved in unique ways. For example, tall buildings are so functionally
important that they are “too big to fail,” as moderate damage can be difficult
to repair and tall building loss of function severely affects post-event
recovery. Yet, the influence of soil-structure interaction (SSI), critically
important to tall building response during an earthquake, is often neglected due
to computational cost and physical testing constraints. To enable more realistic
and faster simulations, this research will derive, demonstrate, and facilitate
advanced numerical methods that harness the massive parallelism of GPUs, i.e.,
real-time computer chips originally developed for graphics rendering, to
overcome computational bottlenecks in structural simulations, specifically in
the real-time hybrid simulation (RTHS) of tall buildings. In parallel, the
multi-disciplinary components of this research will be integrated with a larger
educational commitment to develop, disseminate, and continuously reflect on an
inclusive teaching pedagogy to enhance student persistence and joy in
computation, training students with the skills needed for an increasingly
technology-driven workforce. This award will contribute to the National Science
Foundation (NSF) role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution simulations of complex structures
using RTHS, which couples physical experiments with numerical models in real
time, has previously been exceptionally difficult. Refined, high-fidelity models
result in greater resolution and accuracy but also suffer increased run time,
inhibiting the feasibility of RTHS. Graphics processors will, for the first
time, be used to accelerate RTHS to enable higher-fidelity "on-the-fly"
simulation of civil structures. The seismic response of civil structures poses
unique challenges for full GPU acceleration, including heterogeneous element
formulations, varying degrees of nonlinearities, and reliance on implicit
integration schemes with direct solvers. To address these challenges, this
research will re-formulate approaches to assembling and solving the equations of
motion on GPUs with: (i) massively parallel algorithms, (ii) semi-discrete time
integration schemes, and (iii) an event-driven GPU-adapted RTHS architecture.
This research will culminate in a tiered testing program to simulate realistic
tall building response, including SSI. This project will establish multi-
disciplinary research and mentorship at the intersection of structural
engineering and scientific computing. Mutual collaborations will be used to
synthesize expertise across three NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) facilities, including the Computational Modeling
and Simulation Center at the University of California, Berkeley, the
experimental facility at Lehigh University, and the DesignSafe
cyberinfrastructure at the University of Texas at Austin. Project data will be
archived and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.