* 2145735
* CAREER: Study of Electronic and Magnetic Topological Phenomena in Two Dimensional Quantum Materials with Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yongtao Cui, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2027
* USD 279,216.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical concept of topology, which
studies global geometrical properties of shapes, such as the number of holes or
surfaces, that remain unchanged when the objects are smoothly deformed, has been
applied to understand and discover novel electronic and magnetic properties in
solid state materials. This project studies two types of such phenomena in two-
dimensional materials that are only a few atomic layers thick. The first is 2D
materials that host topological edge conduction. In these materials, the
interior of sample is insulating while electrical current can only flow along
the edges. This kind of edge conduction can greatly reduce the energy loss
during the current flow, therefore, it can potentially be used to develop next
generation of energy efficient electronic devices. The second type of phenomena
occurs in 2D magnetic materials where the local magnetic poles wind around in a
swirling pattern. The winding directions can be used for information storage as
their topological properties make them robust against external perturbation thus
capable of retaining information for longer time. This project further
integrates an education component to engage both undergraduate and high school
students in multidisciplinary research in the field of quantum materials and
nanotechnology. The PI will develop research modules that are suitable for
students at all levels such as building demo nano characterization tools that
involve both hardware design and electronics development. The demo projects
provide a bridge for the students to participate in the proposed research
activities. Under-represented groups will be particularly encouraged and
recruited in the education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Atomic layered materials provide a rich platform to study
topological physics in two dimensions. This project investigates several
families of novel 2D materials and their heterostructures to characterize their
topological states and explore new methods to manipulate and engineer their
topological properties. The first material system is the recently discovered
topological magnet, MnBi2Te4, which combines magnetism and topological order in
one material and is a Chern insulator in few-layer samples. The proposed
research aims to characterize key properties in few-layer samples that are
important for the topological order, including the topological gap and the
magnetic anisotropy. The second material system is graphene based moiré
heterostructures, including twisted bilayer graphene aligned on hBN and graphene
interfaced with moiré heterostructures of transition metal dichalcogenides. The
formation of moiré superlattice with a large periodicity is expected to modulate
the Landau level structures in graphene, which could potentially be used to tune
the topological states in graphene. The third material system is
heterostructures of 2D magnets. The proposed research explores different
material combinations to introduce strong spin orbit coupling and break
inversion symmetry at the interface which could induce the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya
interaction and create skyrmions in the magnetic materials. This project employs
several scanning probe microscopy techniques, including microwave impedance
microscopy (MIM), electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), and magnetic force
microscopy (MFM), to probe the local electronic and magnetic properties and
image the topological states in real space. The local probes provide
complementary information to conventional transport techniques, which can bring
in new insights on topological physics in two dimensions from a different
perspective. Results from this research will provide important feedback for
theorists to refine model parameters and for material scientist to optimize and
improve sample qualities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.