* 2145500
* CAREER: Leveraging Atomically-Precise Inorganic Clusters to Understand Nanoparticle Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Matthew Jones, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 657,460.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Matthew Jones of Rice University will explore
the fundamental processes underlying the formation of metallic nanoparticles.
These structures, approximately ten thousand times smaller than the width of a
human hair, exhibit remarkable optical and catalytic properties that may form
the basis for future technologies in biomedicine, energy storage, and computing.
With this funding, Dr. Jones will expand the understanding of metallic
nanoparticle formation by “seeding” their growth with smaller molecules that are
atomically well-defined. Coupled to these scientific goals is a program of
educational outreach that aims to improve the diversity of the nation’s STEM
workforce by partnering with a local high school in Houston that caters
exclusively to underserved immigrant and refugee communities. Science teachers
at this school will take part in a funded summer research internship in the
Jones laboratory while the students in the classrooms of these teachers will be
engaged by Dr. Jones’ nanoscience outreach group via laboratory exercises and
demonstrations. By creating a program that integrates the training of
underrepresented students and teachers with the resources of Rice University, a
pipeline of diverse, STEM-educated students will be generated who can serve the
workforce needs of the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jones research
group will explore the mechanisms underlying the seed-mediated synthesis of
anisotropic gold nanoparticles by developing a research program that aims to
characterize growth dynamics occurring at the ~1 nm length scale. This work
seeks to uncover cluster-based mechanisms for nanoparticle growth to help
develop nanoscale synthesis into a more chemically-predictable science. In
objective 1, a library of atomically-precise nanoclusters of differing size,
symmetry, and ligand composition are to be synthesized and characterized. In
objective 2, the inter- and intra-cluster growth, dissolution, and coalescence
processes that result in a redistribution of the cluster population in different
chemical environments will be studied. Finally, in objective 3, the role that
cluster-based reactivity plays in defining the symmetry and morphology of
nanoparticles grown from these precursors will be examined carefully with an eye
toward establishing new approaches to predicting nanoparticle structure based
upon reactivity and growth mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.