* 2145625
* CAREER: Developing Actionable Methods for Observational Health Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Ping Zhang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2027
* USD 214,146.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observational health data contain
large amounts of clinical information (e.g., comorbidities, prescriptions, and
laboratory results) about heterogeneous patients and their responses to
treatments in real-world settings. Many existing machine learning works focus on
making predictions on observational data (e.g., chance of death or risk of heart
attack) instead of providing actionable suggestions to physicians (e.g., when to
use which drug for a specific patient). Developing actionable models for
observational data is challenging in three aspects: 1) complex confounding
factors that infect both treatment assignments and disease progression outcomes;
2) interpretability of treatment recommendation for actionable decision support;
and 3) transferability of well-trained models to different environments. To
address these challenges, the project will integrate deep learning algorithms
and causal inference techniques to develop actionable methods for observational
health data. The research team will closely collaborate with medical researchers
and physicians for model validation on various clinical problems, and will
actively seek technology transfer opportunities. The project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students with new programs, courses, research, and
internship opportunities on machine learning for healthcare applications. The
project will also actively include underrepresented students and outreach to
high schools and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
integrate deep learning algorithms and causal inference techniques for modeling
longitudinal observational data and adjusting confounding factors, and develop
actionable methods for observational data with two complementary tasks:
individual treatment effects (ITEs), which estimate improvement in the outcome
of taking a particular action to a particular target; and dynamic treatment
regimes (DTRs), which derive a sequence of decision rules, one per stage of
intervention, based on evolving treatment and covariate history. In the first
thrust, the research team will model time-varying and hidden confounders by
recurrently modeling historical information in observational health data for
estimating ITEs; the researchers will generate a personalized treatment timing
recommendation with an uncertainty quantification that achieves optimal causal
effects; they will provide interpretability of treatment recommendations through
both variable and global perspectives. In the second thrust, the research team
will remove the confounding bias in observational health data via patient
resampling and balancing weights; the researchers will develop a deconfounding
reinforcement learning model for DTR learning, which simultaneously considers
short-term and long-term rewards; they will introduce a policy adaptation method
to the proposed model to transfer the learned DTR policies to new-source
datasets. The project will result in the dissemination of new methods and
software for irregularly spaced time series to the broader machine learning and
healthcare communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.