* 2145584
* CAREER: Enabling Dynamic, Adaptive, and Reliable Battery-free Embedded Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Josiah Hester, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2027
* USD 251,490.00

For decades, embedded computing and sensing systems have relied primarily on
battery power. Yet, batteries are bulky, expensive, high-maintenance, and not
sustainable for the next trillion devices. Instead of relying on energy stored
in a battery, an emerging class of computing devices harvests all energy needed
for operation from sources such as the sun, motion, radio waves, and vibration.
However, building sophisticated applications on these battery-free systems is
challenging due to frequent power failures from fluctuations in energy
harvesting. Programmers must figure out how to string together fragments of
execution to meet application goals while dealing with novel software and
hardware bugs that stem from power failures. Because of this, memory-intensive,
inference-heavy, and user-facing applications have rarely materialized on
battery-free devices. New general-purpose hardware platforms with accelerators
and heterogeneous computing modules are needed to build these applications.
However, hardware is not enough. With new hardware comes new challenges like
scalability, dynamism, and memory-efficient checkpointing. This project explores
intermittent computing systems and toolchain support for integrating diverse
computing modules, like FPGAs, Accelerators, and Vector Processors, alongside
traditional microcontrollers. The project weaves scalability across the
intermittent computing system stack, leveraging these new modules to enable
reactive, adaptive, and high-performance applications on this important new
class of computing devices. This project will explore and prototype scalable
hardware platforms, adaptive software systems, high-level programming languages,
and energy introspection tools that enable even novice developers to quickly
prototype sophisticated battery-free applications, despite power failures. These
advancements will be demonstrated and evaluated in the context of real-world
deployments in mobile health, habitat monitoring, and interactive
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Battery-free embedded systems offer a
transformative and ecologically sustainable approach for building the next
trillion computing devices. This project fills a gap for system designers who
lack the hardware platforms, efficient runtime systems, and focused tools to
build capable, data-intensive, reactive, and reliable applications with these
devices. The results of this research will impact fields across scientific and
industrial interests: including healthcare (wearable and body sensor networks),
ecology, horticulture, infrastructure, conservation, and public utility
monitoring, and many other areas where long-term, massive scale sensing is
essential. The hardware, systems, and tools will speed up research and
commercialization in critical sectors like smart cities and the Internet of
Things. The project's demonstration applications, including smart health
devices, interactive devices, and novice-focused programming environments, will
provide proof of approach to encourage uptake of battery-free devices. The
project includes outreach and education initiatives focused on increasing
participation among Native Hawaiian youth in computing by introducing computing
concepts via building sustainable and conservation-focused embedded systems
applications in partnership with a Native Hawaiian serving public school and
non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.