* 2145803
* CAREER: Exploiting Time Dependent Behavior and Structure in Developing Programmable Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* James Gibert, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 01/31/2027
* USD 601,818.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports the development of
a new generation of programmable materials that can control and monitor
vibrations and shock events in real time. This technology has the potential to
influence various applications ranging from improving the sensing and monitoring
infrastructure to revolutionizing the emerging field of smart packaging. As an
example, these materials allow for in-situ modification of the energy absorbing
capabilities of systems whose conditions can change over time due to aging
and/or due to changing temperatures, and, as such, they can reduce the cost of
replacing vibration reduction equipment. This CAREER grant will introduce new
mechanisms to program the stiffness and time-dependent mechanical and inertial
behavior of these materials. The educational outreach will address systemic
barriers placed upon marginalized students, who are often placed in less
rigorous mathematics courses, by offering project-based experiential activities
to engage students and foster an understanding of the applications of
mathematics in a real-world context. These efforts also aim to demonstrates to
the PI's research team the importance of STEM outreach with the goal of
increasing diversity and inclusion in academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this CAREER project is to investigate the physics, and
establish a mathematical foundation, that governs the interplay between topology
and nonlinear and time-dependent material behavior in heterogeneous mechanical
metamaterials. Applications range from vibration suppression and shock
absorption to the development of metamaterials with self-sensing capabilities.
This research will fill a fundamental knowledge gap in systematic techniques and
theories that conceptualize mechanical metamaterials. The project work will
focus on metamaterials with heterogeneity that arises from: 1) an inclusion in
the topology of an elastomeric matrix, coined a ``digital element", and 2) the
combination of materials whose behavior is primarily viscoelastic with a
material whose behavior is primarily elastic and/or hyperelastic. The selective
placement /and or removal of these digital elements allows for the systematic
programming of a single host structure to exemplify a host of inertial and
elastic behaviors leading to a range of dynamic responses when used as a
component in a vibratory system. We hypothesize that the composite viscoelastic
and hyperelastic materials will allow the host structure to have tailored novel
strain dependent responses. The activities will develop the fundamental
understanding and establish the mathematical framework needed to exploit these
phenomena using the theory of dynamical systems along with analytical and
numerical modeling, material characterization, and experimental testing. The
resulting framework will then be used to improve the development of
metamaterials with self-sensing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.