* 2145474
* CAREER: An Analytical Lens on Quantum Advantage and Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Avishay Tal, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2027
* USD 217,547.00

Computational complexity theory studies the power and limitation of efficient
computation: What can be computed efficiently with bounded resources such as
time, memory, randomness, communication, or quantum bits? This project focuses
on the differences between the computational power of deterministic, randomized,
and quantum computation: Are randomized algorithms more powerful than
deterministic algorithms? Are quantum algorithms more powerful than randomized
algorithms? Recent experiments have demonstrated "quantum advantage:" the
ability to perform tasks that are believed to be beyond the capabilities of
classical computers. Nonetheless, without rigorous proof, the validity of these
beliefs might be fragile. The project seeks to establish provable gaps between
the power of quantum and classical computers, and to understand for which
computational tasks these gaps exist. Towards understanding the role of
randomness in computation, the project aims to show that randomness does not
save space, i.e., that any space-efficient randomized algorithm can be
derandomized at almost no cost in terms of space. The educational plan includes
the development of courses at UC Berkeley and a program at the Simons Institute
for the Theory of Computing -- both aimed to make the field of study more
accessible and inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches these two
fundamental questions through the Fourier analytical lens. Indeed, discrete
Fourier analysis is a powerful tool revealing deep insights on problems arising
in combinatorics and theoretical computer science. A broad phenomenon named
"Fourier Growth" sheds light on these two questions. For one, Fourier Growth
explains the advantage of quantum over classical algorithms in the black-box
setting. For another, Fourier Growth captures structural properties of small-
space computation that are then exploited in the design of pseudo-random
generators. In a nutshell, Fourier Growth captures the algorithm's ability (or
inability) to aggregate many weak signals from the data. The project seeks to
study the full extent of this phenomenon and its potential applications to
tackle long-standing open questions in circuit complexity, pseudo-randomness,
and communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.