* 2145724
* CAREER: Controlling noise in quantum devices with light and sound
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Ryan Behunin, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2027
* USD 499,708.00

While the mastery of nascent quantum technologies promises new forms of high-
performance computing, precision sensing, and unconditionally secure
communications, noise inherent to these quantum devices degrades the very
features that enable their remarkable properties. The most problematic source of
noise for a wide variety of quantum devices is produced by so-called two-level
tunneling states (TLSs). While not well understood, TLSs are
ubiquitous—appearing in crystals, on surfaces, and within disordered
materials—and the noise they produce is more acute at the low temperatures
required for the operation of many quantum technologies. The proposed research
aims to leverage the strong interaction between TLSs and sound waves to develop
new techniques to control and reduce this vexing source of noise. Key objectives
involve engineering devices: (1) to shape how sound impacts quantum device
performance through device geometry, and (2) to show how noise in quantum
devices can be controlled through the active transduction of mechanical waves.
This project explores the ability to drastically reduce the noise produced by
TLS and shed light on the—currently unknown—microscopic origin of TLSs, toward
practical applications of quantum technology. Through paid undergraduate
research opportunities, new curricula on light-matter interactions, and quantum
science themed outreach—focusing on historically minoritized communities—the
proposed educational objectives aim to address systemic underrepresentation of
women and minority groups in the physical sciences and increase accessibility to
careers in Arizona’s burgeoning technology sector to underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to demonstrate control of noise
produced by two-level tunneling states (TLSs) through the manipulation of
phononic degrees of freedom and to show how this control can be used to improve
the performance of quantum devices. To achieve these objectives, electronic,
phononic and photonic devices will be created: (1) from highly confined
membranes, waveguides and resonators that alter and control the phonon density
of states, predicted to drastically alter and reshape the spectrum of TLS noise,
and (2) where light can be harnessed to transduce large amplitude mechanical
waves, expected to reduce noise by “saturating” TLS losses. Pulse sequence
measurements, microwave spectroscopy and a new form of pump-probe phonon
spectroscopy will connect device performance with phonon manipulation. Whereas,
detailed theory-experiment comparison will elucidate the impact of phonon
confinement and transduction on various noise and dissipation mechanisms
produced by TLS, e.g., in the form of the temperature dependence of the
mechanical quality factor. This project will show (1) how TLS noise can be
altered in an array of highly confined structures, (2) how phonons can be used
to control TLS noise in the microwave domain, and (3) how phonons can be
leveraged to improve quantum device performance for the first time. Together,
these results are expected to establish that phonon manipulation can extend
lifetimes of electromagnetic quantum states within superconducting qubits and
may pave the way for practical forms of quantum computing and ultra-sensitive
detectors of forces, rotation, magnetic fields and
displacement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.