* 2145090
* CAREER: Bordered Floer homology and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ina Petkova, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2027
* USD 76,662.00

Low-dimensional topology studies the shapes of spaces in dimensions one through
four, and has applications ranging from physics and cosmology in which the shape
of the universe is studies to biochemistry, which seeks to understand the
behavior of knotted DNA. Closely related to the study of 3- and 4-dimensional
spaces is the study of knots, which can be viewed as tied in space. This project
will further develop and apply recent cut-and-paste tools in low-dimensional
topology. Part of the project concerns the question of what kinds of geometric
structures, specifically what kind of “contact structures”, a given
3-dimensional space can support. In addition to direct applications to
mathematics, contact structures have found numerous applications in physics,
including classical mechanics, thermodynamics, and control theory. In parallel
to the research component, the PI will further their educational and outreach
efforts. For example, the PI will supervise undergraduate and graduate research,
and establish a high school enrichment program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
early 2000s, Ozsvath and Szabo developed a package of powerful invariants for
knots and 3- and 4-dimensional spaces, generally known as Heegaard Floer
homology. Heegaard Floer homology has since taken a major place in low-
dimensional topology, and has helped researchers obtain many new results and
settle numerous old conjectures. Bordered Floer homology generalizes Heegaard
Floer homology to manifolds with boundary, and provides nice techniques for
computing the Heegaard Floer invariants of closed manifolds, by cutting a
manifold into pieces (e.g. a knot into tangles), and studying the individual
pieces and their gluing. This project seeks to develop further the bordered
Heegaard Floer tools we currently have. The PI plans to continue to develop an
invariant from bordered Floer homology for contact 3-manifolds with convex
boundary, and use it to address open questions in contact topology; extend
bordered Floer homology and tangle Floer homology to integral coefficients;
understand and develop the connections between knot Floer homology and quantum
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.