* 2145311
* CAREER: Leveraging physical properties of modern flash memory chips for resilient, secure, and energy-efficient edge storage systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Biswajit Ray, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2027
* USD 279,435.00

Exponential growth in data created, captured, copied, and consumed by people and
machines has created the Zettabytes (one billion terabytes) era, posing new
challenges to the future data storage platforms. To keep up with growing demands
for data storage, future storage solutions will need to provide even higher bit
densities, superior performance and energy-efficiency, and improved resilience,
while guaranteeing end-user privacy. Addressing these challenges requires a
paradigm shift in the storage system design methods beyond the traditional
technology-agnostic algorithmic approaches. To achieve this goal, the project
will create new techniques that exploit rich physical properties of storage
media, thus enabling unconventional but highly effective storage systems.
Specifically, the project (1) develops new technology-specific characterization
techniques to explore physical properties of flash memory during run time, (2)
explores new adaptive storage management techniques through logical scaling of
flash memory, and (3) advances our knowledge of fundamental memory-array
characteristics such as electronic noise, process variation, cell degradation,
and the limits of endurance and energy-accuracy trade-offs. In addition, this
project explores novel data-encoding concepts such as fractional bit storage,
non-charge based data encoding, and energy-efficient approximate storage
techniques that will be critical for the emerging data-intensive applications at
the edge. These techniques are tailored to ensure wide applicability,
portability and ease of implementation promising to enhance resilience,
security, and energy-efficiency of a wide range of future storage
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide significant
benefits to consumers, industry, and U.S. government alike in a wide range of
storage applications including edge/cloud data centers and personal storage
devices. These techniques will enable system integrators to develop near-term
disruptive data-intensive applications such as artificial intelligence and
predictive analytics at the edge nodes operating in extreme environments (e.g.,
nuclear and space). In addition, industrial collaborations will be leveraged for
critical feedback and possible commercialization of any relevant techniques
developed in this project. The educational and outreach plan includes training
graduate and undergraduate students in the area of cybersecurity and advanced
storage technologies, conducting annual workshop and summer camps to attract
young students, particularly from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.