* 2145466
* CAREER: Multiscale Probabilistic Characterization of Seismic Site Response in Highly Uncertain Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Ashly Cabas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2027
* USD 566,155.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will advance scientific
knowledge on the response of soils to earthquake ground shaking at multiple
scales and enable its incorporation into system-level probabilistic seismic
hazard assessments for water distribution systems. The spatially variable
geologic structure near the ground surface exerts a significant influence on the
intensity of ground shaking (known as site effects) and can exacerbate damage to
the built environment. Drinking water and wastewater utilities are critical
lifelines because of the significant negative effects of earthquake damage on
the ability to fight fires, on public health, and the economy. This CAREER grant
will foster a paradigm shift in system-level seismic hazard assessments for
water distribution systems to overcome current practices that oversimplify the
effects of near-surface geologic conditions. Accounting for site effects and
uncertainty can reduce damage and service losses and improve post-event rapid
damage assessments. The educational impacts include reshaping students’ training
in data analytics and uncertainty quantification, while the main outreach impact
is the launch of the first Earthquake Engineering and Seismology Community
Alliance in Latin America (E2SCALA).

The goals of this CAREER grant are to (1) advance scientific knowledge
underlying multiscale assessments of site response and incorporate it into
system-level probabilistic seismic hazard analysis for water distribution
systems, and (2) improve retention strategies for and broaden participation of
women and Latin American students in STEM fields. Numerical modeling, geospatial
analytics and uncertainty quantification will be used. A new conditional site
response model capable of adapting to and integrating all available subsurface
data and the associated uncertainties will be formulated. The influence of
spatially variable site effects on spatial correlations among ground motion
intensity measures will be quantified, as well as azimuth-dependencies in site
response. An improved system-level probabilistic approach that incorporates
local site effects only at critical locations of the system will be created, and
ergodicity will be assumed elsewhere for computational efficiency. The improved
probabilistic approach will be implemented in three case studies of water
distribution systems. "Escala" means "to climb" and also "to scale" in Spanish
and those are key drivers of this CAREER project. E2SCALA will provide open
access to educational resources (in English and Spanish), multi-tiered virtual
mentorship, and collaboration opportunities to Latin American students at
partner academic institutions; helping students reach their highest potential
(to climb), while building a network that grows with their community goals (to
scale up).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.