* 2145895
* CAREER: Additively Manufactured Nanomaterial Layers with Submicron  Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kenan Song, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 03/31/2027
* USD 655,000.00

Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, is the process of joining materials to
make objects from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, instead of
conventional manufacturing technologies with subtractive features and a longer
lead time. As a revolutionary technology, additive manufacturing significantly
improves logistics, quickly enables new products and increases material
readiness, critical to bringing manufacturing back to the U.S. However, there
are many challenges to 3D printing. For example, one significant difficulty
stemming from most 3D printing principles is precisely controlling structural
orders (e.g., patterned dots, lines, pillars) when manufacturing multiple
materials at small scales (e.g., nanomanufacturing in the semiconductor
industry). This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support the
research needed to develop a new additive manufacturing method that can
precisely process a diversity of materials. The new manufacturing platform will
enable layer-by-layer nanomaterial deposition at desired locations with optional
polymers or nanoparticles. The multidisciplinary study includes research in
polymer science, nanoparticle synthesis, and interfacial engineering. As a
result, the newly-enabled composites could have broad applications in sensors,
actuators, soft robotics, supercapacitors, batteries, and regenerative medicine.
By involving female and underrepresented minority students in teaching,
research, and international collaborations, this project will enhance their
education and their representation in an important
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current 3D printing methods rely heavily on
external fields (e.g., electrical, magnetic, and acoustic assistance) to
precisely place nanoparticles at desired locations and control their long-range
orders. However, these 3D printing platforms mandate nanoparticles to be field-
interactive, and they have manufacturing limitations when highly concentrated
nanoparticles form agglomerations in colloids. This research will advance
fundamental knowledge of a new 3D printing method, Multiphase Direct Ink Writing
(MDIW), to improve additive manufacturing precision and efficiency. MDIW will
enable the deposition of submicron-scale structures without the constraints on
part size and build speeds that are typically present in nanoscale additive
manufacturing. In addition, this research involves studying the fundamentals of
polymer science and nanoparticle engineering to generate new knowledge
concerning a 3D printing method for directed nanoparticle assembly.
Specifically, the research team will develop a new nanomanufacturing mechanism
with layering capabilities, synthesize nanoparticles of controlled dimensions
and with desired surface features, and form patterned surfaces with desired
profiles by manipulating polymer-nanoparticle interactions to create submicron
hierarchical structures. The heterogeneous microstructures generated in the
nanocomposites will possess desirable nanoparticle distributions and
orientations with controlled packing density, enabling the demonstration of
rapidly-prototyped multifunctional sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.