* 2145756
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Leader Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Priscilla Hwang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2027
* USD 578,255.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will support research to investigate the migration of
groups of cells, specifically, how mechanical forces from the external
environment and cellular mechanical forces guide migration. The migration of
groups of cells is necessary for development of many tissues. However, migration
can also be a sign of development abnormalities or disease advancement. For
cells to move together, a unique sub-set of cells, those called the leader
cells, must move to the front. The leader cells receive signals from their
surroundings and send signals to other cells in the group so they can all move
together. However, how leader cells are uniquely able to carry out these
functions is still largely unknown. This research will begin to unravel how
leader cells sense, interpret, and send mechanical signals. This will provide a
more comprehensive understanding of how groups of cells move together. This
research will be complemented by an educational program to recruit and retain
diverse populations of students in STEM. Underrepresented minorities, women, and
first-generation students will be engaged through research, mentoring, and
course development for high school, undergraduate and graduate students. Work
will also be conducted with K-12 teachers in Virginia using inquiry-based
science lessons. The activities will promote STEM awareness to K-12 students
using hands-on experiments based on research findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this research is to understand how leader cells, biomechanical
extracellular matrix (ECM) cues, and cellular mechanics are intertwined to
influence the migration of clusters of cells in a process known as collective
migration. The central hypothesis is that leader cells polarize to the leading
edge through increased protrusive adhesions biased in the direction of the
biomechanical cue, interstitial fluid flow, and cellular generated forces
required to sustain directed collective migration. Using a novel, in vitro, 3D
microphysiological system that can replicate dynamic ECM cues and incorporate
cell clusters to model and induce collective migration, this research will
investigate: 1) how leader cells polarize from within a collective unit to the
front in the direction of interstitial fluid flow, and 2) if leader cells are
mechanically connected and how mechanical forces between leader cells initiate
and sustain collective migration. Understanding how leader cells function and
lead to collective migration will not only expand our understanding of
collective migration driven developmental processes, but also provide a new
perspective for therapy design addressing development abnormalities or disease
progression where leader cell driven collective migration has gone
awry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.