* 2145247
* CAREER: The control of learning rate through multi-timescale cholinergic neuromodulation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Kishore Kuchibhotla, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2027
* USD 349,962.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining how well environmental
cues predict reward or punishment is critical for adaptive behavior. Past
experience is more likely to be useful in stable environments. In humans and
other animals, behavioral evidence suggests that learning rates depend on
environmental uncertainty. In constantly changing environments, when uncertainty
is high, it would be helpful to learn quickly. In stable environments, learning
can be de-prioritized and instead humans and other animals can exploit their
learned knowledge. This rate of learning can be formalized as a ‘learning rate’
and the computational theory of reinforcement learning (RL) aims to explain such
learning processes. The proposal will test the role cholinergic neuromodulation,
a deep-brain region implicated in a wide array of neurological disorders
including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), in setting the learning rate during
behavioral tasks. The research within this proposal is complemented with an
integrated set of educational goals. A methods workshop on the optical tools
that are revolutionizing neuroscience will be developed to augment an ongoing
introductory neuroscience course. This workshop, for twenty students in the
research track, will introduce students to optical and molecular tools. In
addition, this proposal will build on the Psychological and Brain Sciences
department’s goal to promote historically excluded identities through its Early
Career Colloquium (ECC). A ‘Neuromodulation of Brain Circuits’ ECC segment will
be launched with diverse speakers (4-6 trainees from outside JHU, 2-3 trainees
within JHU and 1 keynote faculty talk) and networking events, to build a
community of diverse scholars in neuromodulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will use quantitative behavior in mouse models and theoretical
modeling to predict metalearning and then combine two-color, two-photon imaging,
chemogenetics, and projection-specific optogenetics to isolate the roles of
cholinergic and noradrenergic neuromodulation in setting biological learning
rates. The proposal argues that the neural controller of a dynamic learning rate
would benefit from three attributes: (1) encode environmental cues, (2)
dynamically reflect uncertainty in the environment (i.e., high when uncertain,
low when stable), and (3) modulate circuits involved in stimulus-action
learning. Preliminary data show that neuromodulation of auditory cortex meets
all three criteria. Cholinergic basal forebrain (CBF) axons in auditory cortex
exhibit phasic, stimulus-evoked responses to auditory cues (1) that depend on
preceding CBF axon activity, such that early in learning—when uncertainty is
high—CBF axons ramp up their ability to discriminate the two auditory cues, and
later in learning—when uncertainty is low—this discriminative signal fades (2).
This CBF signal precedes cortical plasticity in a region critical for audiomotor
learning (3). These data support a core hypothesis: tonic and phasic CBF
signaling dynamically set the rate of cortical plasticity critical for
sensorimotor learning. To test this idea, the proposal will isolate phasic,
auditory input to the CBF to gain control of this signal (Goal 1), use model-
based predictions to test whether CBF axon activity tracks a learning rate
parameter in discrimination and reversal learning (Goal 2), and causally
manipulate CBF signaling during discrimination and reversal learning and examine
learning rate (Goal 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.