* 2145373
* CAREER: Tuning Topology and Strong Correlations for the Next Generation of Topological Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Shuolong Yang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2027
* USD 383,301.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretically predicted quantum matter – a topological
superconductor – not only conducts electricity with zero resistance but also
protects its innate quantum properties from material imperfections.
Experimentally realizing this new material is key to enabling future fault-
tolerant quantum computers which can outperform classical computers by orders-
of-magnitude. Yet, the existence of such materials remains elusive. This project
supported by the Condensed Matter Physics program in the Division of Materials
Research utilizes atomic-level layer-by-layer construction to fabricate new
generations of topological superconductors, and performs advanced material
characterizations to establish the evidence for this new state of matter. This
project provides a substantial step forward to realize topological
superconductors at temperatures achievable by industrial cryogenics. It can have
profound impacts in not only condensed matter physics but also broadly in
quantum science and engineering: new quantum computing architectures and
protocols can be built on top of this material discovery. The research effort is
integrated with an education and outreach theme “Immersive Quantum Material
Education” to train students at graduate, undergraduate, and high-school levels.
The research results are disseminated through dedicated activities such as the
“UChicago Quantum Quickstart” workshop for 9th-to-11th grade students with
demonstrated 34% participation from under-represented minority groups. Graduate
students trained through this project can advance their careers in academia or
in the emerging quantum engineering industry, forming the workforce for the
future and ensuring the American leadership in both quantum sciences and quantum
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological superconductors are a new class of
superconductors predicted to enable fault-tolerant quantum computing. Current
material platforms for putative topological superconductors are based on
heterostructures of conventional superconductors and semiconductors, and require
sophisticated engineering only to work at temperatures below 1 Kelvin. Yet, the
conclusive test of topological superconductivity remains elusive. The goals of
this project are three-fold: 1) performing atomic-level structural tuning of
FeTeSe/oxides to optimize the topological electronic properties using molecular
beam epitaxy; 2) performing femtosecond dynamical tuning of FeTeSe/oxides to
reveal the relationship between topology and electron-electron interactions
using time-resolved photoemission; 3) testing non-Abelian anyon statistics by
fabricating topological quantum devices using molecular beam epitaxy with shadow
masks. This project can substantially advance the field of topological materials
by addressing the urgent questions on the existence and optimization of
topological superconductors, and provide transformative insights into the
relationship between topological superconductivity and strong electron-electron
interactions. In the education and outreach theme “Immersive Quantum Material
Education,” the principal investigator engages with students at all levels on
the cutting-edge research on topological materials. Workshops such as the
“MASTER Summer School” for undergraduate students and “Certificate in Quantum
Engineering and Technology” for industrial workers promote awareness among the
public on topological superconductivity, benefiting students from under-
represented minority groups. The educational effort establishes the principal
investigator’s laboratory as an anchor to facilitate general education on
quantum science and engineering in South Side Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.