* 2145852
* CAREER: Mechanisms Controlling Signaling Reactions on Membranes through Molecular Assembly at Multiple Length Scales
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* YOUNGKWANG LEE, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2027
* USD 338,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells rely on sophisticated
biochemical reactions to signal the initiation of essential functions.
Understanding the controls that ensure that these biochemical reactions occur in
the right place at the right time is fundamental. In many cases, the signaling
is carried out by proteins that interact and assemble into functional complexes
at the membrane surface. However, our understanding of these processes is
limited. The Lee lab uses a combination of biochemistry and biophysical
techniques to unveil how molecular assembly modulates biochemical reactions. The
proposed research has significant and broad implications, from advancing our
fundamental knowledge of numerous biological processes to improving therapeutic
strategies for disease. Integral to this research is an education and broader
impacts program that provides authentic science learning experiences to
students, including those from historically underrepresented minority groups.
The planned activities include (1) developing smartphone optical microscopes for
implementing course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) that tackle
real-world problems, (2) providing personalized research mentorships for
undergraduate students, and (3) collaborating with area science teachers to
develop science laboratory materials and curriculum for students in high-needs
schools in San Diego County and beyond. American Rescue Plan funding is used to
support this early career investigator at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein assembly, such as dimerization, clustering,
and micro/macroscopic phase separation appears to enhance sensitivity and
specificity in noisy cellular environments. However, much remains to be
understood about how these processes alter the structure and function of
proteins to produce the desired signaling outcome. This project focuses on Raf
kinases, major signaling proteins in eukaryotic cells. The central hypothesis is
that activation of Raf is regulated by different modes of molecular assembly at
membrane surfaces. To test this hypothesis, the Lee lab will reconstitute Raf
signaling on a supported lipid bilayer and manipulate molecular assembly at
multiple length scales, from structurally well-defined complex formation to
macroscopic liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of proteins. Single-molecule
fluorescence microscopy and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy will be used
to quantify membrane binding, molecular diffusion, enzymatic activity, and
conformational dynamics. The research will provide new insights into how
cytosolic signaling molecules utilize multiscale molecular assembly to define
specificity and sensitivity of biochemical reactions at the membrane surfaces.
As protein assembly is a recurring and emerging theme in signal transduction,
the experimental approach and theoretical framework developed in this project
can be readily adapted to other membrane signaling
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was funding jointly by the Molecular
Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function Programs of
MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.