* 2145759
* CAREER: Unraveling Mechanisms of Mechanical Degeneration in Elastin
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Anna Tarakanova, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2027
* USD 600,074.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research to understand complex changes to elastin that occur in aging and
disease. Elastin is a key structural protein that gives biological tissues their
elasticity. For example, skin, lungs, and arteries can stretch and relax thanks
to elastin. During aging or disease, problems with elastin can cause tissue
degeneration, which inhibits normal function. This is a challenging problem to
study because the physiochemical stressors that can lead to degeneration are
linked together. Many of these stressors occur at the nanoscale. This gap in
knowledge prevents new therapies from being developed. The objective of this
research program is to pioneer novel nanoscale insight into mechanical
degeneration of elastic tissues. Specifically, this work will use a computer
modeling framework, which will be calibrated from measured experimental results.
Understanding the various sources of damage to elastin may facilitate new
therapies aimed at maintaining biomechanical function of elastic tissues to
prevent or delay complications in aging and disease. The research program will
also engage and support undergraduate and graduate students, especially from
underrepresented groups, through diverse research experiences and the Women in
STEM Frontiers in Research Expo. This will lead to a new interdisciplinary
curriculum and promote a new local network of computational
biophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will establish a new
high-fidelity modeling framework for healthy and degenerated elastin as a tool
to resolve the impacts of pathological physicochemical stressors on mechanics at
the nanoscale and identify specific drivers to the loss of mechanical function
of elastic tissues. The PI’s recent development of the first all-atom model of
the elastin precursor tropoelastin lays a foundation for systematically probing
deleterious stimuli independently and in combination. This research will
establish a multiscale digital twin of healthy and degenerated elastin to
elucidate how key physicochemical stressors, – specifically glycation and non-
enzymatic crosslinking, ectopic calcification, enzymatic proteolysis, oxidative
damage, racemization, lipid peroxidation, and carbamylation – contribute to
structural change, impact mechanical function independently and cooperatively,
and disrupt tightly coupled hydration water dynamics with unstructured elastin.
This work will provide: 1) validated computational tools to characterize the
multiscale structure and mechanical response of elastin, with applications to
other heterogeneous, hierarchical disordered molecular systems; 2) fundamental
insight into the role of hydration water in such systems; 3) mechanistic
understanding of likely specific paths to loss of function in elastin during
aging and disease; and 4) an educational program to engage and retain diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.