* 2145277
* CAREER: Re-Thinking the Perception-Action Paradigm for Agile Autonomous Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Giuseppe Loianno, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Autonomous robots will become pervasive in our society and will solve complex
tasks, actively collaborating with each other and with humans. As the recent
COVID-19 outbreak has highlighted, autonomous robots can solve a range of time-
sensitive problems including logistics, reconnaissance, and disinfection of
critical areas. Beyond pandemic, small-scale robots can help humans in complex
or dangerous tasks such as search and rescue, security, and surveillance, and,
thanks to their lighter weight, they pose only a modest risk to human safety.
These time-sensitive tasks require robots to make fast decisions and agile
maneuvers in complex and dynamic environments. State-of-the-art autonomous
navigation approaches, while mature, are slow and brittle and prevent robust and
resilient agile navigation. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program studies the fundamental perception-action problem for agile navigation
of autonomous robots in complex environments by planning a novel, low-latency,
robust, adaptive, safe, and resilient paradigm. This project aims also to
educate students on the technical aspects, societal benefits, and ethical use of
autonomous systems by establishing a unique multi-disciplinary, and inclusive
research and educational platform which includes a core curriculum on robot
localization and navigation, and a series of online racing hackathons for a
post-pandemic customized and inclusive research and educational experience.
These will contribute to lowering the barrier to participation in research and
education for students, particularly underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a new foundational
theory, which includes models and algorithms resulting from a principled
combination of perception, learning, and control to holistically design visual
perception and action to create small-scale agile autonomous robots. The goal is
to capture the strict cross–coupling effects between perception and action to
jointly and concurrently resolve the perception-action problem to speed up the
robots’ decision making process and increase their agility. The project is
organized in three thrusts according to a series of objectives, culminating in
innovations in robotics autonomy research and education. A compressed and
unified representation of the perception and action spaces guarantees to reduce
the robot's inference latency and naturally reveals the cross-coupling effects
among them. Next, the robot will exploit using this representation its action-
predictive information to enhance its inference capabilities and will employ an
optimal control/planning approach to maximize its perception accuracy and
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.