* 2145688
* CAREER: Backyard Evolution across a Seasonal Metapopulation in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Alan Bergland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,066,257.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further our
understanding of how evolution happens when the environment varies in space and
time, which can drive rapid adaptation. Fruit fly species (Drosophila) living in
temperate habitats are premier systems to understand adaptation to fluctuating
selection. This project will explore natural selection in various fruit fly
species living in rotting fruit in orchards and inhabiting compost piles, and
answer the following questions: (1) Do these populations adapt to this
environmental variation? (2) Does rapid adaptation to variation in time maintain
genetic variation in populations? (3) What are the consequences of winter-driven
mortality on seasonal adaptation? This project will support a Citizen Science
effort to sample fruit flies across the growing season in the state of Virginia.
These samples will be used for DNA sequencing and will be added to the largest
data repository of fly genetic variation in the world containing sequences from
multiple continents sampled over decades. This project will also support the
development of a research-intensive educational pipeline that incorporates
course-based undergraduate research, restructuring of the genetics curriculum at
the University of Virginia, and will facilitate collaborations with a local
community college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will examine patterns of
allele frequency genome-wide in multiple Drosophila species in order to study
adaptive evolutionary change in response to seasonal fluctuations in selection
pressure. This work will first assess if seasonal adaptation is a general
feature of drosophilid populations by performing pooled re-sequencing of six
drosophilid species collected at multiple points in the growing season over
seven years. Pooled re-sequencing data will be analyzed to assess allele
frequency change through time, and to identify targets of seasonally varying
selection. Next, this work will test if temporally fluctuating selection varies
across habitat type (compost piles vs. orchard) and whether flies are locally
adapted to either habitat type. To further examine the dynamics of local
adaptation to either compost piles or orchards, this project will re-sequence
genomes of individual flies from two species, D. melanogaster and D. simulans.
These data will be used to identify genomic regions that are strongly
differentiated between habitats. Genomic analysis will be coupled with extensive
phenotyping of these two species to test hypotheses about phenotypic
differentiation between habitat types. Lastly, this work will focus on studying
the overwintering dynamics of drosophilid flies and will test whether
overwintering bottlenecks significantly affect allele frequencies due to genetic
drift. These analyses will be combined with outdoor experimental mesocosms to
replicate adaptive evolutionary change due to seasonality as well as drift due
to overwintering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.