* 2145049
* CAREER: Co-designing a Service Exchange Model for Sustaining Community-based Respite Care
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Patrick Shih, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2027
* USD 449,506.00

This project will lead to a novel understanding of effective online service
exchange mechanisms for facilitating respite care among underserved and
vulnerable populations. Respite care can provide a chance for primary caregivers
to take a break from their long-term caregiving work for sick or disabled family
members, as well as encourage them to engage in workforce participation. Despite
its beneficial aspects, there are barriers such as financial, technical, skill-
based, and social inhibitions to receiving and providing respite care. This
research will investigate the sociotechnical factors that are crucial for
developing an affordable and accessible respite care service exchange platform
that leverages the shared caregiving needs within a local community. Findings
will result in the development of a service exchange platform that facilitates
respite care service matching, coordination, and ongoing care support for people
with disabilities and chronic conditions. The integrated research and education
plan is to conduct social media outreach, revamp undergraduate and graduate
level courses to promote awareness of gender disparities in caregiver burden,
connect caregivers to community resources, provide respite care skill
development, and offer online training and best practices guidelines on
technology use, care management, and care transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will advance the design of affordable and accessible community-based
respite care service exchange platforms. Three sets of activities will
contribute to our understanding of design and usage of sociotechnical systems
that aim to facilitate respite care service exchanges, reciprocity, skill
development, and access for participants with limited computer skills. First,
the research will assess the barriers and facilitators that lead to community-
based respite care, through interviews of care recipients, primary caregivers,
secondary caregivers, and respite caregivers, followed by co-design workshops
with these stakeholder groups. Second, a service exchange platform prototype
will be developed to address the respite care needs in underserved and
vulnerable communities, involving iterative user-centered design and usability
testing. Third, a 12-week pilot study will evaluate the feasibility and
preliminary effectiveness of the respite care service exchange platform on
reducing caregiver burden, facilitating perceived trust, and improving care
quality of patients, primary caregivers, and respite caregivers during
caregiving and care transition. This study will provide preliminary evidence as
to whether a community-based respite care network can have an impact on
alleviating the persistent problem of caregiver
burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.