* 2145063
* CAREER: Time-Synchronized Estimation in Power Systems: Unique Challenges and Innovative Solutions
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Anamitra Pal, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Over the next two decades, the need for high-speed, high-precision monitoring,
protection, and control of the electric power infrastructure will increase
considerably as more renewable energy resources are added, electric vehicles
become abundant, and frequency and intensity of extreme weather events rise.
Time-synchronized measurements can satisfy this need and ensure resilience of
this critical infrastructure only if the fundamental concerns regarding limited
sensor coverage, lack of data and model interpretability, and heavy online
computational burden are successfully addressed. This NSF CAREER project aims to
alleviate these concerns by combining recent advances in robust statistics and
machine learning to enable accurate and fast time-synchronized estimation in
power systems. The project will bring transformative change by bridging the gap
between physics-based and data-driven modeling and ensuring creation of
algorithms that adapt to the needs of the data and not vice-versa. The
intellectual merits of the project lie in creating new mathematical techniques
in convex programming, interval-theoretic learning, and distributed
optimization. The broader impacts of the project include engaging high school
students in intellectually stimulating yet fun problem-solving projects that
will expose them to STEM concepts as well as creating a power system workforce
that is knowledgeable about data-driven methods in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore a new
class of optimization problems that are fundamental to time-synchronized
parameter, tracking, and dynamic estimation, respectively, in power systems. The
proposed research will make new discoveries in two areas: (1) Linear estimation:
by creating robust techniques that account for unknown noise characteristics
and/or bounded perturbations in both dependent and independent variables. (2)
Severely ill-structured estimation: by producing fast, valid, physics-compliant
solutions using Bayesian inference and machine learning for problems in which
classical methods fail to provide a consistent answer. The methodological and
theoretical outcomes of this project achieved through the cross-pollination of
ideas from power systems, data science, information theory, and statistics, will
significantly boost the use of time-synchronized measurements for operational
decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.