* 2145051
* CAREER: Promoting Equal Opportunities through Measurement, Simulation, and Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Kenneth Joseph, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2027
* USD 108,861.00

This research will advance our ability to draw on large-scale data from online
social media to understand attitudes towards racial inequality in the United
States and their correlations with critical dimensions of social structure.
While a large literature has studied racial bias on social media, there has been
little research on what social media users believe about the existence and
causes of racial inequality. While much is understood about these beliefs in the
social sciences, this project will develop new methods to measure these beliefs
at an unprecedented scale, allowing a new understanding of the distribution of
racial ideologies and their correlates with place, identity, and network
structure. The long-term research goal is to expand knowledge on how
computational methods can be constructively used alongside social theory and
large datasets to help address social inequality. This work will include the
development and release of tools that will allow qualitative scholars to
leverage similar data without expertise in machine learning. In addition, this
proposal aims to advance computer science education via the development of new
curriculum and opportunities for undergraduate research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project has four fundamental research objectives. First, it will
develop novel mixed methods approaches that combine modern graph-based and
natural language machine learning methods with qualitative analysis to identify
dominant beliefs about racial inequality expressed in large datasets from
Twitter and Parler. Second, it will collect and analyze an innovative new
dataset linking social media and survey data on attitudes about racial
inequality, providing insight into discrepancies between these two sources of
measurement. Third, it will combine measurements of social media users' views on
racial inequality with data on where they live and the structure of their social
networks to study how place, identity, and network structure are correlated with
racial ideology. Fourth, it will develop a novel agent-based simulation
framework that combines empirical findings with contemporary theory on racial
inequality, that can be used to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of
different proposed interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.