* 2145791
* CAREER: Advancing the Mechanistic Understanding of Naphthopyran Mechanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Maxwell Robb, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 02/28/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
and Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) programs in the
Division of Chemistry, Maxwell J. Robb of the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech) is advancing the understanding of the chemical reactivity of
mechanophores embedded within long chain macromolecules or polymers.
Mechanophores are organic compounds that undergo chemical transformations in
response to external mechanical force. When incorporated into polymer chains,
they can act as sensors and provide valuable information about the behavior of
polymers under stress. This characteristic of mechanophores is important in
guiding future design of stimuli-responsive polymers with applications in a
variety of areas including adhesives, sensors, drug delivery, and
sustainability. In this research, experimental and computational techniques will
be used to systematically study the chemistry of mechanophores that change color
when exposed to stress. Reactivity will be analyzed and correlated with the
chemical structure of the mechanophore to understand and control response when
exposed to external stress. The synthesized molecules will be incorporated into
polymers to design unique responsive materials that change color under stress.
Several educational initiatives will be integrated with the research to broaden
participation and enable training of undergraduate and graduate students in
polymer chemistry, as well as physical and synthetic organic chemistry. Summer
research experiences will support the scientific development of undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups majoring in chemistry. In addition, a
hands-on polymer mechanochemistry module will be integrated into K-12 outreach
programs in collaboration with the Center for Learning, Teaching, and Outreach
at Caltech. This activity will engage numerous members of the Pasadena community
each year and introduce important concepts related to polymers and materials
chemistry. Lastly, a webinar series will be developed to educate students about
the different career paths available in chemistry to help to build the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the
development of an improved mechanistic understanding of the mechanochemical
reactivity of naphthopyran mechanophores. Comprehensive mechanistic and activity
studies will be performed to determine the effect of substituents on the
mechanochemical ring-opening reaction of naphthopyran by establishing linear
free energy relationships. These studies will be complemented by computation to
provide detailed insights into the mechanism of merocyanine formation under
force. Additionally, the Robb team will work toward developing a detailed
understanding of force-coupled merocyanine isomerization, which is a critical
component of naphthopyran mechanochemistry. An improved fundamental
understanding of structure-reactivity relationships in these systems would serve
to guide the development of bis-naphthopyran mechanophores that achieve distinct
ring-opening reactions under varying mechanical loads in polymers, leading to
different merocyanine states with uniquely coupled visual responses. This
project has the potential to advance knowledge of mechanochemical reactivity and
empower innovation in the rapidly expanding field of polymer mechanochemistry
and in related cross-cutting disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.