* 2145253
* CAREER: Novel Data-Based Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of Solar Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Satoshi Inoue, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 01/31/2027
* USD 320,552.00

Solar eruptions, including solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs), can
lead to streams of relativistic particles and enhancements in magnetic field
strengths. They are a major source of space weather experienced on Earth, which
can disrupt satellite operations, communications systems, and lead to power grid
outages. This project uses observational data sets along with
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations to understand the processes that trigger
and drive solar eruptions. The broader impacts of the project include expanding
the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) Center for Solar Terrestrial
Research to support modeling efforts from a new faculty hire, a female senior
research professor, and growing the group with students and post-docs from
under-represented groups. The Principal Investigator (PI) will develop and teach
a new data-based graduate level numerical simulation course and a summer school
for modeling astrophysical fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project conducts
data-based MHD simulations using parameters for the coronal magnetic field
derived from advanced extrapolation methods or data-driven MHD simulations as
initial conditions. The observed photospheric flow field, derived by the
differential affine velocity estimator for vector magnetograms (DAVE4VM) method
with high-resolution photospheric magnetogram data obtained from the Goode Solar
Telescope (GST), will be adopted as driving boundary conditions. The novelty of
the research is that it investigates the CME initiation process from the new
perspective of the nonlinear evolution of the magnetic flux rope being
accelerated by a torus instability, starting from the initiation process of
solar flares. The research aims to clarify the following scientific questions:
(1) how does the magnetic field, as driven by the photospheric motions, become
unstable and run into eruption? (2) How does the magnetic flux rope form and
evolve toward torus instability? (3) Eventually, how does it grow into a CME
after being accelerated by the torus instability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.