* 2145174
* CAREER: Tuning Complexity in Rare-Earth Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Katharine Page, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2027
* USD 294,342.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials called “complex oxides” are essential for
technologies such as cell phone batteries, capacitors in all kinds of electronic
devices, and catalysts that clean up industrial pollutants. These materials
contain oxygen and two or more types of metal ions. This configuration allows
for highly variable composition (which ions are present) and structure (how the
ions are arranged), which can be harnessed to improve the technologies that rely
on these families of compounds. With this CAREER award, Professor Katharine Page
at the University of Tennessee Knoxville will study “High Entropy Oxides” (HEOs)
that contain five or more ions of rare-earth elements or transition metals,
which can provide an extremely vast array of compositions and structures. By
using novel techniques to uncover and influence how the various HEO atoms
interact, this research will reveal how to combine multiple desirable physical
properties into a single material. These insights will lead to more efficient,
more powerful, and more diverse fuel cells, catalysts, sensors, and electronics.
Additionally, this project will produce a middle school workshop series that
will promote careers in materials chemistry and related fields through hands-on
activities that celebrate the creative exploration process of materials
engineering and crystallography. Professors, graduate students, and undergrads
involved in the research will teach and mentor participants in the workshop
series at economically disadvantaged schools in rural East Tennessee and
Appalachian communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER award, Professor Katharine Page
at the University of Tennessee Knoxville aims to uncover the rules for enabling
hierarchical and tailored design in pyrochlore and layered perovskite-based rare
earth transition metal complex oxide families featuring two to five atom types
per lattice site. Relatively little is currently known about the classifications
separating traditional complex oxide phases from the emerging class of High
Entropy Oxides (materials involving five or more ions per lattice site),
including the extent to which new design paradigms are needed to understand and
control their physical properties. High entropy and kinetic reaction controls
will be examined for their potential to produce single-phase materials and
specific crystal-chemical conditions in the pyrochlore family, seeking to
improve ionic conductivity at lower working temperature for potential
applications in solid oxide fuel cells and catalysts. Similar approaches will
seek to tune magnetic, electronic, and multiferroic responses in the layered
perovskite family. Sophisticated scattering probes, theoretical tools, and
multi-modal modeling methods will be combined to evaluate the impact of local to
long-range structure traits on the electronic and magnetic properties of the
respective series. The extent to which specific defects, distortions, and
chemical short-range order may be achieved and tuned to impact the stability and
respective properties of the structural classes will be determined. This
fundamental materials chemistry approach will lead to the foundational insights
necessary to design HEO materials with desired combinations of traits.
Relationships governing the stability, local to global symmetry, and overall
tunability in HEOs emerging from this work will impact the broader exploration
of complex oxide chemistries unfolding across multiple disciplines and
applications. Concurrently, this project will promote a new generation of
scientists through outreach, teaching, and mentoring activities that celebrate
the creative exploration process of materials chemistry and crystallography
approaches as part of a workshop series for traditionally marginalized groups at
economically disadvantaged middle schools in rural East Tennessee and
Appalachian communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.