* 2145022
* CAREER: Phase Control in Synthetic Two-Dimensional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Zakaria Al Balushi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2027
* USD 597,821.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports the research into
new electronic materials which can operate in new modalities potentially
circumventing the bottleneck of speed and energy consumption in logic and memory
devices used in computing. Next generation computing and communications are
essential for the continued economic prosperity of the United States.
Metalorganic chemical vapor deposition is a scalable manufacturing process for
the precision synthesis of thin films for microelectronics. While widely used
for optical and electronic devices, this manufacturing process is not well-
developed for the synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides.
This research will develop the knowledge needed to provide control over the
detailed atomic arrangement of the atoms in these two-dimensional materials on
an industrial scale, required for the incorporation of these materials into
advanced electronic systems. These materials exhibit two dominant atomic
arrangements which are referred to as the polytype or phase. The specific phase
dictates the physical properties of the material and potentially could be
selected for use in the formation of components necessary to address the
voltage, interconnect, and dimensional scaling issues in current and future
microelectronics. This award supports innovation in manufacturing through basic
research and technology development of metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
that will lead to precision in the selection of the desired material phase
during synthesis. Achieving phase-sensitive process control will pave the way to
realize new high speed and low energy consuming microelectronic devices. This
research program provides educational activities aimed at developing the next
generation of material processing graduates and the future leaders in
microelectronic materials in the United States. Outreach activities to increase
the diversification of the workforce in advanced materials manufacturing will be
pursued by improving the transfer pathway of students from community colleges to
4-year university Materials Science and Engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program investigates an advanced
manufacturing approach to achieve phase selectivity and control during the
epitaxial growth of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide materials by
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition. This research program will specifically
study the non-equilibrium growth of these materials using steady-state light
illumination: (i) to manipulate the population of free carriers during synthesis
and thus the formation energy of point defects; (ii) to influence the surface
kinetics of mobile species and thus the phase equilibria of these materials; and
(iii) to change the chemical trajectory as well as reaction pathways that will
ultimately impact which polymorph phase is stabilized during growth. The
research program will provide a detailed understanding of the underlying
mechanisms that govern the phase selectivity during epitaxial growth. These two-
dimensional materials could be used in reconfigurable, electrically tunable, low
energy and low voltage switching devices based on phase transformation between
the different polytypes. This research program will develop real-time, in situ
optical diagnostics of the materials synthesis process to characterize and track
the evolution of individual phases during synthesis. The information from the
initial materials system can be used to understand the complex chemical
processes present throughout the synthesis of other two-dimensional materials
under non-equilibrium conditions. A particular phase of interest could be
selectively produced for integration into a variety of microelectronic logic and
memory designs. This research program will advance the critical understanding of
the thermodynamic and kinetic energy barriers for phase transformation in two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide materials and provide insights into
the engineering of these energy barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.