* 2145242
* CAREER: Logical Reasoning of Networks with Partial Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Anduo Wang, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2027
* USD 210,757.00

Logical reasoning has made tremendous progress in computer networks in the past
decade, assuring desirable behaviors of various types on many different
networks. Such achievement relies on an important assumption: the reasoning
process on an entirely known network always reaches a decisive conclusion. But
the sheer size and complexity of modern networks make it hard, if not
impossible, to obtain complete knowledge of the target network, and even when
some knowledge is missing, it is still desirable to perform some (perhaps
weaker) reasoning. This project challenges the assumption that logical reasoning
must be complete and develops techniques for networks only partly
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve logical reasoning of networks with
uncertain events and limited visibility, this project plans to develop (1) loss-
less modeling in which network uncertainty is explicitly handled without
corrupting the querying capability; and (2) complete verification relative to
the level of information available, which reaches an inconclusive result only
when more information is needed. A realization of this vision is built around
knowledge representation and partial reasoning, resulting in a simple yet
powerful logical language for uncertain and missing information, enabling a rich
set of semantics-based manipulation of partial networks by partial evaluation,
program containment, predicate instantiation, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
step towards logical reasoning of real-world networks in which an omniscient
view is unlikely and partial reasoning is most sought-after, this project plays
a unique role in the continued growth and evolution of computer networks.
Simultaneously, the hyper-scale of networks as a driving challenge engages the
knowledge reasoning community to revise and advance earlier complexity results,
producing a more compelling use in networking. By leveraging the connection
between the incomplete knowledge representation in this project and the
numerical methods of inductive reasoning, this project may also facilitate
future development of probabilistic reasoning for quantitative network
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website https://ravel-net.org/ will
be maintained to disseminate the progress of the project. Supporting tools will
be made open-source; source code will also be available on the github server
https://github.com/ravel-net with online documentation to facilitate independent
validation and reuse; networking traces, benchmarks, and real-world dataset will
be collected and made public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.