* 2145640
* CAREER: Knowledge-enhanced and interpretable radiology report generation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Yifan Peng, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 597,031.00

The radiology report is the primary mean of communication between radiologists
and referring physicians, and which also serve as a legal document. To date,
many studies have demonstrated the feasibility of using deep learning to
automatically generate radiology reports from chest x-rays. However, existing
approaches utilize only current chest x-ray images and do not consider
historical images, associated electronic health records (EHRs), and domain-
specific prior knowledge. Therefore, the current computer-generated reports are
far from accurate and complete. To bridge this gap, there is a critical need to
study new report generation techniques to handle large-scale, real-world
healthcare data. This project will employ novel informatics and data science
techniques to automatically generate clinical reports to improve workflow
efficiency and improve healthcare outcomes. From the perspectives of biomedical
informatics, our approach will leverage the wealth of information from EHR to
profoundly understand the role of natural language, image analysis, and deep
learning in report generation. From the perspective of clinical translation,
this project will facilitate radiologists’ workflow, improve clinical accuracy
and efficiency, and enhance decision-making. Additionally, the project will
closely integrate research with education, by launching a new graduate Natural
Language Processing and Health course and supporting several capstone and
specialization projects. It will also broaden the outreach from the
investigators to non-computer-science graduate students, who will be exposed to
working principles of NLP through our extensive collaborative efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and validate a framework to
automatically generate radiology reports using longitudinal, multimodal EHR data
and domain knowledge. The investigator will attain the overall objective by
pursuing four aims. First, the project will build a memory-enhanced report
generation system to handle longitudinal chest x-rays and reports. Second, the
project will build a radiology-specific knowledge graph from multimodal EHR and
inject it into the report generation framework. We will employ a novel approach
to construct such radiology-specific knowledge graph, by modeling heterogeneous
multi-dimensional EHR data in our model. Third, we will create a new rationale-
based model that supports rationale-base interpretabilityFinally, the project
will build and evaluate a prototype user-centered reporting system with a user-
friendly graphic user interface. The new reporting system will enhance
communication between radiologists and referral physicians, particularly in
large and heterogeneous EHR. The proposed research is creative and original
because it represents a step towards building automatic systems with a higher-
level understanding of radiology knowledge and decision-making. It is expected
to open research horizons and employ techniques and theories from data science
to support next-generation medical diagnostic reasoning from chest x-rays and
structured EHR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.