* 2145906
* CAREER: A Novel Twist in Nature; Proteins with a Pierced Lasso Topology
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Ellinor Haglund, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2027
* USD 670,600.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
Ellinor Haglund from the University of Hawaii is investigating a newly
identified protein structure called the Pierced Lasso Topology (PLT). Proteins
are sometimes called the “workhorses” in biology because they catalytically
mediate the majority of chemical functions in a living cell. The breadth of
these functions depends on the variety of three-dimensional shapes adopted by
the chain of amino acids that make up proteins. The trace of a protein chain
through space is called its topology. In a PLT, one end of the amino acid chain
threads through a loop or lasso that is formed somewhere along the chain. This
topology is similar to that of a simple overhand knot of a string or a rope. The
chemical bond that forms the lasso can be made or broken, depending on the
chemical environment of the system, and thus acts like an on/off switch for
biological activity. Dr. Haglund will combine theoretical and biochemical
studies with genetic experiments using fruit flies in order to investigate how
PLTs can act as molecular switches to control biological activity through
changes in the environment within cells. This project will be integrated with an
outreach program to teach students and non-scientists how topologies seen in
biology are connected with the topology of knots found in everyday life and in
Polynesian culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to unravel
functional insight for proteins with complex topologies, i.e., proteins with a
pierced lasso topology (PLT). PLTs are threaded “knot-like” topologies wherein
part of the chain pierces through a covalent loop. Interestingly, PLTs have been
found to exist in 18% of all disulfide-containing proteins. Despite this large
number, a connection between topology and biological function has not yet been
established. As the first research group explicitly focusing on PLTs, the
Haglund group will use biochemistry, cell biology, and biophysics tools to
investigate functional consequences of disulfide chemistry in vivo and the
possible role of disulfides as molecular switches to control biological
activity. Molecular dynamics simulations, in vitro, and in vivo physiological
assays using Drosophila melanogaster as a genetic model will be employed to
examine the biological role of PLTs. This project sets out to reveal mechanistic
details of how PLT proteins can fold and thread to reach their biologically
active states. These studies will focus on three selected proteins (leptin,
superoxide dismutase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and the chemokine CXCL5)
that are involved in cell regulation, growth, and cell
migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.