* 2145830
* CAREER: Linking microevolution to macroevolution using a high resolution, long term fossil stickleback dataset
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Yoel Stuart, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/28/2027
* USD 271,551.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Can biologists use current
knowledge of populations and the forces acting on them to help predict long-term
outcomes of evolution? To answer this question, PI Stuart will study 20,000
years of evolution in a fossilized lineage of Three spine Stickleback fish
(Gasterosteus doryssus). Stuart will measure characteristics of the early
population and test whether that information allows one to predict the evolution
observed by the end of the population’s trajectory. Being able to make
predictions about evolution is highly relevant as it relates to pandemic
forecasting, the design of medicines for infectious disease and cancer, as well
as predicting how agriculture and agricultural pests will respond to human
activity. As such, this project has relevance to national health, prosperity,
and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a museum collection of fossil G.
doryssus, Stuart will measure 19 anatomical traits from ~4,500 fish sampled at a
continuity, resolution, and length of time rarely available in studies of living
or extinct species. Because Stuart is observing evolution directly in a single
lineage through time, the ancestral form is known. Thus, Stuart can better ask
about rates of evolutionary change, how selection shaped evolutionary trends,
how ancestral trait correlations constrained evolution, and whether a constraint
itself evolved. This study organism has the added strength of being a
stickleback and part of a family whose evolution, ecology, genetics, and
development have been thoroughly studied in living populations. As such, Stuart
can place observed change in G. doryssus into a broader biological context to
better answer whether macroevolution is microevolution predictably writ
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.