* 2145712
* CAREER: Crystalizing electrons in coupled atomically thin semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* You Zhou, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 231,521.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: The
most commonly known phases of matter are gas, liquid, and solid. Just as vapor
can condense into a crystalline solid, electrons in a semiconductor can self-
arrange into a periodic pattern, a crystal, at low temperatures. Although
predicted more than eight decades ago, such crystallization of electrons is
challenging to realize and observe. This project investigates the formation and
melting of electron solids in two-dimensional (2D) materials that are only a few
atoms thick. Such 2D materials can be stacked together in different combinations
and orientations, which strongly influences how electrons behave. The project
studies ways to promote electron crystallization by controlling the stacking of
coupled 2D semiconductors. The research also develops methods to controllably
melt electron crystals using quantum fluctuations, paving the way for new
devices for quantum computing and communications. An integral part of the
project is to provide high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students with
hands-on research opportunities in leading-edge materials and optics labs. In
collaboration with local high schools and national non-profit organizations, the
project also establishes internship and mentorship programs targeting
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. This project is jointly
funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and the Condensed Matter
Physics (CMP) programs of the Division of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The study of Wigner crystals is critical for
understanding how the competition between electron correlation and quantum
fluctuations gives rise to exotic properties in correlated electron materials.
Recent experiments reported the formation of bilayer Wigner crystals with
significantly enhanced stability when two transition metal dichalcogenide
monolayers are placed close to each other. This project aims to establish new
systems and methods to interrogate the quantum phase transitions of Wigner
crystals to enable a platform for quantum electronic and optoelectronic devices.
By fabricating coupled bilayer heterostructures based on transition metal
dichalcogenides, the project investigates how the atomic structures of the
materials influence the stability of the electron crystals. Central to this
effort is developing quantitative approaches to investigate the lattice
structures and dynamics in the Wigner crystal phase. By exploiting the
electrical control of quantum phase transitions, the project explores novel
correlated phases such as electron glasses. The research activities elucidate
phase competition in many-body quantum systems and paves the way for next-
generation electronic and optical devices. A particular focus of the project is
to broaden the participants from underrepresented groups by collaborating with
local high schools, universities, as well as national non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.