* 2145295
* CAREER: Rethinking Configuration Management for Cloud and Datacenter Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Tianyin Xu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2027
* USD 215,383.00

Configuration management is an integral part of modern cloud/datacenter system
management. Many critical operations update production system configurations
(e.g., performance tuning and feature rollout). Today, large-scale cloud and
Internet services evolve rapidly, with hundreds to thousands of configuration
changes daily. With the high velocity of changes, faulty configuration changes
inevitably become major causes of system failures and service outages, leading
to catastrophic impacts. This project aims to (1) develop novel, practical
technologies to address key problems of existing techniques, and (2) explore
radically new system designs to prevent configuration problems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop scientific foundations, new methodologies,
techniques, and practical tools for cloud system configuration management, based
on four synergistic research thrusts. First, it will establish the foundation of
configuration testing, a key missing piece of configuration management today.
Second, it will develop novel, practical configuration testing techniques to
prevent failure-inducing configuration changes. Third, it will address the key
problems of static configuration validation, the de facto pre-deployment
protection. Fourth, it will explore new configuration designs that enable
systems effectively to repair and recover from faulty configurations and new
interfaces to advance configuration manageability significantly and reduce
misconfigurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be a catalyst for
multidisciplinary research and education on cloud computing, computer systems,
and software engineering at the University of Illinois. It will expand course
offerings by designing new interdisciplinary courses and by enhancing existing
courses. The project is committed to broadening participation in computing and
will engage undergraduate and under-represented students in research. The
project will have major impacts on industry. The configuration technologies in
practice are often insufficient, partially due to a lack of research foundation
and rigorous, systematic techniques. The project’s industry collaboration will
help drive practical solutions and transition them into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be a strong advocate for open
science. It will make the research artifacts openly accessible, reproducible,
and reliable, including software prototypes, datasets, evaluation artifacts and
scripts, and research results. All research artifacts will be actively
maintained throughout the project period and will be accessible after an embargo
period of one year past the conclusion of the project and any extensions. The
project will have an index page (illiconfig.github.io) to help navigate all the
research artifacts and the repositories will be backed up continuously using the
Engineering Information Technology service at the University of
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.