* 2145479
* CAREER:  Discourse Processing and Content Generation for Document Simplification
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Junyi Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2027
* USD 224,650.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simplification is the process of
making a text more accessible to a target audience, e.g., language learners,
children, and individuals with language impairments, while preserving its
meaning and content. The lack of accessible material can exacerbate social
issues, for example, the complexity of language used in college admission and
financial aid applications has contributed to the lagging access to higher
education among emergent bilingual students; the WHO has recognized the urgency
of accessible technical information, given the rise of medical misinformation
especially in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. While there has been much work
on sentence simplification, very few datasets are large enough to train
supervised models; simplifying a document also involves different operations
from those at the sentence level, including content addition, and how sentences
connect with each other. This project aims to develop new resources and data-
driven approaches for document simplification, with the potential to address
information transparency and fair access across a range of high-stake domains.
This project will also support the education and training of a diverse body of
undergraduate and graduate students across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
substantially advance document simplification, this CAREER project will tackle
several key issues in existing simplification work, including corpora diversity,
explanation generation, and document-level approaches. This is achieved by the
following research activities: (1) introducing new corpora that tackle the
pressing challenge of data diversity in simplification research and enable new
application scenarios, especially in the accessibility of technical and jargon-
laden texts; (2) tackling content addition and elaboration during simplification
---a previously little-explored challenge, and propose a novel, linguistically-
informed framework that characterizes and generates elaborations; (3) develop
models for document simplification that are informed by structures of discourse,
using both coherence structure and entity salience. The innovative ways to
integrate discourse target a larger challenge for models to take stretches of
discourse into account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.