* 2145455
* CAREER: Characterization and understanding of point defect evolution during corrosion-induced grain boundary migration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Yang Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2027
* USD 231,838.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals and alloys rust and degrade
when exposed to the environment. The problem of engineered materials rusting and
degrading has led to crucial reliability concerns with tremendous mitigation
costs. Rust inevitably involves the evolution of microscopic defects within the
material. Typical defects include grain boundaries, dislocations, and point
(atomic level) defects, such as a vacant atomic site. The characteristics of
defects, such as their types, locations, and densities, can significantly impact
the performance of engineered alloys. Understanding how defects are generated
and interact with each other when the material rusts is a critical step to
address these degradation problems effectively. While researchers can now probe
nanometers and larger sized grain boundaries and dislocations in materials at
high resolution, imaging of atomic-level point defects, such as a missing atom
or vacancy, remains a critical challenge. This has limited the fundamental
discoveries in corrosion science and other fields such as catalysis and
batteries. This research program aims to utilize a new atomic-level point defect
imaging technique the PI developed to elucidate the interaction between point
defects and grain boundaries while the alloys rust. This research facilitates
the prediction of failure due to rust in engineering systems and infrastructures
to help prevent rust-induced accidents. Also, the scientific understanding of
the motion of grain boundaries migration during rusting advances engineering
methods to make low-cost, high-performance, and damage-resistant alloys for
advanced energy systems, transportation, and defense applications. Education and
outreach activities include a partnership with the “Physics for Girls” summer
workshop that offers a hands-on, immersive, and fun introduction to physics for
girls in middle/high school in the State College area. These activities
integrate research with a multi-level educational program, which foster
students’ interest in science and engineering, motivate students to effectively
address critical global challenges, and increase under-represented minorities
involvement in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering grain boundary (GB) in materials can
significantly enhance materials’ performance, including mechanical, electrical,
and thermal properties, etc. However, GBs will migrate under the influence of
external stimuli, such as heating, mechanical deformation, and radiation damage.
Thus, taking advantage of GB engineering hinges upon the stability of GB-related
microstructure in application-relevant environments. While the effect of thermal
or mechanical stimuli on GB motion has been vastly studied, it was only until
recent years that corrosion-induced GB migration was characterized. Currently,
the underlying mechanism and the impact of corrosion-induced GB migration on the
corrosion/damage tolerance of materials remain elusive. The critical knowledge
gap resides in how excess vacancies generated by corrosion interact with GB
motion and the stress corrosion cracking (SCC) process. Resolving this question
is currently limited by the difficulty of imaging vacancy distribution at the
nanoscale. Here, the PI integrates correlative electron microscopy and advanced
computational modeling to address this challenge. This project aims to: (i)
develop a robust nanometer-resolution vacancy mapping method to visualize the
excess vacancy distributions near GBs, and (ii) uncover the dominant mechanisms
responsible for the GB migration during corrosion from a fundamental defect
evolution perspective. Meanwhile, a multi-level education and outreach plan
includes: (1) collaborating with the “Physics for Girls” summer workshop by
organizing guest lectures and offering university-lab tours to high/middle
school girls, aiming to help them overcome the stereotype about girls in STEM;
(2) offering a new university course about the degradation of materials under
extreme environment to foster students’ motivation in addressing the challenges
of materials degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.