* 2145644
* CAREER: Scalable Black-box Optimization for Scientific Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Jacob Gardner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2027
* USD 553,510.00

Scientists across the natural sciences and engineering increasingly rely on
data-driven approaches to assist them in making their discoveries. Searching for
a new scientific discovery can frequently be cast as an optimization problem.
For example, a biochemist searching for new therapeutics might seek to optimize
the antiviral activity of a new molecule, or an engineer might optimize the
aerodynamic efficiency of a new vehicle. Qualities like antiviral activity are
difficult to estimate in advance and require experimentation to measure, making
these optimization problems “black-box” and particularly challenging. This
project will build novel technologies that enable practitioners to leverage
large quantities of data to aid in solving these challenging problems, even for
highly complex and structured objects like molecules or vehicles. This will
empower scientists to more rapidly design the next generation of therapeutics,
energy technologies and more. This research is coupled with education and
outreach to a broad set of stakeholders, including (a) professionals in the
natural sciences and engineering through direct collaboration, public tutorials,
and open source software and (b) students interested in data-driven scientific
discovery, from outreach at the middle school level to the development of new
undergraduate curricula designed to reach the broadest possible science and
engineering audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus broadly on
two key research challenges: (1) developing methods for black-box optimization
that scale to high dimensional and structured optimization problems over
challenging domains like molecules, and (2) developing novel large scale
probabilistic machine learning methods that enable careful consideration of the
exploitation versus exploration trade-offs inherent in these optimization
problems. A core theme through both of these challenges will be reducing complex
discrete search spaces into well-organized continuous latent spaces extracted by
deep neural networks. This project will develop novel deep representation models
tailored specifically to the optimization domain, leveraging large quantities of
unsupervised and multi-task data to enable optimization over broad classes of
objects that can be represented as graphs, strings, point clouds or images. The
project will be grounded in concrete, specific applications and collaborations
in therapeutic design, cognitive science for learning and Alzheimer's disease,
and the development of energy technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.