* 2145468
* CAREER: Processing Intrinsically Conductive Polymers for Fibers via  Side-by-Side Spinning
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Hang Liu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 02/28/2027
* USD 528,627.00

Intrinsically conductive polymers (ICP) are a group of organic polymers whose
chemical bonds on the molecular backbone allow conduction of electricity. Their
pendant groups also allow chemical modifications for special functions, so ICPs
have shown potential for use in smart textiles, which have embedded electronic
circuitry that enables them to interact with the wearer and respond to
environmental stimuli. However, the rigid molecular structure of ICPs limits
their processability into flexible fibers for textile fabrication. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research into a new wet-
spinning technology to manufacture flexible conductive fibers via side-by-side
co-spinning of an ICP with a conventional polymer. The project will utilize both
experimental and theoretical methods to investigate the side-by-side fiber
formation process and evaluate its influence on fiber properties. The research
outcomes should help to control the functional fiber manufacturing process, and
allow the fibers to be used to construct sensors for smart wearables, which
might find broad applications in healthcare, the military, and sports.
Curriculum development and outreach activities will be integrated with research
to involve K-12 and college students, especially those from groups
underrepresented in STEM, to cultivate their interest in textile
science/engineering, and to strengthen the workforce pipeline for the textile
industry, in order to improve American competitiveness in the field. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a fundamental understanding of
the process-structure-property relationships of ICP side-by-side wet spinning,
especially the interactions at the interface of the ICP with the spinnable
conventional polymer, including the complex fluid interaction kinetics under
various spinning conditions. Different types of side-by-side spinnerets will be
designed, and the effects of the spinneret geometry on fiber formation will be
studied. The influence of polymer solution properties and spinning control
parameters on the side-by-side fibers' mechanical, electrical, and sensing
properties will also be investigated. Computational fluid dynamics modeling will
be used to simulate the hydrodynamics of the solutions inside the spinneret and
in the coagulation bath during wet spinning, in order to simplify and optimize
the experimental design. The fundamental process-structure-property
relationships obtained could be applicable to multiple polymer solution
manufacturing techniques, including wet spinning, electrospinning, direct ink
writing 3D printing, and microfluid spinning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.