* 2145220
* CAREER: Modular Multi-Interface Nanocrystals for Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Biorenewable Alcohols
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Sen Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2027
* USD 616,080.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Sen Zhang of the University of
Virginia is studying catalysts to efficiently oxidize renewable alcohols for the
production of clean electricity and valuable chemicals. Clean energy is one of
the central challenges of modern society. Renewable alcohols, such as ethanol,
propanol, and butanol, produced from non-food biomass resources are important
components of the United States energy strategic development plan for
sustainable and affordable domestic energy resources. To utilize bio-renewable
alcohols with higher energy conversion efficiency and lower carbon emission,
this project will develop cost-effective catalysts that allow the bio-renewable
alcohols to be designated as a carbon feedstock in electrochemical devices for
electrical energy generation and chemical transformation. The knowledge obtained
from this research will broadly benefit catalysis research for energy and
environmental sustainability. The outcome of this project will accelerate the
development and the scaled application of electrochemical devices, including
fuel cells and electrosynthesis devices, potentially transforming the U.S.
energy portfolio. Dr. Zhang’s research will be closely integrated with education
plans and outreach activities, with an emphasis on the development of a
“iCleanEnergy” pedagogical platform to enable active and customized learning for
undergraduate clean energy education. The project will also involve educational
outreach to minority serving institutions to increase minority participation in
the energy sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Sen Zhang of the University of
Virginia is studying an emerging class of nanocrystals wherein multiple hetero-
structured interfaces, including metal phosphide/metal (MP/M) core/shell and
metal-metal (M-M) interfaces, are modularly integrated for electrocatalysis. By
rationally designing and synthetically tuning these interfaces within each
nanocrystal, this project aims to fundamentally understand interfacial effects
on desirable electrocatalytic properties for the oxidation of biomass-derived
alcohols, leading to the development of efficient catalysts for alcohol-fueled
anion exchange membrane fuel cells and electrosynthesis devices. Dr. Zhang will
leverage his team's abilities in advanced nanomaterials synthesis, structural
characterization, electrocatalysis, and theoretical calculations to focus on
three tasks: (1) optimizing the MP/Palladium core/shell interface to enhance the
alcohol oxidation reaction by tuning MP cores; (2) modifying the palladium shell
with carefully controlled palladium-M heterostructures; and (3) understanding
the design rules for optimized alcohol oxidation catalysts through a combination
of electrochemical and in-situ spectroscopic approaches. By taking an
interdisciplinary approach, this project aims to address fundamental questions
in catalysis and electrochemistry; in particular, how catalyst atomic structure
and interfacial architecture correlate with catalyst activity, stability and
selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.