* 2145170
* The Future of Thermodynamics of Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* David Wolpert, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,991.00

This proposal is for an invited NSF workshop for studying the interplay between
computing hardware and the newly emerging field of nonequilibrium (stochastic)
Thermodynamics. This workshop will identify open challenges, opportunities and
research priorities to develop understanding of the stochastic thermodynamics of
computational systems that are distributed, with multiple spatially separated
subsystems, are not at thermodynamic equilibrium (and in general, not even in a
stationary state), and have both substantial thermodynamic costs of
communication among the subsystems and thermodynamic costs of the information
processing within the subsystems. This connection between energy efficiency in
information processing and thermodynamic limits could have far reaching
consequences in the design of computing systems at large. The topic also has a
broad appeal to natural scientists, engineers, computer scientists and has been
of much recent interest in multiple disciplines. The inclusion of participants
from diverse backgrounds will facilitate the scientific and professional
development of early career researchers and increase the STEM workforce pipeline
in these areas, as well as help to ensure inclusion of scientists from
traditionally underrepresented groups. Close to half of the invitees to the
workshop will be students or postdocs from different communities. The PI has had
extensive recent experience in mentoring students and postdocs in the general
field of the stochastic thermodynamics of computation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will assemble a set of leading researchers
working to examine issues common to nonequilibrium theormodynamics and the
design of computers, to describe the reasons that they should be studied from an
interdisciplinary point of view, to enumerate the major challenges that lays
ahead, and to create a strategy for a way forward. A diverse group of physical
theorists, electrical and computer engineers, and electronic device researchers
with strong understanding of thermodynamics will participate in the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.