* 2145950
* CAREER: Interactive Effects of Land Cover and Climate Change on Forest Carbon Sequestration: Integration of Research and Education to Advance Fundamental Science and Inclusivity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Andrew Reinmann, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2027
* USD 416,596.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperate forests remove more
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere than any other terrestrial ecosystem and thus
play a critical role in slowing the rate of climate change. However, temperate
forests are also the most heavily fragmented forest biome in the world.
Deforestation from urbanization and agricultural expansion creates heterogeneous
landscapes with large spatial gradients in growing conditions for trees. Trees
at the forest edge grow faster than those in the forest interior, yet are more
negatively impacted by extreme weather like high temperatures and drought. The
mechanisms explaining why tree growth in fragmented forests is more negatively
impacted by climate stress than in intact forests remain unknown. The scientific
community’s understanding of how climate affects tree growth and forest carbon
sequestration are largely based on studies from interior forest ecosystems, away
from forest edges. This past focus on interior forests limits our understanding
of carbon cycling across the large and growing proportion of temperate forests
that is influenced by fragmentation. This study integrates a field experiment
and modeling to test the interactive effects of forest fragmentation and climate
on tree growth and forest carbon sequestration. The project is intended to
transform how we think about the future of the temperate forest’s capacity to
sequester carbon in a world facing ongoing changes in climate and land cover and
thus will inform climate change mitigation strategies. This work is paired with
initiatives aimed at addressing major barriers to inclusion in environmental
biology and improving communication between academics and stakeholders,
including engaging minority students and high school teachers in research and
holding workshops with academics, educators, and forest managers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed work are to develop a
mechanistic understanding of the interactive effects of forest fragmentation and
climate on forest carbon sequestration and the role these interactions play in
modulating carbon balance across human-dominated landscapes. These goals will be
accomplished by establishing a new experiment to manipulate precipitation
regimes (i.e., ambient precipitation, high precipitation, and drought) in both
edge-influenced and interior temperate broadleaf forests. This experiment will
also leverage naturally occurring variations in air temperature across time to
explore the roles of forest fragmentation and water availability in forest
carbon sequestration response to excessive heat. Data generated from this
experiment will be used to modify an existing Earth system model (the Energy
Exascale Earth System Model) to improve depictions of forest carbon cycling
across human-landscapes and in response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.