* 2145629
* CAREER: Algorithmic foundations for practical acceleration in computational sciences
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Anastasios Kyrillidis, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 06/30/2027
* USD 241,613.00

Non-convex optimization lies at the heart of many engineering applications with
far-reaching societal impacts, especially through the wave that machine
learning/artificial intelligence triggers: physics, healthcare, biology,
software engineering, chemistry and materials science, among other areas.
However, given the lack of theory, practitioners often simply follow trial-and-
error procedures, leading to heuristics. Characterizing when heuristics turn out
to be provable algorithms is one pressing need for the scientific community, and
indeed society as a whole. The goal of the proposal is to build algorithmic
foundations, along with theory, that accelerate problem solving in such
scenarios. This constitutes the design of fast algorithms as an active research
area in machine learning, information processing, and optimization research.
Understanding how remarkable performance is obtained using efficient algorithms
is of ultimate significance towards practical and safely applicable learning.
The difficulty/risk of this research lies exactly in the non-convex nature of
the tasks, where existing knowledge does not lead to a deeper
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to provide methodologies that
perform faster and better in practical settings, as well as introduce theory
that justifies their performance. Given the difficulty and diversity of the
task, the PI will focus on three research areas: i) faster convergence in
structure-rich problems, with a special focus on matrix-factorized machine
learning problems; ii) algorithmic acceleration in more general non-convex
scenarios, with a special focus on (shallow) neural network architectures; and
iii) acceleration techniques in modern ML systems, such as pruning techniques,
distributed protocols and hyperparameter tuning. The objectives mentioned above
complement each other: their combination results in a unified mathematical
framework that will provide insights on why and how several non-convex tools
work in ML and optimization research. The PI will study and analyze algorithms
with applications in text analytics, image classification, and practical hard
combinatorial problems, among others. The proposed research will analyze ideas
beyond classical momentum in non-convex scenarios, such as algorithmic implicit
regularization, hyper-parameter tuning, deep matrix factorization, proximal
point algorithms and robustness, and lottery-ticket hypotheses, just to name a
few. The long-term goal is the rigorous characterization of practical methods in
non-convex settings, with the hope that they could potentially turn into a
technology for designing faster and better algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.