* 2145728
* CAREER: 3DForests: Using Terrestrial Laser Scanning To Explore Forest Structure Changes Following Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Lisa Patrick Bentley, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason West
* 05/31/2027
* USD 590,994.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While fire is an important
ecological process in the western United States, wildfire has increased over
recent decades as a result of climate change, historical fire suppression, and
lack of adequate fuels management. Due to the urgency to protect life and
property, this work will use state-of-the-art technology (ground-based lasers)
to collect information about forests that will help inform and support both
forest health management and active fire operations in California. In addition,
research findings related to wildfire will be used to create virtual reality-
based activities that will be used to improve retention and graduation rates of
underrepresented minorities in STEM majors at a primarily undergraduate,
Hispanic Serving Institution. These novel data-driven and accessible educational
products will also be presented at a local nature preserve and for 4th-6th
graders at a Spanish-immersion school to allow broad audiences to better
understand interactions between forests and wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to: 1) Use terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) and
handheld mobile laser scanning to estimate understory forest structure
parameters, determine impacts of forest structure on past wildfire intensity,
and predict how altered forest structure affects future wildfire risk; and 2)
Link temporal changes in net primary productivity to disturbance via a scaling
model parameterized with TLS-collected biomass, measured leaf traits and climate
data. This work also aims to use research findings related to wildfire to expand
opportunities for a more diverse group of students, many of whom are often
underrepresented minorities or first-generation college students. This will be
accomplished through: 1) Mentoring underrepresented minority undergraduate and
graduate students to create a virtual "field trip" focused on forest structure
for an ecology course-based undergraduate research experience and NSF-funded
"The Virtual Field" platform; and 2) Adapting the “field trip” for public
outreach at a local nature preserve and for 4th-6th graders at a Spanish-
immersion school using virtual reality (VR). Data collected will enable crucial
characterization of ecosystem changes post-wildfire and assessment of forest
sensitivity to cumulative disturbances and advance the predictability of
ecological science. In addition, VR activities will broaden participation in
field learning and expand opportunities for a more diverse group of students,
especially during pandemic times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.