* 2145308
* CAREER:  Recognition-Memory Modeling: Testing Foundations and Extending Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* David Kellen, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2027
* USD 294,639.00

In recent decades, psychologists have used formal, computational models to make
considerable advances in understanding the cognitive processes underlying
people’s recognition memory judgements (e.g., “I remember seeing this person
before”) and their associated characteristics (e.g., their accuracy, the
subjective confidence ascribed to the memory). These formal models provide
researchers with ways to measure the relative contribution of different
cognitive processes (e.g., “familiarity” versus “episodic recollection”), ways
to answer questions regarding their development across the lifespan (e.g.,
children vs. young adults vs. older adults), and allow for comparison across
different clinical populations (e.g., Alzheimer patients). Formal models of
recognition memory also enable researchers to confidently tackle socially-
relevant issues, such as critically evaluating different eyewitness
identification procedures used by police departments. The proposed research
addresses the present problem that multiple candidate models may offer
alternative characterizations of the same data (e.g., some candidate models
postulate that recognition judgments are driven by a single mnemonic process
whereas others postulate two or more). While unresolved, this issue stands in
the way of researchers and practitioners having properly validated tools for
characterizing people’s mnemonic processes in detail. A key aspect of the
present work is the novelty of the methods applied: the team closely coordinates
experimental designs and mathematical proofs in order to reveal “behavioral
signature patterns” predicted by the different models. The empirical results
from these studies allow the team to directly test models by addressing
questions regarding: 1) the relationship between mnemonic information,
confidence judgments, and response bias, 2) the way mnemonic information is
represented (in absolute versus relative terms), 3) how exactly mnemonic
information supporting a previous encounter (“did I see X before?”) relates to
contextual mnemonic information (“where and how did I see X before?”), and 4)
how many distinct retrieval processes are necessary to adequately characterize
recognition judgments (e.g., do we need to postulate separate “episodic
recollection” processes?). The overarching result is a drastic reduction in the
number of viable candidate models and a convergence towards a single validated
account of recognition memory that brings the formal modeling of recognition to
its full potential in both research and applied settings. In turn, the
educational component of this work establishes as its goals the development of
much-needed coursework on the foundations of psychological science as well as an
undergraduate training program on formal modeling that is explicitly targeted at
increasing the graduate-level representation of members of historically
underrepresented groups and US nationals more broadly. Together, the work
resolves a number of open research problems and increases the number of US
college students equipped to take on the scientific challenges of tomorrow using
state-of-the-art formal methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different models of
recognition memory are currently being used in research and applied settings to
characterize the cognitive processes behind people’s memory judgments. These
models – couched in Signal Detection or High-Threshold frameworks – differ in
terms of the nature and number of cognitive processes that they postulate. The
existence of multiple candidate models creates a problem in that the same data
can be interpreted in multiple, incompatible ways. The present research
critically compares these different models with goal of obtaining a single
validated account. This goal is achieved by articulating experimental designs
collecting forced-choice and ranking judgments along with formal results that
speak to all candidate models (e.g., Block-Marschak and Tversky-Sattath
inequalities) in order to obtain privileged testing grounds that require minimal
auxiliary assumptions. In practice, this means that it is possible to set aside
the generic model-comparison methods (model fit + complexity penalty)
traditionally used by researchers up to this point and re-focus efforts on
specific model predictions that can be directly tested at the level of the data
using order-constrained inferential methods. The test results produced here are
able to address a number of key questions, such as: 1) are confidence ratings
direct, noiseless mappings of latent strengths? 2) are latent-strength values
represented in terms of likelihood ratios? 3) are “episodic recollection”
processes necessary (in addition to latent strengths) to adequately describe the
retrieval of contextual information or the discrimination of studied items from
highly similar foils? These answers can drastically reduce the set of candidate
models of recognition memory, and will lead to the development of strongly-
validated cognitive psychometric tools for experimental procedures, such as the
Memory Similarity Task, which is widely used in developmental and neurocognitive
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.