* 2145340
* CAREER: Engineering Ultra-Wide Bandgap III-Nitride Devices for Highly Efficient and Robust Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Spyridon Pavlidis, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

The global demand for energy will likely significantly increase in the coming
decades as more of the world gains access to electricity. This demand will need
to be met without intensifying existing concerns over the environmental,
societal, and economic impacts of climate change, which is influenced by the
efficiency of power systems. Furthermore, since this efficiency is tied to
losses associated with the semiconductor devices used in power electronics, the
replacement of today’s silicon-based components with a novel semiconductor
technology must be investigated. Wide bandgap semiconductors are candidates,
however ultra-wide bandgap (UWBG) semiconductors represent the next frontier. In
particular, aluminum-rich aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN) offers an exciting
opportunity to explore a new generation of highly efficient and robust
electronic devices. The robustness of these devices in the face of elevated
temperatures or electromagnetic interference (EMI) also stands to improve system
performance and reliability. Thus far, a combination of unresolved scientific
questions and technological barriers have prevented AlGaN devices from reaching
their full potential. The recent commercialization of aluminum nitride (AlN)
wafers, however, permits the ideal properties of AlGaN films to be studied for
the first time. Thus, the research objective of this CAREER project is to
understand the operational physics of high voltage AlGaN devices and develop
engineering solutions that will unlock their performance for power electronics
where efficiency and robustness are key. The investigator is also committed to
becoming a leading educator in the area of semiconductor devices via the use of
team-based, laboratory-based methods and is passionate about ensuring equal
access to STEM education/training. Three education/outreach tasks have been
defined with the objectives of: (1) equipping undergraduates with marketable
skills via hands-on research experiences that they can leverage for STEM
careers, (2) engaging underrepresented minority groups to diversify the STEM
workforce, and (3) increasing the public’s scientific literacy surrounding
semiconductors/electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER
project is to understand the performance limits of ultra-wide bandgap AlGaN-
based power devices and establish solutions to deploy these devices in highly
efficient and robust systems. The potential for Al-rich AlGaN to support large
electric fields will be understood by experimentally extracting the impact
ionization coefficients from avalanche photodiodes realized on native AlN
substrates. The results will be used to minimize the drift region’s contribution
to the overall conduction loss. Since low resistance ohmic contacts to Al-rich
AlGaN remain elusive, the surfaces and bulk of UWBG AlGaN will be engineered to
obtain thermally stable contacts with reduced contact resistance. The surface
barrier height will be reduced using both ex-situ and in-situ interlayers that
compensate AlGaN’s polarization charge. Tunneling contacts will also be sought
by heavily doping the bulk AlGaN via Si implantation followed by effective
activation annealing. The limits of high temperature operation will be explored.
Next, p-type doping of AlGaN, in particular for buried and lateral regions, is a
barrier towards advanced power devices. Thus, novel Crystal Heterogeneous
Integration (CHI) will be investigated to combine p-type compound semiconductors
with n-type AlGaN. The high voltage breakdown of heterogeneous PN junctions will
be evaluated, as well as their response to light to interpret the resulting band
structures and explore carrier transport across the junction. These research
tasks will be leveraged to design, fabricate, and characterize high voltage (1-5
kV) AlGaN diodes, with a view to demonstrating the promise of AlGaN technology
in future power systems. Their stability in the face of high temperature
exposure will also be examined. To address the risk of EMI, the first
phototransistor that heterogeneously integrates AlGaN with other compound
semiconductors will be investigated for fast optical gating and high voltage
blocking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.