* 2145661
* CAREER: Marketplace Design for Freight Transportation and Logistics Platforms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* He Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2026
* USD 528,190.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant will contribute to the advancement of national
prosperity and economic welfare by supporting research to study digital freight
and logistics marketplaces. The freight transportation industry in the US is
enormous in market size but is also extremely fragmented and suffers from
inefficiency. Digital freight marketplaces that emerged over the last few years
are reshaping the logistics industry by offering automated and efficient
channels to connect carriers with shippers. This award supports research to
develop a fundamental understanding of methodologies for designing and
optimizing digital freight marketplaces. The research findings will facilitate
the growing innovation in the freight transportation marketplaces through
collaboration with leading freight marketplace companies. The research also will
benefit small trucking carriers and owner-operators, which account for over 90%
of all carriers in the U.S., by lowering the barrier for them to participate in
freight marketplaces and providing them with steady work and reliable earnings.
The accompanying educational plan aims to educate the trucking industry
workforce about digital freight marketplaces and broaden STEM interest for
underrepresented communities through hands-on activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freight marketplaces face significant uncertainty from
both the demand and supply side of the market, as they exhibit both geographical
imbalance and seasonal volatility. This research will consider designing,
analyzing, and optimizing marketplace control mechanisms for two-sided digital
freight platforms. This research fills an important gap in the freight
transportation literature, which mostly considers carriers with fixed
capacities. This project considers a variety of market control mechanisms such
as pricing, bundling, auction, and dedicated contracts; these mechanisms will
need to be carefully coordinated to form an effective hybrid strategy while
accounting for market participants who may strategically withhold their truthful
preferences from the market operator. This research methodology will integrate
fields such as statistical analysis and causal inference, stochastic models,
approximate dynamic programming, auctions, and mechanism design. The performance
assessments of the methods will be informed by available data and experiments in
collaboration with freight industry partners who operate large-scale
marketplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.