* 2145793
* CAREER: Towards a complete picture of communication in anthropogenic noise - Auditory processing among urban and rural soundscapes.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Alejandro Velez, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2027
* USD 308,792.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noise generated by human activity
has increased dramatically over the past decades and is considered a major
source of pollution. High levels of noise can have negative effects on animals,
particularly those that communicate with sounds. Several studies have
investigated how human-generated noise can impair the recognition of vocal
communication signals. Interestingly, some studies have shown changes in signals
produced by animals that live in cities that help them cope with the negative
effects of noise. Whether and how the sense of hearing can change in response to
human-generated noise is not known. Studying the iconic ‘ribbit’ of Pacific
chorus frogs, this project explores precisely this. We will compare the calls
and the hearing abilities of frogs that live in urban and rural regions across
the San Francisco Bay Area. We will also study whether such changes in calls and
hearing abilities allow animals to communicate easier in noisy environments.
Further, we will explore whether changes in hearing among urban and rural
populations are related to changes in the structure of the ear. These research
activities will be complemented by educational activities, including research
training of diverse student populations and science education outreach in local
communities. As this project will further our understanding of the consequences
of noise pollution for sensory perception and behavior, our results can inform
conservation and urbanization efforts and promote progress in the design of
communication devices that interact with
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic noise has dramatically increased over
the past decades, becoming a major form of pollution. Accordingly, there is
growing interest in understanding the effects of anthropogenic noise on animal
behavior. For animals that communicate acoustically, anthropogenic noise can
impair the detection and recognition of vocal signals. Several studies have
investigated how vocal signals and signaling behaviors change to minimize the
detrimental effects of anthropogenic noise. In contrast, we do not know whether
the hearing capabilities of urban animals also change to better cope with high
levels of noise. The central hypothesis of this project is that, among
populations with different levels of natural and anthropogenic noise, the
auditory system varies in ways that facilitate signal reception. We will test
this hypothesis using Pacific chorus frogs (Hyliola regilla) from populations
with low and high levels of natural and anthropogenic noise. Specifically, we
will (i) characterize the acoustic environment (soundscape) and vocal signals of
populations with different levels of noise, (ii) determine how auditory
processing abilities vary among soundscapes, (iii) determine how such variation
in vocalizations and hearing abilities relate to acoustically-mediated mating
behavior, and (iv) examine anatomical mechanisms underlying population-level
variation in auditory processing abilities. By combining behavioral,
physiological, and anatomical studies of auditory processing, this project will
further our understanding of how novel environments shape sensation, perception,
and animal communication systems in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.