* 2145807
* CAREER: Elucidating the Synergistic Effects of Composition, Porosity and Structural Rigidity on Mechanics of Metallic Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Christian Hoover, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2027
* USD 616,685.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award will support research to
uncover the fundamental relationships between composition, porosity, atomic
structure, and the mechanical behavior of glassy metallic organic frameworks
(gMOFs). gMOFs are porous hybrid materials, often consisting of metallic ions,
connected by organic linkers (ligands), to form a vast reinforced network. A
major advantage of gMOFs is that they can be made in bulk, in diverse shapes,
for a variety of applications. This award will promote the progress of science
by focusing on the experimental understanding of the compression and shear
behaviors of these absorbent materials, which is crucial for their use in
industrial CO2 capture, separation, and storage applications. The techniques and
testing developed herein are generic and will also increase the understanding of
mechanical responses in materials similar in characteristics to gMOFs. This
project will also provide training to students from high school through graduate
college via research opportunities and innovative educational material. Special
efforts will be made to recruit Native American students in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to understand the following
phenomena in gMOFs: (1) the nature of inelastic dissipation processes, (2) the
underlying distinct influences of structural order, composition, and density,
and (3) the influence of energy relaxation on the ability to accommodate contact
loads. The integrated experimental-computational approach will start with AFM-
based indentation and scratch testing to quantify compression and shear
responses at small scales. Second, the effects of different porosities will be
determined by testing tectosilicate zeolites that contain similar pore sizes and
pore size distributions compared to the gMOFs. Third, to relate the mechanical
properties to the rigidity of the atomic structure, MD simulations coupled with
topological constraint theory (TCT) will be performed. Finally, bulk mechanical
behavior of the gMOFs will be experimentally characterized to correlate the
influence of smaller scale inelastic dissipation mechanisms on macroscale
elastic/strength properties and inelastic behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.