* 2145813
* CAREER: Argus: A Measurement-informed Learning Approach to Managing Multi-cloud Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Ramakrishnan Durairajan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2027
* USD 194,217.00

Multi-cloud networks are federations of private network infrastructures from the
distinct cloud and third-party providers, and serve as increasingly vital
underlays for a range of application domains such as genomics, healthcare, and
high performance computing. This emerging connectivity paradigm poses
significant management barriers to enterprises that seek to deploy overlays and
applications due to providers' distinct operational practices, privacy concerns,
egress costs, among others. This CAREER project will investigate a novel
measurement-informed learning-based framework called Argus to significantly
lower the management barriers faced by modern
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on scientific
inquiries in three synergistic thrusts to realize the Argus framework. First, it
will design calibrated measurement tools and techniques, using which enterprises
can gain visibility into the federated underlays. Second, adhering to the
privacy concerns of providers, it will investigate learning-based modeling
capabilities, using which enterprises can accurately infer, localize, and
attribute performance bottlenecks to appropriate providers. Third, it will take
a principled approach to design a management capability, using which enterprises
can effectively and efficiently navigate egress costs and operational goals
while avoiding inferred performance bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's goal is to lower multi-cloud management barriers, to enhance the
operational productivity of enterprises, and to foster breakthroughs in the
aforementioned domains and beyond. The research will be tightly integrated with
education, emphasizing experiential learning. Activities include inviting
underrepresented students from local community colleges to participate in a
mini-research experience, organizing virtual summer schools on project-related
topics, involving undergraduates in research, and developing a curriculum on
multi-cloud networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts, publications,
and course materials resulting from this project will be made available at
https://ix.cs.uoregon.edu/~ram/CAREER.html. The website will be actively
maintained during the entire period of the project, and for at least one year
past the ending of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.