* 2145278
* CAREER: Closing the Gaps in UWB Localization and Sensing; Algorithms, Architectures, and Prototypes
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ashutosh Dhekne, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2027
* USD 249,634.00

This project proposes to use a new and upcoming wireless technology called
ultra-wideband radios to perform indoor localization at the human navigation
scale, fine-grained localization at the scale required for object tracking in
indoor spaces, and for intrusion detection through monitoring of disturbances to
the wireless profile of an indoor space. Several applications can benefit from
the underlying constructs developed in this work, including indoor navigation
and guidance systems, localization and navigation for autonomous agents in
complex indoor spaces, tracking movements of robotic arms for accurate task
completion as well as for compliance, and protection of valuables through
intrusion monitoring and alarm systems. Thus, the fundamental work in this
project is expected to impact several industries and advance mobile computing
using wireless technology for localization and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the state-of-the-art in
wireless localization and sensing through novel algorithmic and architectural
contributions leading to new protocols based on ultra-wideband (UWB) radio
technology. This work comprises three research thrusts. In the first, it
proposes to enable an infinitely scalable indoor localization technology that
can span large indoor spaces, such as shopping malls, museums, government
buildings, etc. using only a few UWB anchor devices. An unlimited number of
users can derive their own location inside provisioned indoor spaces using UWB
receivers that overhear signals sent by installed anchor devices, without
transmitting any UWB signal, thereby ensuring their privacy. In the second
research thrust, a fine-grained 3D localization idea is proposed which exploits
specific channel patterns obtained using multiple antennas at a receiver. The
phase of the received wireless signals is compared to provide fine-grained
localization of objects or robotic arms in a relatively small space. Such a
system can track exact robotic movements without using cameras, a significant
advantage when operating in dark, dusty environments, and when the large amount
of data produced and processing needs of cameras are not desirable. In the third
research thrust, an intrusion detection system is proposed which monitors a
protected space by analyzing disturbances in the wireless channel impulse
response (CIR). The proposed system would allow friendly entities to freely
occupy an indoor space and yet monitor it for intrusions by ignoring CIR
disturbances in the vicinity of the friendly entity. Overall, a rich ecosystem
of new applications is expected to be enabled by this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.