* 2145520
* CAREER: Levelling the Playing Field in STEM: Post-transfer Success for Underrepresented Racial Minority Community College Transfers
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Yu Chen, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 07/31/2027
* USD 152,888.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project will examine psychological and social factors
that are influential to post-transfer success for underrepresented transfer
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. Community colleges offer essential pathways toward bachelor’s
degrees in STEM. Previous studies have focused on creating effective transfer
pathways for STEM students, especially students from historically
underrepresented populations, but significant challenges remain regarding the
transfer experience after enrollment at four-year institutions. Using an asset
model that emphasizes student strengths and traits, this project will identify
facilitators and barriers associated with underrepresented STEM transfer
students’ success and degree completion. Findings will advance knowledge and
scholarly contributions to the literature. Through collaboration with student
affairs administrators and professionals, this project will also develop and
implement tailored institutional strategies to promote post-transfer success
among underrepresented students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical data
will be used through a multi-phase, mixed-method design to accomplish research
goals. In each research phase, validated surveys will be administered to measure
key psychosocial factors such as STEM self-efficacy, STEM identity, transfer
stigma, social and cultural capital, and transfer receptive culture. Transfer
students’ retention and academic performance will be tracked over the project
years and then matched with survey data. Multiple rounds of qualitative
interviews will be conducted with STEM transfer student participants to
supplement and contextualize quantitative survey findings. An integrated
theoretical model will be developed and tested to reveal how psychosocial
factors influence STEM success and post-transfer success, and how such
influences may differ between groups that are and are not underrepresented in
STEM. Research findings will be interrelated with educational activities,
including a STEM transfer success program and development of online resources.
The educational activities will inform higher education leaders and promote
action in fostering a transfer receptive culture in four-year
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research
on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. This award is also funded in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.