* 2145861
* CAREER: A Community-based Approach to Empowered Information and Communication Technology Infrastructure Measurement
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Morgan Vigil-Hayes, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2027
* USD 115,600.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will develop methods
by which to design and evaluate information and communication technology (ICT)
measurement efforts such that deployment efforts can be held accountable to the
citizens they are intended to serve. While there have been several federal
efforts to increase the deployment of broadband infrastructure across the United
States, many communities seem to be persistently excluded from the impacts of
these deployment efforts. It can be especially challenging to quantify these
inequities for mobile broadband technologies. Currently, government subsidized
broadband deployment efforts rely on provider-generated coverage maps, which use
radio propagation models to demonstrate where mobile broadband is available
across space. Ad hoc investigations of these maps have revealed that propagation
models substantially overstate the penetration of ICT infrastructure and point
to a need for widespread measurements of ICT infrastructure to better assess the
true extent of coverage. As ICT infrastructure becomes increasingly necessary
for essential services such as education, healthcare, banking, and civic
participation, accurate assessment of ICT infrastructure accessibility becomes
essential. To measure ICT infrastructure at scale and in a manner that
illuminates inequities, it is necessary to rely on crowdsourced measurements of
ICT infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to answer two
fundamental questions that drive ICT infrastructure policymaking and
deployments: How do we know that ICT infrastructure deployment efforts are
actually improving access to ICT infrastructure and how should crowdsourcing
platforms for ICT measurements be designed in order to ensure that
representative data are generated by crowdsourced ICT measurement efforts?
Research activities will seek answers in three successive strands: (1) an
ethnographic investigation of conceptualizations around ICT measurement and
mapping; (2) the design and implementation of an innovative measurement
platform; and, (3) the deployment and evaluation of the measurement platform.
Meta-analysis of data collected in each of these research strands will culminate
in a transferable theory of design for inclusive crowdsourced ICT measurements.
Moreover, education activities will work synergistically with the research to
broaden participation in computing through inclusive problem-based curricular
design and mentoring students through mixed-methods sociotechnical research
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.