* 2145491
* CAREER: Nanoparticle mRNA and DNA Immunoengineering of Macrophages for Solid Tumor Targeting
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Michael Mitchell, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2027
* USD 397,271.00

The success of messenger RNA (mRNA) COVID-19 lipid nanoparticle (LNP) vaccines
has opened new opportunities to engineer the immune system using mRNA LNP
technology. An exciting target is engineering the immune system to treat solid
cancer tumors which are difficult to treat with cellular immunotherapies. The
goal of this CAREER project is to develop an LNP technology to engineer immune
cells that can enter and kill solid tumors. This research goal is integrated
with educational objectives to engage women, underrepresented, and first-
generation STEM students in immunoengineering. The educational objectives of the
project are to create immunoengineering modules for the NSF-funded International
Summer School in Greece and the University of Pennsylvania Bioengineering course
curriculum, develop K-12 immunoengineering demos with the Franklin Institute
Science Museum of Philadelphia, and engage high school and undergraduate STEM
students through research internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of
this project is to exploit a nanotechnology platform to engineer macrophages
using mRNA and plasmid DNA (pDNA) as a new means to generate an immune response
against solid tumors. Cellular immunotherapies, such as chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T cells, have been successful at treating blood cancers, but have
had limited success in infiltrating solid tumors. Macrophages are actively
recruited and readily infiltrate solid tumors. Therefore, there is immense
potential for engineering CAR macrophages to stimulate the immune system to
treat solid tumors. A new LNP platform will be employed that safely and
efficiently delivers mRNA and pDNA into macrophages, as a new means to engineer
CAR macrophages and characterize their interactions with solid tumor cells. This
project aims to determine how LNP physicochemical properties influence mRNA and
pDNA delivery to macrophages, to engineer and characterize CAR macrophages using
LNPs, to assess their ability to target and kill solid tumor cells, and to
quantify the ability of mRNA and pDNA CAR macrophages to infiltrate solid tumors
and elicit an antitumor response in mice. The proposed studies will have a
transformative impact on the development of immunotherapies to treat solid
tumors, and the nanotechnology developed will enable macrophage immunomodulation
for a range of applications, including infectious diseases, implants, autoimmune
disorders, and mRNA COVID-19 vaccines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.