* 2145521
* CAREER: In Vitro Model Approaches Leveraging Quantitative Cancer Cell Properties as Determinants of Metastatic Potential
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Cheryl Gomillion, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2027
* USD 464,691.00

Cancer metastasis occurs when tumor cells break away from the original tumor and
move, or spread to other parts of the body. In the case of breast cancer, the
majority of patient deaths are as a result of metastasis to other parts of the
body, including bones, lung, and brain. Thus, it is important to identify cells
that have the potential to be metastatic cells early and reliably. This CAREER
proposal aims to develop novel strategies based on measuring quantitative
properties of cancer cells to better understand what contributes to metastatic
cancer and what specific signature metastatic cells have that distinguishes them
from non-metastatic cells. The proposed work integrates a comprehensive
education plan for meeting the primary objective of increasing the participation
of underrepresented minorities in biomedical engineering. This plan will foster
awareness and interest in biomedical engineering and research through research
mentoring and programming developed to provide early awareness of biomedical
career paths for students. In addition, educational outreach events for all
levels will be implemented, including initiatives for K-12 and college students,
as well as community-focused Health &amp; Outreach Days.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's long-term research goal is to develop
strategies and tools that will help to better understand the role of the tumor
microenvironment in cancer metastasis, which will lead to improved health
outcomes for patients with metastatic cancer. To make significant positive
contributions to clinical outcomes, it is necessary to first have a better
fundamental understanding of cancer cell processes and the effects of specific
factors from the tumor microenvironment on cancer cell behavior to identify
metastatic cells earlier and more reliably. Towards this goal, this CAREER
project primarily focuses on understanding contributors to cancer cell
metastasis, with a specific focus on the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
and adipose-secreted factors. The research objectives of this CAREER proposal
are aimed at testing the hypothesis that breast cancer cells have inherent
phenotypical characteristics associated with impedance, morphology, and
gene/protein expression, which distinguish metastatic cells from non-metastatic
cells. Specifically, the aims of this work will: 1) assess the impedance
profiles for breast cancer cells of varying type to identify distinct impedance
signatures for specific cell types; 2) identify morphological features
associated with breast cancer cell metastasis by quantifying changes in cell
shape; and 3) assess the effects of cytokines on breast cancer metastasis using
impedance and morphology-based analyses. Quantitative in vitro modeling
approaches will be applied to obtain quantitative data that will be used to
delineate the specific signature of metastatic cancer cells. Determination of
specific characteristics useful for identifying metastatic cancer cells will
have far-reaching impact for advancing future cancer research and clinical
applications. Integrated into this work is a comprehensive educational plan
towards meeting the PIâ€™s long-term educational goal of increasing science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) awareness and participation of
underrepresented minorities in biomedical research and career paths. Specific
educational objectives are to: 1) promote STEM and health awareness through
educational and community outreach across generations, from K-12 through gray
populations; and 2) support cross-disciplinary research mentorship and
programming at all levels to increase the number of underrepresented minority
students pursuing graduate degrees in biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.