* 2145472
* CAREER: Testing the effects of predator-derived feces on host symbiont acquisition and health
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Adrienne Simoes Correa, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2027
* USD 409,529.00

Climate change and local-scale anthropogenic stressors are degrading coral reefs
across the globe. When conditions become too stressful on reefs, corals can lose
beneficial microbial symbionts (e.g., dinoflagellates in the family
Symbiodiniaceae) that live in their tissues via a process called “bleaching”.
Although Symbiodiniaceae play key roles in the health of coral colonies, we know
little about the processes that make symbionts available in the environment to
prospective host corals. This research test the extent to which coral-eating
fish feces, which contain live Symbiodiniaceae, facilitate symbiont acquisition
by corals in their early life stages. It will generate seminal knowledge on how
corallivore feces impact coral symbioses and health, and will assess the
ecological importance of corallivorous fishes as drivers of coral symbiont
assemblages. This research also test the extent to which corallivore feces are a
source of food and nutrients that impact coral health; this has particular
relevance to the survival and recovery of bleached adult corals. This research
can ultimately inform intervention strategies to support reef resilience and
mitigate reef degradation. Results from this project will be communicated widely
in scientific arenas, in undergraduate education programs, and to the public via
multimedia content and outreach. The Houston Independent School District (HISD,
Houston, TX) is the nation’s 7th largest public school system. This work will
enrich environmental science curricula for underrepresented minority students at
under-resourced HISD high schools. This work will also support economically
disadvantaged and first-generation undergraduate students in pursuing STEM
majors and careers through multi-year research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbioses between foundation species (e.g.,
corals, sponges, trees) and microbiota (e.g., microeukaryotes, bacteria)
underpin the biodiversity, productivity, and stability of ecosystems. Consumers,
such as predators and herbivores, shape communities of these foundation species
through trophic interactions. For instance, grazers contribute to the
maintenance of coral dominance on reefs via consumption of macroalgal
competitors. However, the indirect effects of other consumers on foundation
species are rarely examined. Few studies have tested how consumers affect
microbiota assembly in corals, even though coral symbionts (e.g.,
dinoflagellates in the family Symbiodiniaceae) play key roles in reef function
and persistence. Corallivorous (coral-eating) fishes were recently demonstrated
to egest large quantities of live Symbiodiniaceae cells as they swim across
reefs. This research is testing the hypothesis that corallivore feces promote
coral dominance on reefs by supporting coral acquisition of key symbionts and
nutrients. The following research objectives will be accomplished: (1) to
quantify the contribution of corallivorous fish feces to coral symbiont
acquisition; and (2) to test the extent to which corallivorous fish feces
influence coral health and recovery from thermal stress. Reefs are being
degraded globally due to climate-change induced bleaching and associated
mortality. This project is teasing apart the extent to which nutrients and/or
live symbionts associated with corallivore feces contribute to the resilience of
bleached corals under ambient and heat stress conditions. The research is
tightly integrated with two education objectives: (1) to organize a Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) program in which rigorous learning modules that
high school teachers can incorporate into their Environmental Systems course
offerings are developed and tested; and (2) to provide undergraduate students
with a multi-year research experience through a partnership with the Rice
Emerging Scholars Program (RESP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.