* 2145675
* CAREER: Foundations for IoT Cloud Security
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Luyi Xing, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 219,359.00

The Internet of things (IoT) cloud is one of the key pillars of the foundation
upon which modern IoT systems rest (Smart Home, Industrial, Smart City, Retail,
and Health applications, etc.). Newer IoT devices are taking advantage of the
managed Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) IoT
cloud services (e.g., AWS IoT Core, Azure IoT Hub), which offload much of the
security responsibilities and deployment burden from device manufacturers to the
public cloud providers. IoT clouds must manage trust for hundreds of millions of
IoT devices and users, and provide device manufacturers reliable and usable
tools for secure IoT deployments. In the IoT cloud systems, compromised security
or improper deployments can cause hazardous and deadly consequences. The
outcomes of the proposed work will (1) establish the foundational scientific
theory, security principles, and practices that define the field of IoT cloud
security and (2) protect PaaS and IaaS IoT clouds that underlie the wide array
of Smart Home, Health, Industrial, Smart City, Retail, and critical
infrastructure from cyberattacks. Techniques and tools to be developed in this
project will be used by IoT developers, security analysts in industry, academic
researchers, and a wide range of students (system security, formal methods, and
engineering).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IoT cloud systems have specific challenges
imposed by their requirements of large-scale distributed trust management and
secure support of emerging IoT computing paradigms such as IoT interoperability,
which preclude direct application of solutions devised for general-purpose
systems. The project will characterize these challenges while addressing three
key, novel research thrusts. The first thrust is to formalize the threats
concerning the emerging paradigms of IoT interoperability to conduct novel
attacks, and formally verify their security in IoT cloud systems and protocols.
The second thrust is to explore and understand emerging cyberattacks leveraging
misconfiguration of cloud IoT policies by device manufacturers, and develop
innovative formal modeling and verification approaches to elevate security
assurance of policy specification and cloud-based IoT deployments. The third
thrust is informed by the first two thrusts, which identify the threats and
challenges, and is to fundamentally address the threats by developing a
systematized IoT-cloud security framework with a set of innovative techniques,
including secure clean-slate design of IoT interoperability protocols, a novel
in-device channel control framework, and hardened supply chain for IoT brokers
(a core component of IoT clouds). Through these thrusts, this project will
produce new foundational understanding and methods to safeguard modern and the
next generation of IoT cloud systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.