* 2145411
* CAREER: Aequitas: A comprehensive machine learning framework to decode health disparities
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Joyce Ho, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 499,985.00

Reducing health disparities is important to improve the health and well-being of
every person. Social determinants of health, such as socioeconomic status,
education, and neighborhood, are primary drivers of health disparities.
Unfortunately, rigorous scientific approaches capable of modeling health
disparities are challenged by many issues related to data collection, including
data privacy, insufficient sample size, heterogeneous data, missing data,
multimodal data, and varying data quality along the various modalities. This
project aims to develop a machine learning platform that can integrate a variety
of data sources without requiring extensive annotation efforts. The platform
will also enable modeling of health disparities across multiple data sites while
protecting patient privacy. The project will ultimately make it easier for
health disparities researchers to identify relevant social determinants of
health using existing public health surveillance data in concert with modern
data sources to inform the next steps for achieving health equity. The project
also proposes educational activities centered around raising awareness of
disparities research and broadening participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance health disparities
research by taking a comprehensive and holistic approach to unpacking the impact
of social determinants of health factors on patient outcomes. The project will
address three fundamental and interrelated research challenges: (1) automated
schema integration methods to enable collaborative standardization of data
across multiple agencies; (2) broadening of the landscape of federated learning
to encompass multimodal and multi-level models to incorporate factors derived
from non-traditional data sources, and (3) new human-guided summarization models
that leverage existing expert knowledge to reduce the annotation burden. The
three research aims will be complemented by an extensive evaluation plan that
includes collaboration with public health experts and physicians focused on
advancing health equity. The project will demonstrate the utility and
feasibility of the machine learning platform on diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, and COVID-19 outcomes. This research effort will fill a critical
computational gap in decoding health disparities by harnessing data across
multiple data sites and diverse data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.