* 2145007
* CAREER: Frictional Financial Markets, Crises and Policies
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Luigi Bocola, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2027
* USD 211,827.00

Financial markets institutions are key determinants of the allocation of risk
and capital, both within and across countries. This project consists of three
main research questions that explore the economic consequences of financial
market imperfections and the role of policy in improving these outcomes. The
first area focuses on understanding why firms linked in a production network
tend to borrow and lend to each other, and the implications of these inter-firms
financial relations for macroeconomic stability. The second area examines
optimality criteria for the management of the balance sheet of a monetary
authority, in the context of the recent waves of asset purchases pursued by
central banks around the world. The third area studies the reasons why, over the
past decade, key economic indicators have signaled an increase in barriers to
capital mobility across countries. The educational component of the project
convenes a workshop with graduate students to teach frontier methods for the
analysis of frictional financial markets in open and closed economies. The
findings from these research projects will have broad implications for US
macroeconomic policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on three areas.
The first area studies the macroeconomics implications of trade credit
relationships. In most countries, transactions between firms in a production
network typically involve the issuance of an IOU rather than a spot payment.
These trade-credit bills are a key instruments for liquidity management, and
changes in their availability or terms have major effects on firmsâ€˜ performance.
The first project in this area develops a macroeconomic model of trade credit
relationships and uses the framework to measure how these links affect the
propagation of financial shocks. The second project explores the role of self-
fulfilling expectations in explaining sudden freezes of the inter-firms network
of payments. The second area focuses on positive and normative aspects of
``unconventional" monetary and fiscal policies carried out by several countries
after 2008. The first project in this area develops optimality criteria for the
management of foreign reserves by a small open economy, while the second project
focuses on the management of the balance sheet for a central bank that engages
in quantitative easing. The third area aims at understanding the deviations from
covered interest parity we have observed for several currencies after 2008. This
research shows that a sizable component of the observed deviations from covered
interest parity is due to the widening of the bid-ask spreads demanded by
dealers in currency markets rather than an arbitrage opportunity, and it
proposes a model to interpret this finding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.