* 2145902
* CAREER: Elucidating the Interaction(s) Between Bacteria and Archaea in a Biocathode
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Christine Dykstra, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2027
* USD 413,633.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some microbes can grow on
electrodes. Electrogens are bacteria that can digest organic matter and generate
electrons along with carbon dioxide. If the electrons can be shipped outside the
cell, the bacteria are referred to as exoelectrogens. These bacteria can power
electrical devices. They also supply electrons that drive important reactions to
nearby organisms. This objective of this project is to understand how a known
exoelectrogen interacts with a microbe that can convert carbon dioxide to
methane, referred to as a methanogen. Communities of these two types of
organisms can swap electrons and carbon-containing molecules back and forth.
Understanding how this occurs can help us understand the details of the global
carbon cycle. It could also lead to a carbon-neutral electric energy system.
Training K-12 teachers from Hispanic-serving schools to conduct research and to
incorporate engineering principles into lessons are other major objectives. This
outreach will also engage K-12 students in STEM-focused mentorship activities
with university students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exoelectrogens
influence the electron flow, carbon flow, and biomass formation in a
methanogenic biocathode. M. maripaludis and S. oneidensis are the model
methanogen and exoeletrogen used in the project. Carbon and electron transfer
pathways will be mapped for single-microbe biocathodes and for a dual-population
biocathode. CRISPR Cas9 mediated genome editing interrogate how electrons are
passed from S. oneidensis to M. maripaludis, and where donated electrons enter
the methanogenesis pathway. Carbon transport pathways will be elucidated using
13C labeling of carbon dioxide, formate, and lactate in various single- and
dual-population biocathode configurations, followed by NMR spectroscopy of
biomass, and kinetic modeling. Fluorescence microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, and transcriptomics analyses will be used to compare cell spatial
orientation and biofilm-related gene expression in the single- and dual-
population cathode biofilms. Project results will lead to a better understanding
of biocathode bacteria-archaea interactions. This will ultimately support
improved design and scaling up of bioelectrochemical systems for energy recovery
and wastewater treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.