* 2145528
* CAREER: Learning and teaching how to program morphogenesis with synthetic genetic circuits, a case study for elongation of mammalian cell spheroids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Leonardo Morsut, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2027
* USD 708,481.00

Growing organs and multicellular machines in the lab is at the leading edge of
regenerative medicine. However, controlling the shape of lab-grown materials is
elusive. Creating a computational framework that can help design control
networks to drive groups of cells to self-assemble into elongated structures is
the primary objective of this project. Supporting curriculum and teacher
development is another objective. Presenting workshops and training teachers in
synthetic biology will help cultivate interest in STEM fields among under-
represented high school students from local
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to rationally
design and autonomously manufacture axially elongated, three-dimensional
tissues, organs and biobots. The central hypothesis is that artificial genetic
circuits, based on synthetic Notch (synNotch) contact-dependent cell-cell
signaling, could be designed and optimized in silico to control axial elongation
of in vitro grown multicellular structures, when combined with control of
adhesion and proliferation. A validated platform for computational modeling
based on an augmented Cellular Potts model will be used to develop genetic
programs. These programs will be implemented in fibroblasts. Quantitative
fluorescent imaging will indicate their capacity to sustain elongation. The
validated, predictive computational platform developed during this project will
be available for use on a broader range of shapes and structures. Identification
of genetic drivers of axial elongation will increase our understanding of normal
developmental processes and provide insights into network malfunctions that may
play a role in the pathophysiology of certain birth defects as well as advancing
control of in vitro-grown tissues for applications in regenerative medicine and
soft robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.