* 2145432
* CAREER: Synthesizing Neuroimaging and Data Driven Approaches to Discover Inspirational Examples in Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Kosa Goucher-Lambert, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2026
* USD 580,515.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project are: (1) to understand the behaviors and
cognition that enable engineering designers to find and utilize inspiring
examples in their technical work; and (2) to use this knowledge to develop new
data-driven tools to assist in the process of automated inspiration discovery.
Designers across industries, ranging from engineering to architecture and
animation, increasingly utilize intelligent tools to find inspirational
examples. Such tools can track designers’ real-time progress and use this
information to predict and return inspiring examples to the designer. Critical
to our nation’s competitive advantage, such examples enable designers to
ultimately develop more creative and higher quality solutions (e.g., geometric
styling that is more attractive to users, analogous systems that improve
functional performance). This project will develop a novel computational design
tool that recognizes free-form engineering sketches, text descriptions, and 3D
models and uses these inputs to infer the ideas and intentions of a designer; in
turn, the tool will return examples that are predicted to be inspiring to the
designer. An initial version of this tool will be created and used in behavioral
and neuroimaging studies with student and professional designers, in which
participants will solve real engineering design challenges. Behavioral and
neuroimaging data will be used to answer fundamental questions about which types
of inspirational examples are most helpful and why. In addition to the primary
research activities, an integrated education and outreach plan will increase the
number of underrepresented students in STEM through the expansion of a 10-week
summer research program for undergraduate students, and through a learning
module for middle school students. The project will produce assessments of the
outreach activities, as well as deployable models for other institutions to
implement similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
CAREER project is to demonstrate the combined efficacy of neuroimaging and data-
driven techniques to advance the science of 'design via inspiration', enabling
designers to use new computational tools in order to discover impactful
inspirational stimuli that enhance their creativity and design outcomes. The
specific aims of the project are to: (1) characterize brain activation patterns
using functional magnetic resonance imaging relating to different
representations of design concepts; (2) understand designer behavior during the
discovery and application of inspirational stimuli; and (3) develop new, data-
driven design tools that support the discovery of inspirational stimuli across a
range of interaction modalities (e.g., text descriptions, sketching, 3D models).
Research studies will recruit student and professional designers engaged in
representative early-stage design ideation tasks in the domain of mechanical
engineering. The education and outreach goals of this project are centered on
the expansion of a 10-week summer program developed by the PI for
underrepresented undergraduate students. The project will create new pedagogical
content, assessment methods, and add engagement with a local charter school.
Results from the education and outreach work will be packaged and disseminated
to the broader community in order to encourage the adoption of similar program
models by other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.