* 2145898
* CAREER: Towards a theory of machine learning with strategic interactions
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Nika Haghtalab, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2027
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning (ML) algorithms
use observed sampled data to uncover general patterns that can then be used for
making predictions. Learning systems that interact with human data and
stakeholders (such as those used in personalized medicine, content curation,
financial markets, hiring, and lending) take place in a complex social and
economic context. In this wide range of applications, there are feedback loops
between learning algorithms and people that impact the quality of the learning
process and the wellbeing of people. These feedback loops are currently not
captured by the classical theory of ML, and handling them in an ad hoc, non-
mathematical, way could have major social repercussions. This project will
develop a rigorous mathematical framework for addressing interactions between
learning systems and people and will draw from a wide range of academic
traditions and fields, including Theory of Computing, Artificial Intelligence,
Economics and Computation. This project also addresses educational and community
building plans for enabling the next generations of students to contribute to a
theory of machine learning for emerging and modern needs through cross-
disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a
theoretical foundation for ensuring both the performance of learning algorithms
in the presence of everyday social and economic forces and the integrity of
social and economic forces that are born out of the use of machine-learning
systems. To achieve this, the investigator will consider adversarial, strategic,
and collaborative interactions. For adversarial and long-term strategic
interactions, the project will explore online decision processes and contribute
online learning algorithms that perform well in presence of more realistic
adaptive and non-myopic strategic agents. The project also explores the long-
term social impact of strategic play and communication on learning and quality
of available information, with an eye towards understanding and addressing
biased and polarized beliefs. Additionally, to reap the full benefit of
collaborative interactions, the project will align the performance of learning
algorithms with the needs and preferences of participating agents. This will
lead to the design of collaborative learning protocols that are differentially
private, statistically efficient, and equitable. This project also includes
outreach, mentoring, and educational plans that will complement its technical
goals, including a workshop series on "Learning in presence of Strategic
Behavior" that brings together members of different communities and helps set an
agenda for the field and "Learning Theory Alliance" that is a large-scale
mentoring initiative for supporting the machine learning theory
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.