* 2145961
* CAREER: Better Together: Leveraging the Shared Commitment of Community Colleges and HBCUs to Optimize Black Engineering Student Pathways
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Bruk Berhane, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/28/2027
* USD 373,632.00

While much of the emphasis on broadening participation in engineering has
focused on students who attend PWI and mostly four-year institutions, Black
engineering undergraduate enrollment and graduation rates have declined in
recent years. At the same time, community colleges (CCs) as well as Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) have consistently graduated Black
engineers at comparatively much higher rates. In addition, in previous studies,
Black engineering undergraduates who initially enroll in CCs have reported
positive experiences when transferring to HBCUs. This suggests that CC-to-HBCU
pathways may be an overlooked opportunity for graduating more Black engineers.
Building on this evidence, this CAREER project will assemble stakeholders from
CCs and HBCUs to collaboratively develop a shared vision for maximizing the
potential of these pathways. This project will: 1) Collect baseline data on the
current state of trends, challenges, and opportunities in the CC-HBCU
engineering infrastructure; 2) Document the steps that CCs and HBCUs undertake
to move toward this shared vision; 3) Explore evolving processes as CCs and
HBCUs develop and execute strategies to optimize these pathways. This project
will result in a novel framework to help HBCUs, other minority-serving
institutions, and PWIs partner with CCs to find innovative solutions for
broadening participation in engineering. From an education perspective, the
study will also produce modules developed from the framework that offer guidance
on how four-year HBCUs and other four-year schools can better partner with CCs
to improve Black engineering student pathways. In addition, the project will
position faculty, staff, and administrators as leaders in improving these
pathways by guiding them through workshops focused on collective impact and
institutional change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the advancement in
understanding the CC to four-year engineering college pathway for students, few
scholars have explored the potential of CCs and four-year HBCUs to work together
to maximize Black engineering student persistence, transfer, and graduation
rates. This CAREER project addresses this gap by centering CCs and HBCUs as
leaders in educating future Black engineers, and will leverage the collective
strengths that each type of institution individually brings to broadening
participation efforts. Participants will include faculty, staff, and/or
administrators representing the 15 engineering degree-granting HBCUs, as well as
their feeder CCs. Using an action research approach that is grounded in
collective impact and Kezarâ€™s theoretical frameworks on institutional change, my
research objectives will involve the collection and analysis of: 1) Descriptive
statistics that establish the current state of CC to HBCU engineering pathways,
including trends, challenges, and opportunities in this space; 2) Focus group
and observational data that document how participants collaborate to articulate
and refine a shared vision for maximizing the potential of these pathways; 3)
Focus group and observational data that document CC-HBCU collaborative efforts
during interventions at select sites during this project. The educational
objectives of this project are to: 1) Inform participants of promising practices
drawn from other studies that focus on engineering CCs, transfer, and retention;
2) Introduce collective impact to faculty, staff, and administrators as a tool
for maximizing collaborations in the CC-HBCU context; and 3) Develop an
organizational framework that other engineering institutions, including other
minority-serving institutions and predominately White institutions, can use in
collaboration with CCs to increase Black engineering student enrollment and
graduation. The long-term goal will be to test the capacity of this framework in
future studies to increase the number of Black and other underrepresented
students who first enroll in CCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.