* 2145487
* CAREER: Lipid Mass Tags Designed Via Selective Dissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Xin Yan, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2027
* USD 625,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Xin Yan and her group at Texas A&amp;M University are working to
develop novel approaches to characterizing unsaturated lipids (fatty
acids/esters) using mass spectrometry. Changes in the concentrations of lipid
species in biological systems occur after perturbation by physiological
processes, hence knowing the structures and concentrations of lipids is
essential to elucidate their roles in physiological and pathological processes.
Dr. Yan and her group are developing approaches to allow accurate quantification
of multiple unsaturated lipids (including difficult-to-detect non-polar lipids)
in a single experiment. The integrated educational plan seeks to amplify the
scientific impact by broadening access to chemical education and chemical
measurement research including live demos of fun experiments, engagement of
students in chemistry open houses, and providing research opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate quantification of a lipid mixture
with isomeric resolution has been a long-standing challenge. To address this
challenge, a set of isobaric lipid mass tags (LMTs) is being designed to react
selectively with lipid double bonds. By designing and tuning the LMT chemistry,
diagnostic ions for determining double bond isomers are selectively produced in
low energy collision-induced dissociation. Charged mass reporters corresponding
to lipids from different samples are released upon higher energy dissociation,
thereby enabling accurate quantitation of lipids from multiplexed samples in a
single run. The combination of information from the two tandem MS experiments in
a single run enables the quantification and identification of unsaturated lipid
isomers. Development of LMTs will facilitate future investigations into lipid
structure/function relationships. Broader impacts of the educational plan
include promoting interest in and broadening access to chemical education and
chemical measurement research for all levels of students. Disseminating science
through live demos seeks to motivate middle/high school students to appreciate
science at an early stage. Providing active engagement in experiments is seen as
a good, hands-on approach to encouraging students to consider pursuing careers
in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)-related fields. The
innovation X program and research training are expected to provide undergraduate
and graduate students with opportunities to work with advanced analytical
technologies and develop new strategies for unsolved chemical measurement
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.