* 2145766
* CAREER: Non-Hermitian physics of spacetime-periodic soft matter
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jayson Paulose, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2027
* USD 251,336.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, and educational activities that advance designer
materials that mimic the adaptability of living systems and their ability to
manipulate energy flows. The properties of a material arise from the collective
interactions of its building blocks. In traditional materials, the building
blocks are atoms or molecules whose interactions are determined by the nature of
the chemical bonds among them. Modern technical advances in fabricating complex
assemblies, such as 3D printing and bio-inspired self-assembly, have enabled
artificial materials composed of active building blocks such as driven
micromechanical resonators, miniature robots, and even bacteria whose
interactions can be dynamically modulated via external means or internal power
sources. By incorporating dynamic elements, these new materials can manipulate
mechanical energy and transform their structural properties in ways that are
unattainable in inert materials. This project will develop quantitative models
that predict the collective behavior of massive assemblies of dynamic building
blocks, thereby expanding capabilities to tailor the response of dynamic
materials towards specific technological needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and
his research team will develop new theoretical and computational models to
predict the mechanical and structural response of assemblies of building blocks
whose interactions are modulated to form periodic patterns in both space and
time. These models will extend physical theories which model inert materials as
networks of masses connected by springs, with the novel advance that the spring
stiffnesses will be varied sinusoidally by external driving agents. The new
models will be used to propose designs for dynamic materials with desirable
material properties targeted towards technological applications such as
vibration control, shock absorption, and acoustic signal processing. For
example, time-varying spring stiffnesses can enable structures that amplify
sound waves traveling through the material in particular directions or transform
a static solid to a spontaneously flowing liquid when a prescribed pressure is
applied. In addition, this research activity will advance fundamental
understanding of systems which manipulate energy flows in fields as diverse as
electronics, photonics, and quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the project will develop new pedagogical tools,
activities, and programs to advance materials science knowledge among students
in non-traditional academic pathways, K-12 students, beginning graduate
students, and the general public. The PI and his research team will develop new
hands-on activities to convey the physical principles underlying the project to
participants at the Eugene Youth Math Festival, the Oregon Country Fair, and
summer programs for high school students hosted by the University of Oregon.
This award will support research internships for community college students who
are considering a transfer to a four-year degree program, and the development of
new learning modules which use scientific teaching practices to improve equity
and inclusion in graduate physics courses. The educational activities are
designed to enhance participation, achievement, and persistence of students from
underrepresented groups in STEM while improving outcomes for students from all
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award will support research and educational activities to advance
fundamental understanding and public awareness of dynamic materials that are
designed to channel mechanical energy in ways unattainable by inert structures.
Technological breakthroughs have enabled the fabrication of collections of
interacting building blocks whose local properties can be modulated by external
fields or internally powered mechanisms as desired. This opens new possibilities
for non-equilibrium manipulation of mechanical energy. However, the normal modes
of these dynamic materials are typically investigated using approximate methods
such as plane-wave and Magnus expansions that fail to correctly capture symmetry
constraints and topological features of the excitation spectra. This project
will develop an exact theoretical framework to compute the band structures of
spacetime-modulated mechanical systems with generalized couplings. The framework
will be used for rigorous evaluations and new explorations of non-equilibrium
mechanics and phase behavior, including topological properties of excitation
spectra and phase changes between crystal-like ordered states in active matter.
Beyond this work, the framework will be widely applicable to harmonic
oscillations of dynamical systems with second-order time dynamics. By revealing
new ways to control the flow of mechanical energy in classical systems, the
research will advance fundamental understanding of non-Hermitian physics with
relevance to manipulating energy flows in quantum condensed matter, cold atoms,
and optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying concepts and research questions
will be integrated into educational activities and programs that will improve
awareness of fundamental materials science and its role in technological
advancement in K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate physics students, and
the general public. New opportunities for materials science research will be
created for community college students, thereby reinforcing pathways to STEM
careers for students with non-traditional backgrounds. The research and
educational plans leverage the PI's expertise in theoretical modeling of soft
matter systems and existing relationships with educational and outreach
organizations in and around Eugene, Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.