* 2145256
* CAREER: Bio-inspired Nonequilibrium Design Principles of Molecular Information Machines
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Zhiyue Lu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2027
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award supports the research and
integrated educational efforts toward developing a new theoretical framework to
guide the design of intelligent, responsive materials that mimic living
organisms. Intelligent responses allow an entity to smartly discern and respond
to the complex spatial and temporal changes of surroundings. For example, a
bacterium can actively gather information from the environment and swim toward
foods or flee from toxins. Such intelligent responses, ubiquitously observed in
living organisms, must operate far from the steady state of thermal equilibrium.
So, they cannot be described by the equilibrium theory of classical
thermodynamics. Instead, a novel non-equilibrium theory is required to explain
and predict the intelligent responsiveness in the fundamental building blocks of
materials – molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this project is to
develop a non-equilibrium theory to quantitatively predict the intelligence of a
molecule’s response to external stimuli. The theory will capture the
relationship between the intelligence of the molecule’s response, its robustness
to environmental noise, and how far it needs to be driven away from thermal
equilibrium. To accomplish this aim, the research team will combine numerical
simulation techniques with the modern theory of non-equilibrium physics. In
addition, the team will construct generic toy models that distill the essential
dynamics of molecules’ non-equilibrium responses. This project will lead to a
set of fundamental and generic statements and predictions as design principles
for intelligent materials. These activities will provide students with a cross-
disciplinary training program combining mathematics, statistical physics,
chemistry, and biophysics and mentorship and professional development
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and the research team will partner with the
Morehead Planetarium and Science Center at the University of North Carolina-
Chapel Hill to engage the public. This collaboration involves outreach
activities such as Family Science Day and Launch Lab events to make the
scientific principles behind the research available to the students and teachers
in middle schools, kids and families, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
Award supports the research and integrated education to elucidate the design of
microscopic information machines that autonomously sense, memorize, and respond
to spatiotemporal patterns of external stimuli, such as pH, temperature, and
chemical environments. These microscopic machines will serve as fundamental
building blocks of next-generation novel materials and smart nano-robots.
Attaining this goal will transform the field of novel functional and active
materials by imparting life-like attributes to otherwise inert molecular
complexes and deepen our understanding of thermodynamics, information, and
intelligence in the chemistry, biology, and material science
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living organisms, maintained far from
equilibrium by constantly dissipating energy and producing entropy, can actively
sense, memorize, and respond to complex information hidden in environmental
conditions. Biological systems have evolved to utilize diverse ingenious
nonequilibrium mechanisms to maintain robust and accurate performance, typically
at the cost of energy dissipation or the speed of response. The strategic goal
of the research is to elucidate nonequilibrium mechanisms of energy extraction,
information sensing and storage, noise resistance, and robustness in connection
to entropy production and to develop a universal theory to predict and optimize
the performance of generic microscopic information machines. Specifically, this
research will address the following questions: What are the general
nonequilibrium thermodynamic principles behind these mechanisms? What are the
possible mechanisms to better extract and dissipate energy for the optimal
performance of smart materials and intelligent molecular complexes? What can one
learn from the physical understanding of biological systems to help the design
of artificial molecular complexes to achieve similar or better information
processing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the research are to (1)
use a hybrid energy landscape approach to describe the nonequilibrium flows of
energy caused by a time-varying environment, and (2) find the thermodynamic
limit of memory capacity in macromolecular complexes and general relation
between the ability of pattern recognition and system’s energy-landscape
complexity as reflected in its topology and geometry, and (3) lift the ideal-
environment assumption to include the backaction from the system and the thermal
fluctuations, and understand the counter-intuitive stochasticity induced
comprehensive sensing mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities
are closely integrated with education and outreach efforts: both graduate and
undergraduate students will be exposed to cutting-edge tools and concepts via
direct involvement participation in a novel course module of “thermodynamics of
information processing” that is to be included in the re-designed course
“Thermodynamics and Introduction to Thermal Statistics”. The PI will collaborate
with the Center for Faculty Excellence at UNC to acquire knowledge and guidance
regarding the up-to-date educational tools and methodologies and obtain frequent
quantifiable evaluations to guarantee the success of the re-designed course. The
PI and the research team will work with visitors and high school teachers and
students in North Carolina by collaborating with the Morehead Planetarium and
Science Center on Family Science Day and during the Launch Lab events. Morehead
will provide evaluation data to the PI that examines the extent to which the
event’s main communications goals are met and provide further guidance on
improving the public's engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.