* 2145223
* CAREER: Noise-Tailored Architectures for Fault-Tolerant Continuous-Variable Quantum Computing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Shruti Puri, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2027
* USD 227,428.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A computing hardware operating on
principles of quantum mechanics opens up the possibility of powerful
technologies that can accomplish tasks beyond what is possible with processors
based on classical Boolean algebra. However, to fully harness the power of
quantum phenomena the computing system must be made robust against inevitable
faults in the hardware. It becomes necessary to correct errors introduced in the
system due to faulty-hardware in a fault-tolerant manner so that the computer
continues to function reliably even if some of its constituent quantum
components have failed. State-of-the-art quantum technologies have led to
demonstration of landmark experiments in quantum error correction. However, they
are still far away from reaching the stringent performance and resource
requirements for fault-tolerance at a large scale needed for practical
applications of quantum computing. The goal of this NSF CAREER program is to
apply our expertise in the theory and control of open quantum systems and theory
of fault-tolerant error correction in unison to chart a course for practical,
scalable fault-tolerant quantum computation with new emerging quantum hardware.
To extend the broader impacts of this program, hands-on quantum information
science curricula will be developed to engage students in active quantum
information research and to draw talent from fields ranging from physics to
electrical and computer engineering. Moreover, to sustain a diverse future
quantum workforce, the program will establish a scaffolded education initiative
for the local community and youth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This program takes a
bottoms-up approach to accomplish the ambitious task of resource-efficient
fault-tolerant quantum error correction. The approach will be developed, in
particular, for the emerging superconducting continuous-variable (CV) or bosonic
quantum hardware based on storing a bit of quantum information or qubit in
quantum states of a superconducting oscillator. The motivation behind bosonic
encodings is that, in principle, they can be made resilient against some sources
of noise either by design or by active error correction applied directly to the
oscillator mode. Unfortunately, practical experimental noise is more complex and
the amount of noise suppression achieved so far in the laboratory is quite
limited. In this program the PI will develop new strategies for robust quantum
control of CV qubits taking into account realistic experimental noise. Rather
than solely relying on making the CV quantum hardware less noisy, known
structures in the noise will be used to design efficient fault-tolerant
protocols. This direction is based on the observation that not all errors are
equally harmful in a given system. Some errors are more contagious and spread
rapidly in a circuit and then there are also some types of errors that are
easier to detect using a particular error-correcting code. Thus, error-
correction can be made more effective if the noise channel of a qubit could be
tailored to suppress contagious errors, perhaps even at the cost of slightly
increasing errors that are nonetheless easier to detect. Such asymmetric-noise
qubits can be realized in a number of ways using CV encoding in superconducting
oscillators. Thus, the bottoms-up approach will be taken to develop scalable
fault-tolerant architectures with planar topological error correcting codes that
can leverage the noise properties of asymmetric-noise CV qubits. This work will
not only lead to efficient CV-fault-tolerant error correction, but will also
inform the design of next-generation quantum hardware, enabling practical,
scalable quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.