* 2145362
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Climate Driven Risks to Urban Environment – Hybrid Modeling and Adaptation Strategies
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Lei Zhao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2027
* USD 415,098.00

Current global-scale Earth systems research leaves critical gaps and barriers
for urban areas, which leads to systematic deficiencies in understanding urban
climate-driven risks and critical challenges for informing infrastructure system
design and operation. This project will mitigate these barriers by advancing
global urban science and engineering through addressing two overarching research
questions: (i) how does large-scale climate change coupled with urbanization
affect local urban climates? and (ii) how can this urban locale knowledge inform
the associated risks to infrastructure systems and adaptation strategies?
Outcomes from this project will: (i) advance the knowledge frontier of global
urban climate change, impacts, and solutions; (ii) provide a global-scale multi-
model characterization of local-scale urban climate change, variability, and
uncertainty driven by urbanization coupled with greenhouse gas (GHG) warming;
(iii) contribute to development of a new dynamic-urban Community Earth System
Model (CESM), and (iv) build a new hybrid urban modeling framework to help forge
new global urban science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to contribute to the new field of urban climate science and engineering through
developing a new hybrid modeling framework that combines process-based modeling
and deep learning approaches. The project will advance the knowledge frontier in
climate-driven risks to built environments and adaptation strategies. Objectives
of the research are to (i) robustly characterize urban climate change,
variability, and uncertainty under greenhouse gas (GHG) warming coupled with
urbanization, (ii) establish a pathway to inform infrastructure system design
and operation using robust urban projections, and (iii) establish a methodology
to evaluate and devise adaptation solutions on large scales. Research efforts
will be integrated with an educational plan designed to (i) motive, engage and
inspire young minds and the public to address critical urban challenges and (ii)
forge convergent education in urban climate science and engineering to foster
students’ creativity. An online, interactive Global Urban Climate Risks Map
webtool will be developed and publicly released. Hands-on sessions and demos
will be designed and showcased every year at UIUC summer programs to engage K-12
students, especially female and underrepresented students. A new inter-
departmental seminar series and new course materials will be developed and
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.