* 2145749
* CAREER: Engineered SAM-Dependent Enzymes for Stereoselective Alkylation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Yang Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 01/31/2027
* USD 690,000.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Synthesis
(SYN) program in the Division of Chemistry, Yang Yang of the University of
California-Santa Barbara (UCSB) is working with a team of graduate and
undergraduate students to discover and develop biocatalysts for selective
C-alkylation reactions. Enzymes are protein biocatalysts that have naturally
evolved to catalyze chemical reactions, often with excellent chemo-, regio- and
stereoselectivities. These biocatalysts function in water under exceptionally
mild conditions, thus allowing chemical synthesis to be carried out in a more
sustainable fashion. Furthermore, enzymes are easily produced on a large scale
using microbial hosts and have been exploited recently for applications in
chemical manufacturing and pharameutical process chemistry. It is desirable to
discover and engineer new classes of biocatalysts to catalyze synthetically
significant reactions with enhanced efficiency and selectivity. Dr. Yang and his
students will exploit their abilities in organic synthesis, physical organic
chemistry, enzymology and protein engineering to investigate and discover
efficient new biocatalysts for selective C-alkylation reactions, alpha-to a
carbonyl group, a process that is widely used in the synthesis of organic
compounds. In partnership with ongoing outreach programs at UCSB, Dr. Yang will
lead hands-on workshops to introduce local 7-12th grade students to the key
concepts and applications of chemical synthesis and
biocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining ideas and technologies from organic
chemistry, genome mining and protein engineering, Dr. Yang and his students aim
to discover and develop new biocatalysts to facilitate selective alkylation
reactions. Despite the synthetic utility to these transformation, aside from
examples using organocatalysis, there are relatively few general catalytic
asymmetric methods for C-alkylation adjacent to a carbonyl group. To address
this challenge, Dr. Yang and his group are developing a fully biocatalytic
platform consisting of a set of engineered alkyl transfer enzymes to facilitate
highly stereoselective alkylation processes using abundant and readily available
alkylation reagents. This biocatalytic alkylation platform, once fully
developed, is expected to allow for a range of useful chiral building blocks to
be synthesized conveniently. Broader impacts of this endeavor include the hands-
on exposure of students from underrepresented groups to science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers, as well as planned outreach focused
at the local level and on underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.