* 2145210
* Career: Dynamics of coalescence and mixing during droplet impact on liquid films
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Abhishek Saha, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2027
* USD 430,928.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many processes of industrial
importance involve the impact of a liquid droplet on a liquid surface. Examples
include inkjet printing, spray cooling, spray coating, and fuel injection in
combustion engines. This CAREER award will use advanced experimental techniques
and analytical methods to reveal the detailed dynamics of droplet impact with
liquid surfaces from the sub-micron to millimeter scale. The goal of the project
is to identify how ambient conditions and material properties influence droplet
impact and fluid mixing following impact. The project will also provide venues
for student engagement and outreach activities. High school students will
participate in the research through UCSD’s ENLACE program. Undergraduates,
especially first-generation college students, will be engaged in outreach
activities sponsored by the UCSD rocket clubs. Graduate students will benefit
from a new experiment based on the science explored in the project that will be
developed for a graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims
to investigate droplet impact on liquid surfaces and provide critical insights
in assessing impact dynamics and mixing behavior. The study will involve many
advanced optical measurements, such as imaging, interferometry, particle image
velocimetry, and laser-induced fluorescence, all of which will be performed at
high speed. Experiments will identify the microscopic physics associated with
the evolution of an interfacial gas layer trapped between the droplet and the
film, which controls the coalescence process. Then, the project will focus on
the mixing of droplet liquid with the film immediately following coalescence and
how mixing is affected by impact inertia, film geometry, molecular diffusion,
and liquid properties. The results of the study will aid in the design of
industrial applications mentioned above and will provide insight more broadly
into other multiphase processes, including droplet-droplet and jet-jet
interactions often relevant in propulsion, power generation, medical,
bioengineering, and manufacturing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.