* 2145378
* CAREER: Electrochemiluminescence in Microfluidics for Mechanistic Studies of Redox Reactions and Single Particle Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Frederique Deiss, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 01/31/2027
* USD 651,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry and partial funding from the Biosensing Program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET), Frederique Deiss of Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis
will study reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions and the detection of single
particles with electrochemiluminescence (ECL) and microfluidics. To answer
current challenges in analytical chemistry for the identification and
measurements of a single entity, Dr. Deiss will integrate electrochemistry,
microfluidics, spectroscopy, and materials sciences to produce methods for
single-entity electrochemistry using ECL in droplets. ECL is the emission of
light by a redox-active molecule after a cascade of electrochemical and chemical
reactions. This research will provide new strategies to elucidate chemical
mechanisms, with findings applied to making advances toward the goal of
detecting single bacteria. If successful, this research will help society by
generating a method for rapid and highly sensitive enumeration of bacteria,
which is needed in fields such as clinical tests and industrial quality control,
and to increase the understanding of chemical and biological systems. A sub-
class of microfluidic devices are paper-based devices. Their versatility, low-
cost, portability, and user-friendly features have enabled many studies, as well
as point-of-care and in-field applications. The educational objective of this
project is to transform the current knowledge and research in microfluidic
paper-based analytical devices and produce low-cost and widely accessible
platforms to teach practical analytical chemistry to students in a variety of
settings via instructional videos. The video series of the lab modules will be
hosted on free servers and educational websites to ensure its access to a broad
audience. The paper-based analytical assay and video modules are expected to
help motivate and spark interest in future researchers from all backgrounds,
including underrepresented minorities in science-technology-engineering-
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concomitant to the development of the
ECL single-entity electrochemistry (SEE) platform, the research objectives of
this project, under the direction of Frederique Deiss of Indiana
University–Purdue University Indianapolis, are to (i) study the different ECL
pathways of common luminophore/co-reactant, (ii) explore other redox mechanisms
such as the ones involved in bacterial metabolism used in resazurin-based redox
indicators, (iii) detect bacteria at ultralow concentration, and (iv) generate
paper-based platforms and instructional videos to teach hands-on analytical
chemistry modules. Droplets generated on electrodes in a microfluidic device
will yield an array of individual nodes to measure individual analytical events
electrochemically and spectrally. The simultaneous collection of electrochemical
and spectral data with space and time information should confer an edge to this
SEE platform and help elucidate redox mechanisms. The mechanistic insights could
help guide the development of other SEE droplet-based assays. This research will
also ultimately expand the knowledge of electrochemistry at the interface of
droplets and the new field of SEE. Additionally, its analytical performance is
set to be demonstrated with a reverse ECL assay for the detection of bacterial
cells down to the single cell level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.