* 2145108
* CAREER: Capillary-Incorporated Bioprinting of Biomimetic Soft Tissue  Constructs
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* George Tan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2027
* USD 600,711.00

Bioprinting is an additive manufacturing process that aims to create three-
dimensional biological constructs to repair or replace damaged tissues or
organs. Despite significant progress on material and process development in the
last two decades, there is an unmet need for bioprinting large functional
tissues with life-sustaining capillaries. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project investigates a hybrid bioprinting technology that can
contribute to the development of capillary-incorporated bioprinting for optimal
tissue regeneration. The technique includes electrospinning of porous microtubes
between layers of hydrogels in order to provide channels for nutrients to reach
cells which are to be grown inside the scaffold. The outcomes of this research
could provide a path toward novel manufacturing solutions for complex diseases
and bioinspired therapies that can advance regenerative medicine. The project
aims to cultivate and engage a diverse student body to achieve future excellence
in manufacturing for medicine by implementing a skill-based immersive teaching
program for K-12 teachers and students, and establishing university-community
partnerships in rural areas with global connections. These educational outreach
activities should help to build an ecosystem of biofabrication in west Texas,
with scalable models for enhancing research and education networks and
partnerships in rural areas. In addition, this award will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in research outside the customary
manufacturing portfolio, with a desire to contribute to sustaining America's
global leadership in advanced manufacturing and
biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports fundamental science
and engineering research in capillary-incorporated bioprinting for fabricating
centimeter-sized scaffolds integrated with biomimetic porous microtubes that
function as capillary vessels. The research tasks include (1) modeling the
microtube morphology and permeability, (2) characterizing the effects of
material and process parameters on the printing quality of the system, and (3)
building the process-function relationship of biomimetic constructs. By
successfully completing these three research tasks, this CAREER project will
generate new knowledge about the mechanisms of porous microtube formation, the
effect of wall thickness on the microtube permeability, and the
interrelationships between material composition, process parameters, and the
time-dependent properties of capillary-incorporated
scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.