* 2145844
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Nanoprecipitates in Advanced Metastable Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Yufeng Zheng, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 198,020.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In materials science, strength is the measure of
a material’s ability to bear a load or carry weight without failing.
Alternatively, ductility is a measure of a material’s ability to bend, stretch
or spread without breaking into pieces. Often, increasing the strength of a
material results in a decrease of ductility and vice versa. This project
supports fundamental research focused on the design of Titanium alloys that
overcome this typical strength-to-ductility trade-off by carefully tailoring the
elemental make-up of said alloys. This careful tailoring controls how specific
parts of the metal are arranged on an atomic level to have a certain chemical
composition and arrangement that increases the material’s strength without
reducing the material’s overall ability to bend or stretch. This type of design
is known as metastability engineering. This project investigates how parts of
Titanium alloys having the same elemental makeup and atomic structure change
with both temperature and chemical composition and how they deform under various
circumstances. To explore this behavior, real-time and “after the fact” studies
are performed using cutting edge equipment to discover connections between local
chemistry, different environments and very small particles in the metal that are
nanometers in size and have only recently been discovered in Titanium. The
fundamental knowledge established in this project advances the ability to design
lightweight Titanium alloys with both high strength and high ductility.
Metastable titanium alloys are desirable for aerospace, automobile, bio-medical
and chemical industries, due to their high strength-to-weight ratio, ability to
absorb impact, resistance to chemical deterioration and compatibility with
biological applications. As an example, relative to just one of these
industries, improvements to these alloys can help to increase aircraft fuel
efficiency, reduce fuel consumption, lower carbon emissions and ultimately,
benefit the environment. This project also develops education modules for
students in a K-12 Summer Camp as well as lab experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Nevada Reno. Both sets of activities
feature high powered microscopes providing students from local Reno communities
exposure to science and technology while also providing opportunities for women
and underrepresented minorities to learn materials science for the purpose of
developing the future scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance a novel alloy designing strategy
known as metastability engineering, by studying microstructural evolution and
deformation in metastable Titanium alloys. The project will identify the
critical role of the recently discovered, orthorhombic nano-precipitate, O prime
(O’) in the spatially confined phase transformations of Titanium and its alloys.
Advanced ex-situ and in-situ characterization techniques are employed to explore
three specific phenomena: (i) The relationship between alloy composition and O’
nano-precipitates; (ii) The role of O’ in refining precipitate microstructure;
and (iii) the role of O’ in regulating martensitic transformations. Multiscale
ex- and in-situ experimental characterization using scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, scanning transmission electron
microscopy and atom probe tomography are used. This research progresses the
ability to realize metastable alloys of Titanium having both high strength and
high ductility. Education modules and outreach activities focused on electron
microscopy creatively engage students in K-12, undergraduate and graduate level
study. The education modules and activities are enhanced by a remote-controlled
transmission electron microscope and a portable desktop scanning electron
microscope to capture a wide range of interests and expose all to meaningful
science. These education activities provide students in the neighboring
community unprecedented access to science in real-time and offers to the student
body at the University of Nevada, Reno a practical means of enhancing their in-
class instruction with exposure to advanced characterization being performed at
their institution. All activities assist with developing a future STEM workforce
by generating interest in materials science to students at all
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.