* 2145153
* CAREER: Structured High-Agency Interactive Narratives for Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Stephen Ware, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2027
* USD 224,560.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narratives are fundamental to the
way we think, communicate, and learn. Virtual environments such as training
simulations invite the user to play the role of one character in a narrative,
while the system controls all the other non-player characters and the
environment. Interactive narratives are effective tools for teaching people how
to perform a task and educating people about important topics, but writing
interactive narratives is challenging. Most are manually written, ensuring a
nice structure but limiting their scope because every choice must be imagined in
advance. Some environments are realistic simulations that give users freedom to
do a wide variety of actions, but then it is hard for the designer to guarantee
the narratives have the necessary content. This project will use artificial
intelligence planning algorithms to create narratives at run time in games and
training simulations. Planned narratives can have the structure of a hand-
written story and the freedom of a simulation. This project will explore fast
algorithms for generating narratives as well as models of what users remember
and expect. Over the project duration, the research team will develop virtual
environments (such as a virtual reality de-escalation training simulation for
police officers) that evolves from a role-playing exercise between two people to
a fully automated virtual environment where the artificial intelligence
personalizes the interactive narrative for each
player.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project frames interactive narratives as an
improvisational exercise between a player who controls one character and an
experience manager who controls all the other elements of a virtual environment.
These partners communicate their beliefs, intentions, memories, and expectations
via the actions they choose to take, which is a noisy channel that requires
inference for understanding. This project operationalizes the interactive
narrative creation as a Mutual Implicit Question Answering (MIQA) process. Each
action taken by one participant causes their partner to implicitly ask questions
about why they took that action and/or implicitly answers questions that were
raised earlier. The better one partner can answer questions raised by the other,
the closer they are to mutual understanding. MIQA combines research on multi-
agent artificial intelligence planning, cognitive models of memory and
expectations, and procedures from automated question answering to represent both
partners and how well they understand one another. Participants in an
interactive virtual environment will do paired exercises where one will act as
player and the other as experience manager. During this exercise, both partners
will answer questions about their actions and about their perceptions of their
partner’s actions. They will also report on their perceptions of the structure
of the narrative and the player agency. These exercises will begin as person-to-
person exercises but will evolve into person-to-intelligent-agent exercises
through data gathering and model refinement. The research hypothesis is that the
intelligent agent will be able to provide high-agency, structured interactive
narratives that approach the quality of those created with a human partner. This
hypothesis will be evaluated using a Turing test: can the player identify
whether the interactive narration is controlled by a human or an intelligent
agent. These exercises will take place in a virtual environment called Camelot,
but the research team will simultaneously implement the same procedures into an
ongoing virtual reality training simulation that is being built in consultation
with police officer training experts to teach best practices for de-escalating
potentially dangerous situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.