* 2145354
* CAREER: Enabling Verifiable Computation with Hardware Acceleration
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Scott Beamer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 12/31/2026
* USD 255,699.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As computation has become increasingly
ubiquitous, so has the fraction of daily life directly impacted by it.
Unfortunately, with declining trust in institutions, users find themselves in
the perilous position of relying on computations they have little trust in.
Fortunately, verifiable computation (VC), a rapidly emerging capability in
computer science, provides a candidate solution. Instead of requiring users to
blindly trust that their computations are correctly computed by others, users
can verify that the correct computation was performed by inspecting a proof
produced with the computation. There is a growing list of potential applications
for VC including cloud offload, finance, untrusted chip fabrication, blockchain
compression, and machine learning (ML). However, VC is currently impractical
because generating the proofs is too computationally expensive. Hardware
acceleration is a natural solution to VC's astronomical computational demands,
but rising hardware-design costs complicate the development of specialized
hardware. This project attacks both problems by investigating novel hardware
architectures to accelerate VC and agile hardware-design techniques to reduce
design costs. The acceleration provided will make many more VC applications
practical. Enabling the widespread use of VC benefits society, as users will be
able to individually verify the integrity of computations that affect them. The
new design techniques will be shared in an approachable course whose materials
will be open-sourced and well documented. In addition, the project integrates
educational efforts such as helping underrepresented college students strengthen
their problem-solving skills as well as broadening the pool of students pursuing
graduate study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immaturity of the VC research area
complicates developing hardware acceleration in multiple ways, and this project
is intended to solveee these challenges. First, VC is a diverse and rapidly
moving field, which makes it unlikely that a single accelerator architecture
will be able to support all approaches. Fortunately, many approaches reuse
operations and computational patterns, so this project is creating a library of
hardware generators that can serve as building blocks to construct the desired
VC approaches. Second, since VC is so new, there is little architectural wisdom
and nearly no prior work on hardware acceleration for VC. The flexibility and
parameterizability of the generators enables expansive design space explorations
to productively discover efficient architectures. Third, exploiting all of the
opportunities for reuse requires non-trivial compositions of topologies,
operators, and rich data types. The project is developing deep composition to
raise the abstraction level of reuse without sacrificing efficiency. The
innovative architectures developed to handle the novel VC workload will empower
future VC application research. The open-source library of building blocks for
VC hardware accelerators will help kickstart a new research area. Creating a new
research area in addition to the new course and outreach activities, will help
broaden and grow the hardware-design community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.