* 2145588
* CAREER: Heterobimetallic Complexes for Facile Hydrodenitrogenation Processes with Low Hydrogen Intake
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Virginia Montiel-Palma, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2027
* USD 691,886.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry
and the the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
Virginia Montiel-Palma of Mississippi State University is investigating
catalysts that remove nitrogen from aromatic compounds commonly present in
gasolines and petroleum feedstocks. Aromatic N-containing compounds, some of
which can have a negative environmental and health impact, are difficult to
remove from petroleum under current industry conditions. Thus, developing
catalysts that facilitate the cleavage of C-N bonds in these compounds is a huge
challenge. In this project, catalyst candidates that incorporate two metals are
designed to react with and break the C-N bonds in aromatic N-containing
compounds under mild conditions. In terms of broader impacts, the PI will
continue to be actively engaged with the Mississippi Migrant Education Center
where she participates in efforts to reach and provide science education to K-12
students who are children of migratory workers. These efforts are aimed at
fighting educational inequities by addressing scientific topics that enrich the
educational pathways and motivate students to complete and continue their
education beyond the secondary level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve a systematic study of the hydrogenation of nitrogen-containing aromatic
compounds by heterobimetallic complexes made of a late transition metal and a
group-13 metal. In some of these complexes, the transition metal binds to an
aromatic ring, while the N atom binds directly to the main group metal. This
particular arrangement is expected to allow for the scission of the C-N bonds at
low hydrogen pressures. A multifaceted characterization plan will be used to
interrogate the precise role of the metal coordination modes in the
hydrogenolysis reaction, as well as the mechanism by which it occurs. These
activities are expected to provide a foundational profile of the catalyst system
and aid in the design of more efficient and robust hydrodenitrogenation
catalysts. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students involved in
the project will gain experience in synthetic, mechanistic, and computational
methodologies in pursuing this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.