* 2145723
* CAREER: Vascularization in Cardiac Fibrosis Models
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Perla Ayala, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2027
* USD 430,660.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart failure (HF) persists as a
major healthcare issue because of its high prevalence, mortality, morbidity, and
cost of care. The human heart has limited capacity of repair after injury, and
the lost cells are replaced by a fibrotic scar. The limited formation of blood
vessels during cardiac fibrosis conditions significantly contributes to disease
progression; vascularization in a damaged heart muscle is still a central and
unresolved problem for cardiac muscle infarction repair. The objective of this
CAREER proposal is to use a tissue engineering approach to develop precise
diseased models to investigate vascular repair of damaged cardiac fibrotic
tissue, and to integrate inclusive education and research training to every
stage of the research work. This system will enable investigation of effective
therapies for patients suffering with heart disease and the training component
will broaden the participation of women and students from underrepresented
backgrounds in science and engineering, eventually helping to diversify
America's science and engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator's long-term research goal is to advance strategies to engineer
novel tissue models that mimic matrix remodeling and vascularization events
during different pathophysiological conditions e.g., fibrosis progression after
myocardial infarction, aiming to gain insight on tissue repair mechanisms and to
ultimately establish new therapeutic approaches to control cardiac dysfunction
and repair. Towards this goal, the aim of this CAREER project is to increase
understanding of the mechanisms of vascularization in cardiac fibrosis
conditions. The proposed 3D models will mimic important characteristics of the
infarcted fibrotic cardiac tissue. The research objectives are to: (1) Engineer
well-defined cardiac fibrosis models that recapitulate the remodeling process
post-MI, (2) Determine/replicate the reciprocal influence of endothelial cells
on the progression of cardiac fibrosis and the role of fibrosis on
vascularization, and (3) Investigate the design of a vascularized engineered
cardiac fibrosis model with flow that could help elucidate mechanisms to enhance
cardiac vascularization and repair. The results obtained from this study will
focus on two important aspects that limit the success of regenerative therapies
for cardiac regeneration, the progression of fibrotic tissue remodeling and the
optimal approach to promote sustained cardiac vascularization. This knowledge
will contribute to the development of novel approaches to modulate the balance
between pathological fibrosis and endogenous mechanisms of regeneration,
including angiogenesis. New insight will facilitate the development of advanced
regenerative therapies that can be implemented in the
clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.