* 2145392
* CAREER: Multiscale Mechanics of Mycelium for Lightweight, Strong, and Sustainable Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Zhao Qin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2027
* USD 595,245.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will focus on revealing the
fundamental principles that govern the multiscale mechanics of mycelium-based
composites and integrate research into an educational program. Mycelium is
massively produced during mushroom growth as the main body of fungi. It plays an
essential role in altering soil chemistry and mechanics, enabling a suitable
living environment for different plant species. Their growth naturally forms
entanglement and bonds to integrate organic wastes, including hardwood residue,
mill dust, and stalk, to produce strong and lightweight composites without
adding synthetic glues or energy input. The multiscale structure of mycelium
composites includes the chemistry of mycelium fiber, the mycelium-debris
interface, and the complex mycelium network entangled with debris. These
features synergistically determine the composite strength, elasticity, and
toughness. This research project will develop computational modeling, culturing,
and characterizations capabilities to understand the evolving mycelium structure
in growth and the structure-mechanics relationship to yield better composites.
This research will be complemented by establishing an inclusive, engaging, and
inspiring educational program to the broad community, including curriculum
development, giving a special exhibition on biomaterials, coordinating learn-by-
play activities and seminars on computational simulations for bridge competition
in a local museum, and involving K-12 in research through an institutional STEM
education center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to
develop a fundamental multiscale model of mycelium-based composites, validate
the model through in-lab culturing and mechanical/structural characterizations,
and reveal the mechanism of making mycelium composite lightweight and strong.
The research objectives of this project include (i) development of a multiscale
modeling and simulations platform for the structure-mechanics relationship of
mycelium-wood composite; (ii) development of Monte Carlo and generative
adversarial network models to replicate and predict the growth of mycelium
network; (iii) capability to use machine learning model for fast prediction of
the composite mechanical properties and their scaling law with material density.
In addition, the following fundamental questions will be addressed: (1) what are
the roles of environmental factors and nutrition distribution in the structure
and mechanics of a mycelium network; (2) what are the roles of processing
parameters in the mechanics of mycelium composites. The overall focus will be on
understanding the physics of mycelium composite and the potential of producing
multifunctional composites from wastes. This project will allow the PI to
advance the knowledge base in material science, multiscale modeling, and
mechanics, and establish his long-term career in biomechanics and
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.