* 2145767
* CAREER: Harnessing external knowledge to improve computer vision robustness, explainability, and user accuracy
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Anh Nguyen, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2027
* USD 212,708.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial Intelligence (AI) is
transforming every discipline from transportation to policing to healthcare.
Yet, AI-based systems often make mistakes when facing scenarios that they have
never seen before. For instance, one of the most critical issues with
autonomous, self-driving cars is the inability to handle edge cases, causing
accidents both with and without humans behind the steering wheel. The goals of
this research are to build AI-based systems that harness external sources of
knowledge (e.g., Wikipedia) to make more informed and thus more accurate
decisions. In addition, the AI systems have a transparent decision-making
process that human users can leverage to make accurate decisions or debug AI
systems. With these goals in mind, the project will address three research
questions on making AI-based systems. First, the system should be designed for
addressing robust to new, edge cases in the complex, evolving real world.
Second, the AI system should maximize user accuracy when humans are the end
decision-makers. Finally, systems should be built so human users can debug and
understand the systemsâ€™ decision-making process. Education and outreach
activities of the project include a new Explainable AI course in Auburn
University, an AI club in K-6 school, and collaboration with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the challenges in image
classification frameworks that harness explicit visual and textual knowledge
from external knowledgebases to make decisions. Towards this, the researchers
will utilize large text corpus (e.g., Wikipedia) and image datasets as an
external source of information for image classifiers to leverage (for instance,
by comparing the input image with support images) and make better decisions. The
research goal is to shift the paradigm of image classifiers from the existing
parametric approach that relies only on an input image for the deep neural
networks (DNNs) into a hybrid, semi-parametric, system that uses DNNs to process
the input image but also iteratively searches in an image-text database. This
paradigm shift will help improve the accuracy of decision-making for both the
AI-based systems and human-AI teams. The information-retrieval-based approach to
computer vision will make the decision-making process of AI-based systems: (a)
be more robust to ill-posed image classification cases e.g., under occlusions;
(b) inherently more understandable to users as humans can naturally interpret
the support images or text retrieved by the systems; (c) it could also lead to
more robust DNNs for image classification tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.