* 2145075
* CAREER: Universal Dynamics of Thermal Fluctuations in Pool Boiling and Their Role in Predicting Critical Heat Flux
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Vinod Srinivasan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2027
* USD 458,773.00

Boiling is a highly efficient heat transfer mechanism widely used in power
plants, micro-electronics, and industrial heat exchangers. In recent years,
microfabrication technology used for manufacturing electronics has been adapted
to create extremely fine-scale roughness on boiling surfaces, tremendously
enhancing their heat transfer performance. However, all surfaces are prone to
contamination that can cause physical and chemical changes on the surface. This
can lead to dramatic, unpredictable shifts in their performance, with the result
that the margin of safety from overheating and failure becomes unknown during
long-term operation. The present study develops a new framework for
understanding the boiling process that enables assessment of the safety margin
in real time, even as the surface degrades. Besides improving safety, this may
promote adoption of more advanced heat transfer enhancement techniques, while
providing a better fundamental understanding of the boiling phenomenon. As part
of the project, an exhibit appropriate for middle schoolers will be developed
jointly with the Bell Museum of Minnesota, to illustrate chaotic phenomena such
as the ‘butterfly effect’, which has certain parallels with the chaotic boiling
process. The PI will also develop modules for outreach activities that bring
middle school girls to campus for STEM-oriented workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a model for the
Critical Heat Flux (CHF) phenomenon, in which a vapor film blanketing the
surface leads to thermal runaway. The model will seek to reproduce observed
nonlinear phenomena such as intermittency of measured quantities. A theoretical
framework will be developed that enables non-dimensionalization of the boiling
curve, leading to a more universal understanding of the conditions leading to
CHF. Specifically, nucleation site interactions will be incorporated into bubble
growth models in order to reproduce the experimentally observed intermittency in
quantities. This intermittency is expected to give rise to long-term temporal
correlations that can be represented by the Hurst exponent. Experimental data
will be analyzed using a multifractal framework, and are expected to display the
predicted universal behavior, independent of system parameters. The study will
explore whether the Hurst exponent behavior is independent of surface roughness,
allowing it to be used as a real-time observable quantity that acts as a
signature of impending failure. In order to understand the reasons for the
observed trends and assist in model development, the wicking flow under a
departing bubble will be characterized using high-speed thermometry and total
internal reflection microscopy. These will yield further information on
conditions immediately preceding the onset of CHF and
dryout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.