* 2145725
* CAREER: Contextualizing recent extreme El Nino events over the late Holocene using trace element paleothermometry in tropical Pacific corals
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Alyssa Atwood, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 02/28/2027
* USD 270,170.00

This project will produce coral-based sea surface temperature reconstructions in
the tropical Pacific Ocean. These records will document the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) climate phenomenon during the last 3000 years. Today, ENSO
drives changes in weather patterns around the globe every few years. It
originates in the tropical Pacific Ocean and atmosphere and can have severe and
far-reaching impacts that affect the natural environment and the lives of
billions of people. A series of extreme El Niño events over the last several
decades suggests that rising atmospheric greenhouse gases may be causing ENSO
events to intensify. However, how ENSO may change in a warmer world is not well
known. Advances in understanding ENSO are currently limited by the short
duration of instrumental sea surface temperature records. Approaches that use
paleoclimate proxy data provide a way to produce temperature estimates from
before the instrumental era. However, those longer proxy temperature records
rely on sparse networks of coral-based records. This project will reduce that
data gap by producing ~40 new decades-long coral-based temperature records from
the central and eastern Pacific Ocean. The project’s education and outreach
activities include efforts to recruit and retain undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in the earth sciences and to strengthen active learning in the
Florida State University undergraduate curriculum. They also include development
of cross-disciplinary graduate research opportunities and efforts to improve
science literacy in northern Florida high schools. The project includes four
years of graduate student support and support for undergraduate researchers each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate 40 new quantitative
temperature records over the last 3,000 years from key regions of the equatorial
Pacific Ocean spanning the eastern edge of the warm pool to the core of the cold
tongue. An ensemble reconstruction approach will use smaller, more widely
available coral archives than have traditionally been used in the past – coral
rubble – and measurements will combine traditional Sr/Ca measurements with newer
Sr-U techniques. Rigorous screening tools for diagenesis, including microscale
analyses, will be employed to extract reliable climate information from the
fossil records. The reconstructions will provide unprecedented quantitative
constraints on the evolution of equatorial Pacific sea surface temperatures on
seasonal to millennial time scales, including characterizing whether and how the
statistics of extreme ENSO events have changed since the industrial era,
relative to the prior 3,000 years of Earth history. The educational objectives
of the project will increase the scope and impact of the research, while also
addressing outstanding needs in geoscience education. These educational
objectives focus on expanding professional development opportunities, skill
building, and diversity and leadership training for graduate students and
postdocs entering the scientific workforce. The project will also integrate
research with community needs and education at international field
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.