* 2145532
* CAREER: Micro- and Nanoplastics in Sea Spray: Emission, Transport, and Deposition in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Hosein Foroutan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2027
* USD 408,896.00

Micro- and nanoplastics (MNPs) have become pervasive pollutants throughout the
world. MNPs have been found virtually in all ecosystems and environmental media.
They can be easily ingested by living organisms and pose new risks to human and
ecosystem health as they enter the food chain. Every year millions of tons of
MNPs are released into oceans and seas. Recently, plastic particles were
detected in air samples from marine atmosphere boundary layers. However, little
is known about the processes and mechanisms that control the release and
transfer of MNPs from oceans and seas to the atmosphere and other environmental
compartments and media. This CAREER project will address these critical
knowledge gaps. More specifically, the Principal Investigator proposes to carry
out an integrated experimental and modeling project to test the hypotheses that
1) MNPs can be aerosolized and transferred to the atmosphere by sea spray
through ocean/sea wave breaking and bubble bursting, 2) the aerosolization of
MNP particles via sea spray is modulated by their size, shape, age, and
composition, and 3) sea spray MNPs can be transferred to other environmental
compartments and media through long-range atmospheric transport and deposition.
The successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new data and knowledge to advance the fundamental understanding
and quantification of the atmospheric release, transport, and deposition of sea
spray MNPs in the environment. Further benefits to society will be achieved
through student education and training including the mentoring of two graduate
students and two undergraduate students at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
widely held assumption is that oceans and seas act as quasi-permanent sinks for
micro-nanoplastics (MNPs); that is plastic particles which enter oceans and seas
will remain there for extended periods. However, the detection of MNPs in air
samples from marine atmosphere boundary layers suggests that particle transfer
from oceans and seas to the atmosphere might be an important and yet poorly
accounted pathway for plastic environmental transport and pollution. The
overarching goal of this CAREER project is to investigate and quantify the
aerosolization of MNPs via sea spray and their atmospheric transport,
deposition, and accumulation in the environment. To advance this goal, the
Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to carry out an integrated experimental and
modeling program organized around four research tasks. Task 1 will investigate
the generation of sea spray MNPs in a specially designed aerosol generator tank
to simulate particle formation via ocean/sea wave breaking and bubble bursting
using well characterized plastic particles as model systems. Task 2 will
evaluate and quantify the relationships between the ﬂux of aerosolized MNPs and
particle size, shape, age, and composition. Task 3 will combine the data
generated in Tasks 1 and 2 to develop and parameterize a process model that
could be used to estimate the surface flux of sea spray MNP aerosols. Task 4
will integrate the MNP surface flux model from Task 3 into the Community
Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model to simulate and quantify the transport and
deposition of sea spray MNP aerosols in relevant environmental compartments and
media. The successful completion of this project has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge, data,
and modeling tools to quantify the generation of sea spray MNP aerosols and
their subsequent transport, deposition, and accumulation in the environment. To
implement the education and training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will
work with the Science Museum of Western Virginia to create a public exhibit with
hand-on experiments to demonstrate the formation of sea spray aerosols and
marine atmospheric MNPs using an exhibit version of the PI’s aerosol generation
tank. In addition, the PI plans to partner with the Center for Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity (CEED) at Virgina Tech to develop a training module for
summer camps for pre-college students who are underrepresented in STEM. The
proposed summer camp module will include a hands-on experiment during which the
students will learn how to characterize aerosolized MNPs from the PI’s lab using
optical microscopy and related image processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.