* 2145427
* CAREER: Training Diverse Scientists to Design Bionanomaterials for Imaging and Labeling of Therapeutic Stem cells
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Marilyn Mackiewicz, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2027
* USD 362,144.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award made by the Biomaterials
Program in the Division of Materials Research to Oregon State University focuses
on nanomaterials research to advance national health. New nanomaterials combine
cell-labeling and imaging capabilities to visually track stem-cell-based
regenerative medicine therapies longitudinally in real-time via optical
coherence tomography (OCT) imaging. The materials from this project will allow
researchers to study the migration and survival after transplantation in vivo,
capabilities that currently do not exist. Highly reflective nanomaterials
improve the resolution of OCT imaging to visualize single cells. The modified
coatings on nanoparticle surfaces adhere to therapeutic stem cells, protect
nanomaterials from degradation in biological environments, and make them
stealthy to evade the immune system. The project develops safe and stable
nanomaterials and advances the field by improving understanding of how the
properties of the coated nanomaterials influence their stability, cellular
uptake, and retention without compromising cell health and function. It also
advances the potential of preclinical research by providing new tools for
studying the safety and efficacy of therapeutic stem cells. The project will
benefit society by addressing convergent challenges in human health and
nanomedicine and by providing broadly applicable new materials for (1)
diagnostic imaging, (2) drug delivery, and (3) preclinical research tools to
advance cell-based therapies for retinal diseases, cancer, and
neurodegeneration. The investigator integrates this research with a
comprehensive education program to inspire and train the next generation of
diverse scientists in bionanomaterials research for nanomedicine. The
educational platform comprises an Ignite in STEM research program; enrichment
curriculum focused on professional skills; and a course-based research
experience that provides K12 and undergraduate students from underserved
communities with authentic experiences, transferable skills as chemists, and
opportunities to reveal the hidden curriculum needed to build strong scientific
and professional identities for retention in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for
evaluating cell-based therapies, i.e., gaining insights into cell migration,
integration, and survival after transplantation rely on histological analysis of
tissues post-mortem. This approach is costly and requires that many animals be
sacrificed. The ability to track these cells longitudinally in vivo is hampered
by the inability to identify transplanted cells with current imaging methods.
This NSF CAREER award is focused on studying how hybrid membrane-coated
nanomaterials (HMNPs) may be optimized as optical coherence tomography (OCT)
contrast agents and nanolabels for cell-based therapies, uniquely advancing the
capabilities of preclinical studies focused on cell transplantation. Creating
membranes to coat nanomaterials that give them “stealth” abilities to evade the
immune system represents a frontline nanotechnology challenge in imaging,
diagnostic, and drug delivery. The design rules for these coatings in imaging
cell-based therapies remain unknown. While prior work shows that membrane-based
nanoparticles improve biocompatibility and drug delivery, the ability to use
HMNPs to label and visualize transplanted cells using OCT, as this project aims
to do, has not yet been realized. The first aim of the project focuses on the
synthesis and characterization of HMNPs with high scattering efficiency and
reflectance for OCT imaging and membrane architectures with ligands on the HMNPs
that attach extracellularly or intracellularly to cells. The second focuses on
understanding how the size, shape, and surface chemistry of HMNPs influence
their ability to engage and facilitate their cellular uptake and retention. The
third focuses on understanding how the structural features of HMNPs and
symbiotic cell-labeling influence their reflectance properties and OCT contrast.
Together these aims advance fundamental knowledge of HMNPs as preclinical tools
to improve the study of cell-based therapies. This project integrates research
and professional development skills to increase the number of diverse scientists
in STEM by (a) creating a strong outreach program to engage and connect high
school STEM students with nanomaterials research, (b) implementing a
programmatic enrichment arc in the chemistry majors to hardwire success in
chemistry with transferable asset-based skills, and (c) creating a Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) focused on interfacing nanomaterials
with biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.