* 2145471
* CAREER: Assertions for Distributed Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Aurojit Panda, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2027
* USD 266,819.00

Distributing computation on multiple machines is the primary tool used for
building software that can operate across multiple computers or despite computer
failures. As a result, distributed applications that run on multiple machines
lie at the core of most large services such as Google, Netflix, and air-traffic
control systems. However, writing correct distributed applications is
challenging. Bugs in distributed applications have resulted in downtime for
several services, including Facebook, Netflix, and the United Kingdom's air-
traffic control system. This proposal aims to develop techniques to allow
distributed applications to detect and respond to bugs at runtime, thus
minimizing their impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three
core thrusts. The first thrust focuses on developing efficient mechanisms to
detect distributed application bugs by evaluating logical assertions about
application state, and developing efficient techniques to respond to detected
bugs. The second thrust focuses on developing techniques to check automatically
whether the assertions provided by a programmer are both necessary and
sufficient for detecting bugs in the distributed application. The third thrust
focuses on developing techniques to identify the root cause of a bug detected at
runtime, thus allowing programmers to fix the underlying
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms proposed by the project can improve
the resilience and trustworthiness of widely used online services and
infrastructure. The project will produce an open-source framework that
incorporates these mechanisms and produce documentation and tutorials to
simplify the adoption of these ideas. Additionally, the proposal plans to
develop new programming assignments that use the proposed assertion checking
mechanism to allow students to validate their approach to failure handling.
Extending assignments in this way improves distributed systems pedagogy. The
proposed project will develop new graduate and undergraduate distributed systems
classes built around these assignments. The projects and course materials
developed for these classes will be freely available to encourage wider
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All source code, data, papers, documentation, and
course materials produced as a part of the proposed work will be available from
https://cims.nyu.edu/daf/. All material will remain available for at least five
years after the end of this project or five years after publication, whichever
is later. All source code will be released under an ISC (Internet Systems
Consortium) or similarly permissive license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.