* 2145615
* CAREER: Understanding the Deformability of Biological Filaments from their Atomistic Level Details
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Sachin Goyal, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports research to examine how the mechanical
deformability of biological filaments is influenced by the atom-level details of
their chemical structures. Biological filaments include those that form our
genetic material and make up biological tissues. Understanding how biological
filaments deform is important for both bioengineering and medicine. Eventually,
this work may enable scientists to manipulate biological filaments to improve
the functional ability of the filaments. For example, manipulating mechanical
and chemical signals of genetic material can transform gene therapy, or
eventually lead to a new treatment for cancer. This work will also transform the
way engineering students learn mechanics of materials. It will also bring a
radically new perspective basic mechanics questions, such as "Is it possible to
obtain a whole range of deformation behaviors by simply changing the atomistic
configurations?" This work will create fundamental knowledge that connects the
fields of engineering and technology with basic science and mathematics. It will
provide primary and high school students a unique learning perspective and
empowers schoolteachers with new knowledge on the topics covered under "From
Molecules to Organisms: Structures and Processes."&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
existing models for simulating the deformations of filaments employ linear
constitutive laws that are inadequate to explain the crucial mechanics of their
biologically relevant deformations. The goal of this research is to clear this
roadblock by developing an inverse approach with a rod model framework for
estimating the constitutive laws of thin filaments from the data obtained from
their all-atom simulations and physical experiments. The related research
objectives include: (i) analysis of how the spatial configuration of atoms as
well as the bond potentials individually influence the constitutive laws; (ii)
development of educational tools and virtual labs for engineering students to
learn the mechanics of beams along with some novel concepts. Some of the
fundamental questions that will be answered include: (1) how base-pair sequence
of the non-coding segments of the genetic filament influences their structural
deformability that govern gene expression; (2) how one can design a filament to
have a certain constitutive behavior by changing its atomistic
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.