* 2145744
* CAREER: A Model-Guided and Holistic Approach for Peripheral Security
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Jing Tian, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 203,280.00

Modern peripherals devices such as USB keyboards and drives, Bluetooth speakers
and headsets, complement users' computer systems with rich functionality and
have become an integral part of daily life. While peripheral devices offer a
"Plug'n'Play" solution to ease their usage in different scenarios, attacks from
these devices are increasing due to their "Trust-by-default" treatment and
direct interactions with the low-level parts of the target machines (e.g.,
operating systems). For instance, a USB drive found in the parking lot could
take complete control of an industrial control system once plugged, while a
Bluetooth speaker could intercept all the network traffic of a user's laptop
once connected. This work aims to systematically improve peripheral security by
discovering and reducing vulnerabilities that could enable peripheral attacks
ahead of time, detecting malicious tampering within peripheral devices once
connected, and responding to peripheral attacks timely with
assurance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address the broad research
challenge of enabling a trustworthy and formally-verified peripheral ecosystem
and designing next-gen secure peripheral devices and operating systems. Rather
than targeting a specific peripheral attack, this project focuses on developing
a model-guided and holistic approach for peripheral security in general,
including both USB and Bluetooth, leveraging “models” extracted from peripheral
specifications and stack implementations as key prior knowledge, and covering
the whole life cycle of peripheral security, including pre-attack, runtime, and
post-attack stages. As such, model-guided fuzzing, debloating, and formal
verification reduces the attack surface exposed to peripheral devices; model-
based firmware analysis, fingerprinting, and authentication enables runtime
integrity of peripheral devices; model-guided provenance, patching, and formal
implementation allows for immediate and assured responding actions against
peripheral attacks. This project will assess all these considerations within a
combination of real-world applications (e.g., Android USB security) and
specification enhancements (e.g., Bluetooth security and privacy), and
generalize the knowledge for securing both peripheral devices and host machines
across hardware, firmware, and software stacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.