* 2145871
* CAREER: Using Stochastic Techniques to Understand and Predict the Flow of Non-spherical Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Aaron Morris, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2027
* USD 443,172.00

Flows involving dense suspensions of particles in gas, which are known as
granular flows, are common in nature and industry. In many cases of practical
importance, the suspended particles have an irregular shape (i.e., non-
spherical), which makes predicting the flow behavior of the suspension
especially challenging with currently available methods. As a result, the design
of many particulate processes often relies on costly empirical trial-and-error
testing. This CAREER project will develop a physics-based stochastic model that
accounts for irregular particle shapes to predict particle dynamics more
accurately in large-scale systems. Results of the project will be useful in
extending granular flow theory for idealized spherical particles to more
realistic granular media and in providing new solutions to technical challenges
that occur in particle technology. The project will involve research training
for graduate and undergraduate students and will prepare them for possible
careers involving particle technology. The research team will participate with
the Purdue Engineering Outreach club to bring demonstrations of particulate
flows for K-12 students in local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
CAREER project is to use stochastic methods to develop a physics-based model for
predicting particle flows in systems containing billions of particles. Current
state-of-the-art discrete element methods for non-spherical particles are
limited to fewer than one million particles. By comparison, a single cup of sand
contains approximately 100 million particles. To achieve this goal, the project
will develop high-fidelity simulations that capture the dynamics of colliding
particles to construct a stochastic model for large-scale systems. Discrete
element simulations will be performed to determine how non-spherical particles
scatter during collisions and redistribute rotational and translational
energies. Machine learning tools will then be employed to build probability
distribution functions that relate the pre-collision to the post-collision
states of particles. The probability distribution functions will then be
incorporated into a direct simulation Monte Carlo solver that can simulate the
dynamics of systems containing billions of particles. To validate the stochastic
model, comparisons will first be made to deterministic discrete element
simulations for relatively small-scale systems. The accuracy of the stochastic
model will then be assessed for larger scale systems by comparing results with
available experimental data in the literature and with data from in-house tests.
In addition to capturing the complex physics that arise due to particle shape
effects, the project will create a framework for improving predictions of other
complex phenomena such as particle attrition and
agglomeration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.