* 2145323
* CAREER: Synthetic quantum materials in superconducting circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ruichao Ma, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 232,799.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding strong interactions and collective quantum
effects between sub-atomic particles that take place in certain materials is a
grand challenge in modern physics. Better understanding of these strongly
correlated interactions is critical as these novel materials have promising
properties for advanced technological applications. However, the presence of
dissipation and other environmental factors make it very challenging to probe
these interactions. This project addresses these challenges by creating
synthetic “designer” materials made of interacting microwave photons in
superconducting circuits, leveraging the precise yet flexible control of quantum
systems and baths available in the experiments. The research aims to develop
efficient protocols for creating and controlling synthetic quantum materials and
their properties, and to investigate the microscopic dynamics of quantum
materials in open driven-dissipative settings. The findings will provide
insights on material discovery and design for applications in quantum
information science and engineering. The project also launches education and
outreach activities aimed at strengthening quantum awareness and quantum
proficiency in a wide audience. This includes professional training in quantum
research for a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students, development
of new accessible materials for quantum information science education, and broad
quantum-related outreach activities for K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting
quantum circuits provide the long coherence, strong interactions, and precise
tunability well-suited for the exploration of synthetic quantum materials made
of microwave photons. This project supports the development of a synthetic
quantum matter platform in superconducting circuits for the investigation of
strongly correlated quantum phases and many-body dynamics in driven-dissipative
settings. Dynamically tunable broad-band bath is developed and applied to
realize efficient and robust methods to stabilize and manipulate many-body
phases in circuits, including strongly interacting phases in Bose-Hubbard
lattices, topological lattices, and other novel non-equilibrium quantum phases.
This project further explores the evolution of quantum information in many-body
localized systems, by investigating particle and entanglement dynamics in the
presence of thermal or quantum baths and local dissipation. These experiments
offer a microscopic view of the dynamics of thermalization towards quantum many-
body phases, a cornerstone of our understanding of correlated materials. They
also provide insights into the interplay between interaction, topology and
dissipation. The driven-dissipative techniques developed in this project for
creating and controlling quantum many-body states could be applied to various
quantum platforms to engineer and identify robust quantum information resources.
The research infrastructure and training materials that result from this award
will provide long-term training and educational opportunities for students at
all levels and contribute to a diverse workforce in quantum information science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.