* 2145209
* CAREER: High Accuracy Methods for Electronic Structure of Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Sandeep Sharma, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2027
* USD 647,165.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WIth support from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Sandeep Sharma of the University of Colorado at Boulder is developing
computational theories and methods to advance the characterization of the
electronic structure of molecules and materials. Of specific interest are
systems that contain clusters of transition metal atoms; such catalysts are at
the heart of many critical processes in the pharmaceutical industry and in the
area of energy conversion. These systems give rise to fascinating phenomena that
are relevant in biology for example, from bird navigation via magnetoreceptors
to enzyme-catalyzed redox reaction of small molecules. Other phenomena include
materials with quantum states relevant to Quantum Information Science (QIS). The
underlying microscopic principles giving rise to these remarkable properties are
often not well understood and/or characterized. One avenue of obtaining a better
understanding is to perform "numerical experiments" instead of laboratory
experiments, as the latter, may be too expensive and sometimes extremely
difficult to conduct. However, performing such "numerical experiments" is far
from trivial and the goal of this proposal is to overcome this challenge. To
this end, Dr. Sharma and his research group will develop theories, methods, and
computer software that will enable these numerical experiments. These
developments will see their validation on two classes of systems: (1) Cu-O
complexes that are important intermediates when copper containing
catalysts/enzymes perform O2 activation followed by substrate oxidation via C-H
bond breaking; (2) transition metal oxides that contain iridium atoms and
display exotic quantum states. For broader impacts of the project, the Sharma
group will make the newly developed software available to the chemistry
community and create new educational materials dealing with the fundamentals of
quantum chemistry and software implementation. For outreach, Dr. Sharma will be
involved in education and training activities under a US-Africa collaboration
framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sandeep Sharma and his research group will
devise novel algorithms of electronic structure that combine techniques borrowed
from quantum Monte Carlo, multi-reference quantum chemistry, and tensor network
methods to significantly advance our ability to characterize strongly correlated
systems. These algorithms will be used to characterize the physics/chemistry of
two classes of representative systems: (1) Cu-O complexes that are important
intermediates when copper containing catalysts/enzymes perform O2 activation
followed by substrate oxidation, in particular C-H bond breaking; (2) Iridates
that are transition metal oxides that contain iridium atoms and display exotic
quantum states facilitated by a competition between electron correlation and
spin orbit coupling; these are candidates for hosting topologically protected
fault-tolerant quantum states. In the area of broader impacts, the Sharma group
will make the newly developed software available to the chemistry community and
create new educational material dealing with the fundamentals of quantum
chemistry and software implementation. In addition, the PI plans to work through
USAfri (US-Africa Initiative in Electronic Structure) and ASESMA (African School
on Electronic Structure Methods and Applications) to do international outreach
by teaching courses in sub-Saharan Africa. This will not only help educate early
career students of color, but will also provide an opportunity to attract some
highly talented students to pursue their PhD studies in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.