* 2145272
* CAREER: Enabling sustainable phosphorus recovery through integration of classical nucleation theory and particle population balance modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Roland Cusick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2027
* USD 406,777.00

The utilization of phosphorus fertilizers has been critical to maximizing crop
yields in agriculture and farming to feed a growing world population.
Unfortunately, the release of excess phosphorus (P) from agricultural runoffs
and municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) has also led to a widespread
nutrient enrichment in surface water systems, a process commonly referred to as
eutrophication. In P-limited surface water systems, eutrophication causes a
decrease in water quality, oxygen depletion, a loss of aquatic biota, and the
occurrence of harmful algal blooms that adversely impact communities that rely
on surface water systems for drinking water, fishing, recreational activities,
and tourism. To meet a growing demand of P fertilizers while protecting critical
water resources and ecosystems, a growing number of municipal WWTs have
installed additional treatment trains to recover struvite, a magnesium ammonium
phosphate hexahydrate mineral that can be used as a slow-release fertilizer in
agriculture and farming. However, the lack of a fundamental understanding of
struvite crystal growth and precipitation in wastewater has led to uneven
performances of struvite recovery reactors and a growing skepticism about the
viability of P-fertilizer recovery in municipal wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs).The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of struvite crystals growth and recovery in wastewater
with the specific aim of developing and validating modeling tools that could be
used by engineers and practitioners to tune and control the growth,
precipitation, and recovery of valuable P mineral fertilizers from WWTPs. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development of a circular
phosphorus economy between urban population centers and rural food production
regions. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through education and
training including the mentoring of a graduate student and an undergraduate
student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of circular phosphorus (P) flows between
urban population centers and rural food production regions has emerged as a
critical sustainability challenge of the 21st century. To address this
challenge, the recovery of the mineral P-fertilizer struvite (MgNH4PO4•6H2O)
from municipal wastewater is increasingly being evaluated and implemented in the
United States and worldwide. This CAREER project will lay the scientific and
technological foundations for the development of next generation technologies to
recover P-fertilizers from municipal wastewater. The specific objectives of the
research are to: 1) Evaluate and quantify the impact of environmental conditions
on struvite nucleation rates and energetics on model inorganic and organic
substrates to elucidate mechanisms of crystal formation using classical
nucleation theory and advanced analytical tools including ex-situ atomic force
microscopy (AFM) and grazing incidence small angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS); 2)
Develop, calibrate, and validate a dynamic particle population balance model for
struvite growth in recovery reactors; and 3) integrate the struvite particle
population balance model within an open-source plant-wide modeling framework
with the ultimate goal of establishing design criteria and operational
guidelines for struvite recovery in WWTPs. The successful completion of this
project has the potential for transformative impact through the development of
new fundamental knowledge and modeling tools to advance the design and
implementation of next generation processes and technologies to recover P-based
mineral fertilizers from municipal wastewater. To implement the educational and
training goals of this CAREER project, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes
to pilot an environmental engineering/science summer camp with hands-on learning
activities that will focus on broadening participation in STEM higher education
through the recruitment and retention of high school students from marginalized
and underrepresented groups in Urbana-Champaign. In addition, the PI plans to
develop and pilot a professional mentor network for undergraduate and graduate
students that are enrolled in the UIUC Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering (CEE) in collaboration with the department’s “Advancement,
Communications, and Alumni Relations” team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.