* 2145137
* CAREER: Pathways of Microplastics Creation: Multi-physics Study of Macroplastic Fragmentation, Foliation, and Fibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Maryam Shakiba, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2022
* USD 516,621.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research to
understand the degradation mechanisms of macroplastics into microplastics under
coupled effects of weathering and mechanical stresses. It is well-established
that microplastics exist in our oceans in ever-increasing numbers and cause
great ecological harm. Physical, mechanical, and chemical properties of
macroplastics change during the degradation process and make it challenging to
detect microplastics and estimate their lifetime in water. To address this
challenge, it is critical to understand the formation mechanisms of
microplastics and the rates at which they are produced. The objective of this
research project is to discover the mechanics of degradation and develop
predictive models which can estimate the fate of macroplastics. The outcome can
help ocean environmental scientists and the manufacturing practices and
recycling processes. The research activities will be complemented with a series
of integrated educational activities to train the next generation of engineers
and researchers in the multi-physics and mechanics of soft polymers through
combinations of undergraduate and graduate students training and outreach to
high-school students. The award will also be used to contribute to public
knowledge infrastructure and create workshops for the polymer industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Separate models exist for studying how polymers degrade
due to two or three factors among mechanical loading, temperature, oxygen, salt-
water, and UV irradiations. The principal emphasis of this project is on the
nonlinear coupling effects of all these factors. Physics-based equations for
degradation in microstructural properties will be established based on polymers'
network statistics, chemistry kinetics, as well as stored and dissipative
energies. The critical internal stress at which micro-cracks form in thin
polymers will be determined using polymer statistics and conservation laws. A
non-affine multiscale framework will be built upon the deformation and breakage
in chains and crosslinks to predict heterogeneous damage initiation and
propagation. A physics-guided machine learning algorithm will assist the
development of the framework. The damage mechanisms, threshold, and transition
from brittle to ductile under multi-physics conditions will be described. The
particular questions to be answered include (1) effects of the microstructural
morphology of macroplastics on the degradation process and the choice of a
specific fracture pathway -- fragmentation, foliation, or fibration, (2) changes
in mechanical properties due to thermo-chemo-UV internal stresses in soft
polymeric materials, and (3) failure mechanisms in semi-crystalline and
amorphous polymer under coupled conditions at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.