* 2145562
* CAREER: Structural Discovery of Super-Complexes Regulating Energy Flow in Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Yuval Mazor, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2027
* USD 356,875.00

Oxygenic photosynthesis sustain life on earth by producing oxygen and providing
energy for carbon fixation. Increased human population constantly challenges
food and energy supplies thus requiring continued innovation to increase the
productivity of photosynthesis in multiple ways. This research project will
discover how plants direct light energy absorbed in leaves between two different
energetic routes. The outcomes of these two routes, which are called linear and
cyclic electron flow, produces different energy carries within plant cells.
These energy carries are utilized differentially under different conditions and
the balance between them is paramount for plant growth and adaptation. The
project aims to discover new components and mechanisms that direct this decision
using structural biology and protein engineering approaches. An additional goal
of the project is to obtain molecular level images of these routing mechanisms
in plants that utilize a special form of photosynthesis called C4
photosynthesis. C4 photosynthesis is employed by some of the most important crop
species on the planet, Corn, Sugarcane and Sorghum, and confers to these plants
many of the advantages that make them such successful crops, for example,
improved water usage and higher photosynthetic efficiency. The project will use
Sorghum, a plant better adapted to warm and dry conditions then Corn, as a
platform to discover components and mechanisms that control electron flow and
may be responsible for some of Sorghum’s unique properties. To improve
accessibility to the project’s scientific results and to structural biology in
general, scientifically accurate virtual reality scenes will be developed based
on the project results. These will be used in basic biochemistry courses and
made publicly available. A summer research internship will be offered to
veterans to actively participate in this research project to enable exploration
of research as career path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our ability to control and
manipulate photosynthesis is severely limited. The long-term goal of the project
is to develop a high-level understanding of the function of photosynthetic
supercomplexes together with the ability to manipulate their properties in
photosynthetic organisms. To achieve this, the project will discover new
structures of the photosystem I (PSI) complex in eukaryotes. PSI is one of the
most complicated assemblies in nature. Like many large cellular structures, PSI
interacts with cellular factors to carry distinct functions, a fact which is
still not manifested in our structural description of PSI. Electron flow in
photosynthesis follows two main modes, linear or cyclic electron flow (LEF or
CEF respectively). By balancing these two pathways, photosynthetic organisms
adapt the output of the photosynthetic machinery to cellular needs. The
potential for engineering photosynthetic organisms to achieve higher
productivity and to synthesize specific chemicals is great but requires changing
the basic energy requirements from this machinery. This proposal tackles this
issue using cryo-EM supplemented with functional analysis to discover
supercomplexes adjusting energy flow around PSI. By determining high-resolution
structures of these complexes our mechanistic understanding of the basic systems
controlling electron flow modes in photosynthesis will greatly improve. This
project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.