* 2145834
* CAREER: Temporal and Transgenerational Genomic and Epigenetic Effects of Hybridization in Long-generation Tree Species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Amanda De la Torre, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2027
* USD 570,063.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Warming temperatures and more
severe and frequent heat events will bring significant challenges to the
development and survival of commercial plant species. Therefore, a deep
understanding of the phenotypic plastic responses and drought tolerance is
crucial for species management. In long-generation tree species, such as Douglas
fir, the management decisions taken today will affect the productivity of
forests over the next 50-100 years. The outcomes of this research will be the
first of their kind for a conifer species and will significantly contribute to
our understanding of the genomic and epigenomic basis of phenotypic variation in
long-generation tree species. The role of hybridization in adaptation to
changing climates in Douglas fir and other conifers has been poorly studied, so
this study will also make important contributions to that area. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be trained in molecular lab techniques, greenhouse
work and bioinformatic analyses through internships, course modules and summer
workshops. Informal science education will be encouraged through science
expositions at K-12 schools and public scientific events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genomic and epigenomic basis of
phenotypic variation is a key biological question. Environmental stresses and
hybridization may produce wide genomic and epigenomic changes that can be
transmitted to subsequent generations and may contribute to the ability of
plants to persist in variable environments. This project will investigate the
contribution of hybridization to temporal and inheritable genomic and epigenomic
changes that could lead to increased growth and drought tolerance in two
varieties of the economically important timber species Douglas fir (DF,
Pseudotsuga menziessii var. glauca and var.menziessii). Warming temperatures and
more frequent heat events will reduce the growth capacity of the commercial DF
coastal variety which is less drought tolerant. In contrast, the DF interior
variety is more drought-tolerant, but grows slowly, and is therefore not ideal
for commercial purposes. Preliminary studies suggest hybrids between varieties
show increased drought tolerance than its parents, which could be due to
transgressive segregation or adaptive introgression. This study combines
physiological studies, genomic, epigenomic and expression data of pure
varieties, F1s, F2s and advanced-generation hybrids in the species, allowing the
study of transgenerational effects of hybridization in the genome and epigenome,
and the dissection of the molecular basis of heterosis and transgressive
segregation. Simultaneous with these research efforts, this project aims to
train one postdoctoral fellow, and 31 undergraduate and graduate students.
Project outcomes including data and educational resources will be made publicly
accessible through project/lab websites as well as through TreeGenes and other
long-term public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.