* 2145260
* CAREER: Teacher learning through expansive sensemaking in science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jessica Watkins, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2027
* USD 310,083.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there have been extensive
efforts to support teachers with curricula and pedagogical practices to
implement Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), teachers’ disciplinary
learning experiences has been underexamined. This project considers how
teachers’ engagement in scientific sensemaking as an opportunity for teachers’
learning to support more expansive science learning environments. It seeks to
address two ongoing challenges in science teacher education: the need for
teachers to learn (1) to recognize, value, and integrate students’ diverse ways
of knowing, communicating, and relating with one another and phenomena and (2)
to acknowledge and disrupt restrictive narratives that shape what counts as
science in schools and who is seen as a scientist. This project will provide new
models for science teacher education to engage teachers in expansive scientific
sensemaking, seeking to develop more humanizing relationships between teachers,
students, and science. More broadly, the project will produce a new structure
for professional learning and resources for supporting more heterogeneous and
equitable forms of science in teacher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to design and study for secondary science teachers’ learning
to value heterogeneity and challenge restrictive narratives of science in
schools. In particular, it will examine (1) the moment-to-moment interactions of
teacher learning in their own scientific sensemaking, (2) how these interactions
support teacher learning communities to develop practices that meaningfully
integrate heterogeneity in their pursuits of coherent and causal accounts of
phenomena, (3) how teachers connect their scientific sensemaking to dominant
narratives of STEM in school, and (4) how these aspects of teacher learning
impact their goals and plans for teaching. The project team will design for
teachers’ expansive sensemaking in two settings: in a Science Modeling Course
for pre-service secondary teachers at Vanderbilt University and in Science
Teachers’ Circles (STCs), in which in-service and pre-service teachers engage in
their own scientific inquiries to reflect on disciplinary learning. Through
multiple design-based research cycles, project analyses will consider how
opportunities for heterogeneity emerge, get taken up, or get shut down in
teachers’ disciplinary engagement. These analyses will inform conjectures about
how to design and facilitate teacher learning communities that help teachers (a)
attune to heterogeneity in science, (b) develop practices for integrating
diverse ways of knowing, communicating, and relating with one another and
phenomena, and (c) challenge restrictive narratives about science learning. The
project builds on existing relationships with secondary science teachers in
local schools; the STCs will be co-designed with teacher partners to fit within
the local schools and community contexts. This collaboration will develop
resources for new models of professional learning for science teachers that
foregrounds heterogeneity and issues of power in scientific
sensemaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.