* 2145604
* CAREER: Multi-scale Mechanical Behavior of Quantum Dot Nanocomposites: Towards Data-driven Automatic Discovery of High-performance Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ozgur Keles, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 599,293.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research on processing-structure-mechanics relationships in thermosetting
nanocomposites containing ultrasmall two-dimensional quantum dot nanoparticles.
Thermosetting polymers are used by aerospace, defense, transportation,
electronics, and many other industries. Moreover, fiber reinforced thermoset
composites dominate high-performance structural applications. Despite their
common use, thermosets are brittle. Quantum dot nanoparticles, on the other
hand, simultaneously enhance the toughness and strength of the thermosets. Yet,
we donâ€™t know how the ultrasmall two-dimensional particles enhance mechanical
properties of the thermosets. The researched project will reveal the molecular
origins of these enhancements using systematic simulations and experiments. This
new knowledge is potentially transformative because quantum dots can enhance all
the other larger-scale-filler composites, such as continuous fiber, graphene,
and carbon nanotube composites. The education objective is to create open-source
virtual reality engineering education tools and cultivate creative engineers.
Unique collaborative design projects are planned to enhance student creativity
that can impact innovation potential of the next-generation engineers. Outreach
activities will also be performed in the elementary/high schools that serve
underrepresented groups in the Silicon Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will improve our understanding of molecular level damage/deformation mechanisms
as well as macroscopic fracture behavior of quantum dot nanocomposites. A
specific focus is given to unique sub-20 nm structures containing up to three
different quantum dot sizes that can react with thermosets and with each other.
During this CAREER award, a combination of experimental, theoretical,
computational, and informatics approaches will be used to answer: (a) How do
quantum dot nanocomposites deform and break? (b) What are their main toughening
mechanisms? The research objectives are to (i) reveal the load transfer and
debonding mechanisms, (ii) identify the plastic deformation, damage initiation,
and damage accumulation mechanisms, and (iii) observe, quantify, and model the
toughening mechanisms in thermosets containing multi-modal size quantum dots
below 20 nm. To achieve these objectives, molecular dynamics synthesis and
mechanical tests will be performed. Positron annihilation time spectroscopy, in-
situ Raman spectroscopy, in-situ synchrotron X-ray characterization, and ex-situ
mechanical tests will be performed. A molecular dynamics-informed multi-scale
model will be used to quantify the toughening behavior. In addition, a new
atomistic data-driven predictive framework will be created to quickly discover
nanocomposites with high mechanical performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.