* 2145601
* CAREER: Multiphysics Mechanics of Magnetic Shape Memory Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Ruike Renee Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 549,670.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant investigates
multiple physical behaviors of magnetic shape memory polymers. The shape memory
effect refers to the ability of a material to remember and recover a pre-
programmed shape in response to a combination of magnetic and mechanical fields.
These materials are composites with embedded magnetic particles in shape memory
polymer matrices. They utilize superposed alternating and direct magnetic fields
to regulate the stiffness and shape changing actuation of the materials. They
combine untethered fast and reversible transformation, shape-locking ability,
and reprogrammability in one material system and have potential applications in
soft robots, flexible electronics, and biomedical devices for minimum invasive
surgery. However, the complicated magneto-thermo-viscoelastic behaviors of these
materials make the design of applications using these materials very
challenging. The success of this work will lead to a systematic understanding of
the magnetic shape memory polymer, a material model to describe the magneto-
thermo-viscoelastic behavior and a multiphysics simulation platform to
accelerate the design of applications. This work will provide hands-on
interactive multi-disciplinary research experience for middle and high school
students through 3D Printed Magnetically Actuated Soft Robots. This work will
also demonstrate material research to K-12 students and the general public
through the local Science and Industry Science Festival and the Ohio State
University STEAM factory Franklinton Friday Events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft
active materials are widely used but have limitations such as slow actuation
speed, irreversible actuation, or no shape-locking. Magnetic shape memory
polymers overcome these limitations by integrating rapid magnetic actuation with
shape memory effects in polymers. These materials use the alternative current
magnetic field to control the temperature and the direct current magnetic field
to actuate the materials. The coupling of magnetic actuation with
thermoviscoelastic material behavior demands intensive fundamental mechanics
research. This CAREER award will provide new understandings on how the
interactions among magnetic particles and magnetic particles-polymer matrix can
alter the thermoviscoelastic and shape memory behavior of a polymer. These
understandings will enable the establishment of a thermodynamic framework for
magneto-thermo-viscoelastic solids. The new framework can provide a clear
description of the complicated multiphysics processes and guide the development
of a new constitutive model for magneto-thermo-viscoelastic solids. The new
constitutive model will be implemented into finite element analysis to simulate
the magnetic and thermal actuation of magnetic shape memory polymers with
complicated geometry and complicated loading
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.