* 2145517
* CAREER: A Transformative Approach for Teaching and Learning Geometry by Representing and Interacting with Three-dimensional Figures
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Justin Dimmel, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2027
* USD 345,574.00

People think about space, objects in space, and the relationships of those
objects all of the time. Reasoning about space is fundamental to tasks ranging
from engine repair and moving furniture to multivariable calculus, linear
algebra, and other advanced areas of mathematics. In the physical world, spatial
reasoning is linked to physical movement, such as turning oneâ€™s head to get a
different view of an assembly or rotating an object in space to fit it around a
corner. In the realm of mathematics, spatial reasoning is associated with mental
manipulations of two-dimensional diagrams. The disconnect between the strategies
used to explore the world and the spatial abilities used in mathematics
classrooms is fundamentally a representation problem: Because of the constraints
of drawing on flat surfaces, three-dimensional figures are compressed into flat
diagrams. But the emergence of extended reality (XR) technologies, such as
virtual and augmented reality, offers a profound shift in our capacities for
representing and interacting with information. Three-dimensional figures can now
be represented as diagrams that appear to extend into space in ways that are
free of material or physical constraints. They can be rendered at any size, in
any orientation, and at any position in space, and can thereby realize a far
more varied set of mathematical concepts than what is possible with physical
models. The goal of this project is to investigate the transformative
educational potential of these representations and to generate a knowledge base
that teachers, teacher educators, and researchers can use to reimagine the
learning and teaching of geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
potential of spatial inscriptions will be explored through two parallel strands
of research. A teaching strand will characterize the existing representations
for three-dimensional figures and analyze how those representations feature in
the instructional practices of high school geometry teachers. The teaching
strand has two components. (1) A semiotic and conceptual analysis of
contemporary high school geometry textbooks will investigate how three-
dimensional figures are typically represented. (2) A semiotic analysis of the
words, symbols, diagrams, and models that high school geometry teachers use to
communicate about three-dimensional geometric figures will investigate how
three-dimensional figures are typically represented in classrooms. A
complementary learning strand of research will investigate how the unique
affordances of diagrams inscribed in immersive spaces can be leveraged to create
new opportunities for high school students to explore three-dimensional figures.
The methods for these investigations will be textbook analysis, classroom
observations, survey experiments, and task-based interviews of students in
immersive environments. Through the learning strand of research, multimodal
analyses of student explorations of diagrams will generate a first approximation
of a theory that explains how movement-based interactions with spatially-
inscribed diagrams can contribute to the learning and teaching of high school
geometry. Through the teaching strand of research, analyses of the extant
representations of three-dimensional figures in textbooks and high school
geometry classrooms will provide a foundation for embedding the emerging
representations of spatial inscriptions in instructional
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by in part under the
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award is also funded in
part by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.