* 2145893
* CAREER: Understanding the interplay of magnetism, structure and composition in high entropy alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Roopali Kukreja, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2027
* USD 221,557.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High entropy alloys (HEA) are comprised of five or more
elements usually in equiatomic proportions. HEA show fascinating novel
properties including high temperature strength, exceptional ductility and high
corrosion resistance which are currently being investigated for applications in
aircrafts, cars, submarines, and buildings. Their magnetic behavior is also
being considered for applications such as electric cars and aeronautics where
both magnetism and mechanical strength are needed due to high speed and
operating temperature requirements. However, there is a wide knowledge gap in
fundamental understanding of magnetic behavior of HEA, as most of the
experimental studies have concentrated on bulk magnetization measurements which
cannot access nanometer lengthscales. This project focuses on understanding
magnetic properties of HEA thin films and correlating it with structural
behavior by carefully tuning the composition of HEA thin films. Research
activities involve synthesis and characterization of HEA thin films including
synchrotron based x-ray spectroscopy and x-ray imaging techniques to
characterize magnetic behavior and structural details at nanometer lengthscales.
The microscopic view of HEA system developed in this project will enable
material design for a wide variety of magnetic applications including electrical
power generation and transmission, permanent magnets, aeronautics and consumer
electronics. Education activities includes introducing women and minority
undergraduate students to opportunities at U.S. National Laboratories and
collaborating with University of California Davis Mathematics Engineering
Science Achievement (MESA) and AvenueE Programs to engage community college
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Annual MSE summer
camp, internship program and bridge initiative will be established under this
project. This project provides graduate and undergraduate students training in
interdisciplinary fields at the intersection of materials science, physics, and
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this projects is to elucidate nanoscale magnetic and structural behavior
of HEA in a non-destructive and element-specific manner. Synchrotron-based x-ray
spectroscopy and imaging techniques will be utilized to access material response
at relevant nanometer lengthscales. Specific objectives include, (i) developing
a cohesive synthesis approach for HEA thin films and characterization to explore
the multicomponent phase space, (ii) evaluating the relationship between
element-specific magnetic behavior and short range ordering by using x-ray
spectroscopy techniques, and (iii) examining the impact of nanoscale effects for
both magnetic domain structure and microstructure by utilizing x-ray imaging
techniques. The scientific knowledge established in this project will lead to
development of transformative and unified understanding of magnetic and
structural behavior of HEA films which will assist development of an atomistic
view of HEA and their exceptional properties. Comprehensive knowledge of the
relationship between magnetic and structural properties will enable theoretical
prediction for tuning magnetic behavior in HEA to achieve desired
functionalities and material response. Education activities include the training
of undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the art deposition and
characterization tools, including synchrotron radiation based characterization
techniques at U.S. National Laboratories, and engaging underrepresented groups
and women in HEA research and National Labs through development of summer camps
and bridge program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.