* 2145494
* CAREER: Extracellular Hydrogen Peroxide and Nitric Oxide Detection and Quantification Via Biocompatible Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Nicole Iverson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2027
* USD 444,362.00

Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) are essential components in
cell signaling and they are known to play an important role in health and
disease/inflammation—both helpful and harmful; however, their concentrations and
mechanisms during healthy and diseased states are largely unknown. This CAREER
project will advance the understanding of how ROS and RNS levels impact the
function of cells and tissues using nano-scale sensors to quantify ROS/RNS
concentrations. Ultimately, understanding how ROS/RNS levels correlate with
diseased cells and using novel sensors to subsequently quantify these
concentrations could provide quick detection of infected individuals, thus
leading to improved diagnostics and health outcomes. Integrated with this
research are educational efforts that aim to teach rural middle school students,
undergraduate and graduate students, and adults over 50 at the Osher Lifelong
Learning Institute (OLLI) about nanotechnology and sensors. University students
will receive training, mentorship, and hands-on experience while directly
contributing to the research objectives and will enhance their science
communication skills by assisting with the outreach programs, creating a
reciprocal relationship between the education and research objectives.
Participants in the middle school and OLLI programs will enhance their
understanding of nanotechnology and sensors and be able to share their newly
acquired knowledge with others, extending the project’s impact beyond the
individuals directly participating in the programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator’s long-term career goal is to develop and use single walled carbon
nanotube (SWNT) sensors to learn about biological phenomena while preparing the
next generation for careers in nanotechnology and sensor development. Towards
this goal, this project focuses on advancing the understanding of ROS and RNS in
cell signaling by developing a single walled carbon nanotube sensor system that
quantifies hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and nitric oxide (NO) simultaneously.
Research objectives include to: (1) develop a sterile platform system that can
simultaneously quantify H2O2 and NO concentrations; (2) identify the
concentration profiles of extracellular H2O2 and NO associated with breast,
skin, and lymphocyte cells; and (3) evaluate the importance of H2O2 and NO in
cellular proliferation, release of inflammatory markers, and cell migration. It
is hypothesized that diseased cells will have significantly higher levels of
H2O2 and NO and that proliferation rate, migration, and inflammatory factors can
be increased or decreased with the addition (causing an increase) or scavenging
(causing a decrease) of reactive species. This program represents a novel and
transformative approach for quantifying H2O2 and NO and will illuminate basic
facts about cell signaling that were previously unattainable. Furthermore, this
research represents a new milestone in the field of carbon nanotubes, which has
largely focused on developing new sensors rather than using these unique sensors
to understand how biological systems function. Findings from this research will
serve as a roadmap for detecting other small molecules in the future as
additional sensors are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Biosensing Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.