* 2145408
* CAREER: Scalable and Secure Control of Distributed Grid-Edge Resources for Enhanced Grid Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Mingxi Liu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,079.00

The growing penetration of renewable energy brings unprecedented operational
challenges to the modern power system, demanding additional power system
flexibility to enhance grid reliability. This NSF CAREER project aims to bolster
the nation’s grid decarbonization and energy security by developing a grid-edge
resource (GER) management framework to increase power system flexibility. The
project will bring transformative changes to GER management by overcoming three
intertwined challenges, i.e., high scalability requirements, major privacy
concerns, and surging cybersecurity risks. This will be achieved by synthesizing
ideas from optimization, machine learning, statistics, and cryptology to
establish an efficient, private, and secure GER control framework. The
intellectual merits of the project include (1) developing a scalable framework
that enables efficient cooperative control of heterogeneous GERs; (2)
investigating privacy preservation measures for strongly coupled decentralized
GER control; (3) investigating models, and detection and mitigation strategies
of stealthy cyber-attacks that target at decentralized GER control algorithms.
The broader impacts of the project include (1) unleashing heterogeneous GERs to
enhance grid reliability and deepen grid decarbonization; (2) advancing the
grid’s ability to integrate increasing amounts of renewable generation and GERs
in a cost-effective, secure, and reliable way; (3) providing the industry with
insight into developing new market products. The integrated education plan will
spread control and power system concepts to youth-in-custody, K-12 students, and
underrepresented groups, motivating them to pursue STEM education and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing GER control frameworks may fail in large-scale
deployment because they invariably ignore scalability issues caused by network
dimension and GER heterogeneity, lack efficient measures to protect GER owners’
privacy, and lack the understanding of stealthy for-purpose cyber-attacks. To
advance the knowledge, this project will (1) develop new optimization, machine
learning, and statistical tools to construct a GER control framework that is
agnostic to GER type, scalable with respect to GER population and network
dimension, and applicable for different grid services; (2) characterize privacy
risks in GER management and develop cryptology-based and non-cryptology-based
privacy-preserving decentralized optimization paradigms; (3) constitute cyber-
attack vectors that leverage decentralized GER control algorithms for stealthy
attack purposes, determine the detectability of those attacks, and develop
corresponding detection and mitigation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.