* 2145810
* CAREER: Optimal Transport-based Density-Aware Multi-Agent Exploration
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Kooktae Lee, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2027
* USD 542,258.00

Multi-robotic systems can provide many benefits over single robots in exploring
and servicing large-scale environments, such as in problems of search and
rescue, surveillance and reconnaissance, smart farming, infrastructure
inspection, wildlife monitoring, weather monitoring, and planetary exploration.
However, the deployment of multiple robots in an efficient manner remains a
challenge. Traditional approaches for deploying robots that uniformly or
randomly cover a given domain are not necessarily efficient. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support fundamental research to
develop a new method for multi-agent control by incorporating density
information that reflects the priority or importance of covering specific areas
in the domain. This paradigm shift from traditional to adaptive coverage creates
an opportunity to maximize the efficiency of multi-agent explorations in various
missions where both time and resources are limited. The outcomes of this project
will include hands-on demonstrations of multi-agent control for wildlife
monitoring. The integrated research and educational activities will directly
impact upcoming generations of scientists and engineers through involving
graduate and undergraduate students in research and organizing education and
outreach programs for K-12 students with an emphasis on underrepresented
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on improving the
efficiency of multi-agent explorations by employing optimal transport (OT)
theory as a tool to synthesize multi-agent trajectories. OT provides a way to
quantify the distance between two probability density functions (PDFs): the
reference PDF that is chosen to indicate the relative importance or priority of
the given domain and the current PDF that will be formed based on the time-
averaged behavior of the multi-agent system. A decentralized optimal control law
for multi-agent systems will be developed to manipulate and reshape the PDF of
the multi-agent trajectories to make it as close to the reference PDF as
possible. This new framework, based on concepts from OT theory, will serve to
advance knowledge of multi-agent control for broad environment
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CMMI-
DCSD program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.