* 2145326
* CAREER: Understanding Bond Formation, Microstructural Development and Mechanical Properties in Cold Spray Additive Manufacturing – A Unified Experimental and Numerical Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Mostafa Hassani, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2027
* USD 648,748.00

Melting-based additive manufacturing (AM) has been utilized for high-value
metallic component manufacture. Limitations exist, however, due to the high
process temperatures, (often beyond the melting point of component materials),
and the large associated thermal gradients and rapid cooling rates. On the other
hand, non-melting metal AM such as cold spray technology, in which tiny powder
particles are accelerated to a supersonic speed to collide, bond to and build up
underlying materials upon impact, may considerably alleviate the melting-rooted
challenges. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
research in developing a fundamental understanding of the process-
microstructure-property relationships for cold spray AM using novel high-speed
single-particle impact testing, complemented by multi-scale numerical modeling,
to study individual bonded particles, the building blocks of the cold spray
process, and then expand to a part-level study. The research will enable
reliable and performance-oriented processing design for cold spray AM, with a
potential to strengthen the Nation’s defense and other industries through
enabling sustainable and agile manufacturing and repair at the point of need.
The knowledge gained may also be translated to other solid-state joining or
additive technologies for aerospace, construction and energy applications. The
team will engage K-12 students and educators through hands-on activities with a
designed additive manufacturing toolkit. The project will also promote
participation from underrepresented minority students in advanced manufacturing
through 10-week summer camps in a research laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this CAREER project is to establish a unified framework to
understand and predict the critical velocity, impact-induced microstructural
development, micro-scale bond strength, and macro-scale mechanical properties of
cold-sprayed deposits. Laser-induced micro-scale projectile impact testing will
be conducted with high-resolution imaging to produce well-defined high-velocity
individual bonded particles, with microstructures and properties characterized
by advanced electron microscopy and micro-mechanical measurements. Both the
first layer impacts and particle impacts on subsequent layers will be
systematically investigated. The role of the impact velocity, oxide layer
thickness, particle size and temperature, and impact angle in the
characteristics of bonded interfaces and local bond strengths will be
scientifically revealed. Further, finite element modeling incorporating a
dislocation-based constitutive model, oxide layer fracture, and cohesive bonding
will be established, which will be used to predict the impact-induced
microstructure changes and bond strengths. The micro-scale simulations will
inform a macro-scale model to calculate the mechanical properties of cold-
sprayed specimens. Different sources of statistical effects resulting from the
distribution of particle sizes, temperatures, and oxide layer thicknesses will
also be considered in the multi-scale model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.