* 2145537
* CAREER: Toward Geomimetic Concretes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Mohammad Javad Abdolhosseini Qomi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2027
* USD 650,000.00

Inspired by the exotic chemical reactions in earthâ€™s crust, this award focuses
on the fundamental understanding of the chemical reactions at the fluid-solid
interfaces and leverages this basic insight to design carbon-negative geomimetic
concrete materials. The production of ordinary Portland cement-based concretes
is responsible for about 7 percent of global anthropogenic carbon emissions and
about 9 percent of industrial freshwater withdrawals worldwide. This
necessitates the development of infrastructure materials that are not only
carbon sink but also water conscious. The progress in designing such sustainable
material technologies is in principle confounded by the complexity of chemical
reactions occurring at the carbon dioxide-water-solid interfaces. The
breakthrough in understanding the mechanistic picture of such heterogenous
chemical reactions will not only benefit the design of eco-friendly construction
materials, but also entails numerous implications in tuning soil-hosted
reactions, determining the fate of contaminants in the geosystems, and
understanding environmental catalysis. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will also instigate synergistic educational efforts to engrave
the significance of sustainable construction materials in K-12 and undergraduate
students, especially bilingual Hispanic early-learners, who make up a
significant portion of the US English language learner population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When it comes to describing the carbonation process with
humidified CO2-rich fluids, the long-standing paradigms for bulk aqueous fluid-
mediated carbonation via the dissolution-precipitation process become simply
irrelevant. Such a change in paradigm is particularly evidenced in geological
settings with reports of accelerated carbon mineralization in water-poor fluids.
The enhanced carbonation kinetics is hypothesized to be closely related to the
formation of interfacial water films that exhibit unique reactant/solvent
chemophysical properties and serve effectively as a nano-confining bath
mediating chemical reactions. Despite the vast technological implications in
developing carbonated concretes, the mechanistic picture of the interfacial
processes accountable for the enhanced reactivity in water nanofilms and the
associated thermodynamics and kinetics remain elusive. By integrating molecular
simulations and in situ and ex situ spectroscopy techniques, this research
provides a molecular-level understanding of the nanoconfined processes that
govern carbon mineralization in nanoconfined media. These processes include
multi-phase fluid segregation in nanoporous media, nanoconfined crystallization
processes, and diffusive mass transport in the adsorbed water layers and cation-
leached glassy silicates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.