* 2145334
* CAREER: Is Continental Crust Juvenile or Reworked? A Test of Growth Models Using the Extant Neoarchean Granitoid Record
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jesse Reimink, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 369,652.00

There currently exist more geological samples from the Moon than from our own
planet during the first 500 million years of the Solar System. This dearth of
samples has led to vigorous debate amongst the geological community regarding
three very important aspects of Earth evolution: 1) when, 2) how, and 3) to what
extent did continents emerge on the early Earth. Recent advances in technical
capabilities now allow these questions to be revisited. Earth is a tectonically
active planet, which means that old rocks are constantly being altered, leaving
few pristine samples from the earliest phases of Earth history. By looking for
very small, but important isotopic signatures in preserved rock samples, one may
infer how much continental crust was around very early in Earth history. This
project will fund advanced isotopic analyses of ~2.6-billion-year-old rocks in a
search of evidence for great than 4.0-billion-year-old continental material,
material that may have been reworked during later tectonic events. Collection of
this data will allow the research team to test the hypothesis that very large
volumes of ancient continental crust existed on the early Earth and to answer a
fundamental question about planetary formation and evolution – when did
continental crust form on Earth? This project will also support an undergraduate
field research experience, which will serve to train the next generation of
geoscientists in skills that employers are keenly interested in – field geology
and spatial reasoning skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will combine
petrology and isotope geochemistry to test broad hypotheses regarding the growth
and reworking of continental crust. Neoarchean granitoid rocks represent some of
the oldest well-preserved suites of rocks on Earth. Detailed analysis of samples
will address the fundamental question of when continental crust formed on Earth.
This proposal will analyze suites of granitoids from three distinct North
American cratons for their igneous chemical signatures. Zircon age and isotopic
information (U-Pb-Hf-O) will be measured from several compositional groups to
test the fidelity of commonly used tracers for crustal melting and overprinting.
Analyses of xenocrystic zircons and bulk rock Nd-isotope ratios will be used to
search for reworking of truly ancient (&gt;4.0 Ga) crust in the Neoarchean—a
time that has been suggested to have experienced broad overprinting of the
continental record. The research team focus on 142Nd analyses as these data are
particularly adept at identifying Hadean crustal relics. This proposal will fund
an REU field experience aimed at developing a diverse and strategically
important workforce with training in field geology and spatial reasoning. The
maps created and samples collected by undergraduate researchers will be used for
advanced isotopic analyses conducted during the scientific study, and
undergraduate participants will not only gain important—and in-demand—skills in
spatially-focused critical thinking but will also be exposed to advanced
geochemical techniques and datasets. These participants will finish their
undergraduate experience well positioned to pursue many types of careers in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.