* 2145091
* CAREER: Atomic scale understanding of the doping incorporation and transport properties in ultrawide band gap semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Baishakhi Mazumder, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2027
* USD 256,388.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description:
Improving power conversion efficiency in a wide range of applications including
consumer appliances, all-electric and hybrid-electric vehicles, and extraction
and conversion in cost-effective renewable energy sources can save energy,
significantly reducing costs, benefiting both the economy and environment. The
potential material system for revolutionizing power electronics components is
ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors, a class of semiconductors with large bandgap
energy. Enhancing their performance relies on critical understanding of
mechanisms to efficiently generate and control charge carriers and how these
carriers interact within the materials. This project reveals and describes “what
really happens” at the scale of charge carriers and microstructures within these
material systems, including the dopant-defect interaction and how these atomic
scale features affect the electrical functionalities. This work is made possible
by an innovative approach that integrates a three-dimensional atomic scale
imaging tool, atom probe tomography with statistical and computational modeling
on the atomic scale data, establishing a direct link with the electrical
conductivity that would be difficult to identify and mitigate otherwise. The
principal investigator strives to inspire students at undergraduate and graduate
levels, especially women and underrepresented minorities, to pursue a career in
materials science and engineering by exposing them to the exciting development
of advanced materials to solve important societal problems. The principal
investigator will also increase awareness of advanced material characterization
to generate smart data for material design and development by organizing summer
workshops and symposium. Coursework will emphasize multidisciplinary approaches
to teach engineering concepts and connect them with real-world applications to
solve challenges for the advancement of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: This research project will provide a fundamental understanding of
electrical transport properties in ultra-wide band gap semiconductors to advance
high power electronics and clean energy technologies. Ultra-wide bandgap
semiconductor technology is hindered by the lack of knowledge of the dopant
incorporation on electrical functionalities and identification and detection of
atomic scale features contributing to charge compensation. A novel framework
will be developed to detect and quantify dopant solubility, dopant diffusion,
impurities, vacancies, and defect complexes by leveraging atom probe tomography
coupled with machine learning and statistical modeling on microscopy data. The
overarching goal is to generate know-how on the impact of microstructures on
electrical transport, beyond the limits of existing techniques. This research
aspires to transform the doping engineering and electrical conductivity
optimization by: i) developing novel methodologies that can characterize dopant
incorporation and dopant-defect interaction that leads to charge compensation
with unprecedented resolution and precision; ii) gaining new insight into how
atomic to nanoscale structures and defects impacts the electrical transport;
iii) validating existing theories on charge compensation and providing important
inputs for further developing material structure-chemistry for power electronics
and clean energy generation, and iv) acquiring new knowledge on material
structure and chemistry to aid the principles and design criteria to achieve
outstanding material performance in ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors and
beyond. The closely integrated research and education components provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
on advanced microscopy, machine learning modeling, and ultra-wide bandgap
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.