* 2145172
* CAREER: Mapping and enhancing the acquisition of conceptual knowledge using behavior, neural signals, and natural language processing models
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Jeremy Manning, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 01/31/2027
* USD 480,149.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The project is also funded from the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program with co-funding from the Human Networks and Data Science (HNDS)
program in SBE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project at
Dartmouth University is to advance our understanding of how students learn STEM
concepts through online course videos in order to improve online education.
Continued expansion of the internet backbone and improvements in computing
hardware have facilitated improvements in video streaming, enabling videos to be
more easily downloaded and shared. This, in turn, raises a number of questions
of pressing national concern. For example, what makes for an effective course or
training program? Which aspects of teaching might be optimized or automated? How
and why do learning needs and goals vary across people? How might we lower
barriers to achieving a high quality education? The focus of this project is to
understand how to provide learners with automatized instruction that is
customized to the needs of each individual. It could have a significant impact
on the online learning of STEM concepts and how it can be individualized for
members of different communities. Moreover, the investigator’s own teaching and
mentoring will bring machine learning, cognitive neuroscience, and instructional
design together in a way that will provide development opportunities for the
next generation of scientists working on frameworks for characterizing and
evaluating real-world teaching and learning. He will create summer workshops, a
regular tutorial series, and a series of open online courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to (1) to build a computational framework
for tracking individual students’ conceptual learning and understanding; and (2)
to test whether and how brain recordings can be used to estimate ongoing
conceptual learning and understanding. The project will collect data of what
students learn from real online instructional videos to inform, fit, and test
models of real-world conceptual learning in such STEM domains as Astronomy and
Computer Science programming. Conceptual knowledge is tested by asking
participants to solve applied problems that require them to generalize beyond
the specific examples presented during training. Applying text embedding-based
models run on these data, the investigators will derive semantic maps both of
the concepts taught and of what the students learn. The project will also
involve collecting a large dataset from participants who engage with a sequence
of course videos while undergoing neuroimaging. The experimental data will be
used to construct dynamic estimates of each participant’s moment-by-moment
conceptual knowledge and their ability to acquire new knowledge. The project
will use natural language processing models to quantify concepts and how they
relate. This work will provide a foundation for later research and development
of automatic adaptive learning systems that can assess individual conceptual
knowledge and edit online instructional material so that it is tailored to that
individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.