* 2145929
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cybersecurity Talent Development in Kentucky
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Adel Elmaghraby, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,345,007.00

The security and prosperity of the United States have become increasingly
dependent on its technological superiority and competitiveness in the
cyberspace. The University of Louisville’s CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program will prepare 20 diverse master’s students with superior
cybersecurity skills for entry into the government workforce. To ensure
diversity, this project will actively recruit students from currently
underrepresented groups in the cybersecurity workforce, including women,
minorities, and low-income students. As the first SFS program in Kentucky, this
project will make advanced cybersecurity education and financial, academic, and
student support more accessible to diverse students in Kentucky and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the existing graduate certificate
in cybersecurity program, which is designated by the National Security Agency
and Department of Homeland Security as a National Center of Academic Excellence
in Cyber Defense Education, to provide students with rigorous training in
advanced cybersecurity knowledge and skills to defend against current and
emerging cyberattacks. Scholarship recipients will also participate in a variety
of academic and student support activities, such as personalized curriculum
planning and mentoring, cohort-based peer meetings and advising, a federal
internship program, and other professional development activities to promote
their success in the program. Additionally, this project will help the
University of Louisville broaden participation in cybersecurity education and
strengthen partnerships with government agencies in cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or continuing
scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber
Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation,
scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal,
state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration as their
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.