* 2145542
* Career: Building Models that Avoid Spurious Correlations through Interpretability and Representation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Rajesh Ranganath, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 546,682.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) modeling have allowed AI to uncover and
use all kinds of information to make accurate predictions. These predictions
touch our day-to-day life, for example through fitness wearables that monitor
health. Sometimes the predictions made by AI models make use of information that
is unstable or spurious. For example, using sand to classify whether an image
contains a camel versus a cow would be incorrect when presented with a camel in
a grassy field. Examples of AI models failing because of the use of spurious
information exist in other domains such as healthcare, where AI models can make
predictions on the basis of how the data was collected rather than on the
physiological information in the data. This project aims to develop tools to
both help identify when AI models make use of spurious information and tools to
build better AI models that avoid the use of spurious information. The results
of this project will be algorithms that are applicable across several types of
data and domains. The project will foster the development of undergraduate and
PhD students through new lectures on AI for the real world and will promote data
literacy through visualizations of AI models made by the tools the project will
develop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two technical thrusts in this project.
The first thrust focuses on interpretability of AI models. This thrust seeks to
develop methods that can help identify the use of spurious information and,
given knowledge of spurious information in an input, can help identify the
semantic information in an input useful in predicting a label. This thrust will
adapt the concept of learning to explain, which seeks to train a function to
highlight the important part of an input for predicting a label, to the task of
identifying and downweighing spurious information. The second thrust constructs
new representation learning algorithms for building models that avoid the use of
spurious information. Spurious information consists of relationships between
variables that change across a family of data generating distributions. This
thrust will seek to study the limits of reweighting-based estimators and
flexible models and the utility of stronger assumptions, such as the existence
of a residual. It will also study assumptions needed to address violations of
positivity and how to do representation learning that avoids spurious
information in multimodal data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.