* 2145938
* Collaborative Research: Unintended Consequences of Law Enforcement Disruptions to Illicit Drug Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Maria Mayorga, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 241,079.00

The use of illicit substances remains an ongoing and widespread part of society,
with the illegal drug market estimated to be one percent of total global trade.
Although the true scale of this market is unknown because of its illicit,
underground nature, the overarching US drug policy and strategy has consistently
been to allocate large amounts of resources to law enforcement agencies to
dismantle illicit distribution networks. The motivation for narcotics
enforcement is that it imposes negative consequences on the supply side that
both deter people from distributing illicit drugs and decrease the drugsâ€™
availability to vulnerable consumers. Yet little evidence suggests the negative
consequences disrupt the macro-level drug supply to an extent that alters the
price of drugs, and very little is known about the meso level effects of these
interdictions on violence in the broader community and drug consumers at risk of
fatal overdose. Therefore, the purpose of this Disrupting Operations of Illicit
Supply Networks (D-ISN) project is to utilize national integrated data to
develop an understanding of the impact of law enforcement disruptions to the
illicit drug supply on both public health (e.g., overdoses) and public safety
(e.g., violent crime) outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand the
relationship between drug market disruptions and outcomes of interest, the study
team will construct a county level dataset across 10 diverse states using three
sources of administrative data: (1) National Incident-Based Reporting System
(NIBRS), (2) National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) detailed Multiple
Cause of Death (MCOD) data, and (3) the US Census. NIBRS captures
characteristics of crime incidents, including detailed information on drug
seizures, crime offenses, and other incident characteristics in a nationally
systematic way. The MCOD data will provide unsuppressed, county-level, mortality
information based on death certificates and include information on cause,
decedent demographics, month of death, and county urbanicity. Data from the
Census will be used to calculate rates of drug seizures and control for county
level population characteristics and resource deprivation. The county-level
integrated dataset will include the date of overdoses (by type of drug), public
safety events (e.g., murder/nonnegligent manslaughter, robbery, and aggravated
assault), and the county where the outcomes occurred. The study team will employ
methods of spatial temporal causal modeling, which allows for the modeling of
causal relationships between time- and space-persistent features. Lastly, the
integrated datasets will be shared with researchers interested in utilizing
these data with information on the data integration process, how to access the
data, and how to customize it to fit the needs of their research. The team will
also engage with relevant stakeholders to identify or create strategies that may
mitigate the unintended consequences of drug market disruptions (e.g., reduce
overdoses and community violence), reduce disparities in these outcomes in
communities of color, inform local and state law enforcement drug interdiction
strategies, and inform the allocation of resources for drug
interdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.