* 2145885
* CAREER: Transcriptional Regulation of Primate Gene Expansions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Megan Dennis, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2027
* USD 624,934.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify what
makes us uniquely human by comparing newly decoded primate genomes. Finding
genetic differences may offer insights into the origins of increased human brain
size and cognitive ability versus other great apes. These same genes may also
explain trait differences and susceptibility to diseases observed across modern
humans today. By exploring these questions, this project will provide early
research experiences to high school and undergraduate students from underserved
communities, imbuing them with the confidence and skills to continue on in STEM-
related fields. Ultimately, these efforts will contribute to a more diverse
future generation of scientists. American Rescue Plan funding of this project
provides support for this investigator at a critical stage in her
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directed studies in primates have identified gene
expansions likely contributing to human brain evolution; however, there are few
studies of duplicated cis-regulatory elements, which can impact many genes. The
research goal of this project is to narrow in on functional noncoding elements
within structurally-variant loci that drive differences in gene expression
across primates by: (1) identifying changes in duplicated elements that may lead
to altered gene regulation between primate species; (2) characterizing
alterations in chromatin contacts resulting from structural variants between
primate species; and (3) interrogating gene regulation and chromatin
interactions across diverse human structural haplotypes. This study will employ
innovative experimental and computational genomic approaches and leverage
thousands of primate sequencing datasets. Results from this project will point
to exciting candidate genes driving species innovation and diversity, and
provide functional targets for future in vivo studies. Ultimately, this work has
the potential to expand understanding of how structural variation contributes to
primate evolution and diversity. Further, the methods employed can be applied
broadly to other species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.