* 2145222
* CAREER: An Integrated Computational and Experimental Framework to Understand Deformation and Failure of Porous Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Yashar Mehmani, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2027
* USD 629,955.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research to understand how porous materials deform and fail under external
loading, and to develop predictive models useful for the precise engineering of
such materials. Applications are broad and include the safe and sustainable
engineering of subsurface operations to extract energy (geothermal), store
energy (hydrogen), and dispose of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide). Still
others include the optimal design of components for fuel cells, batteries, and
civil infrastructure, all of national interest to the US. Existing models used
to predict deformation and failure of microstructurally complex porous materials
are slow and contain knowledge gaps that stem from a lack of mechanistic
understanding of the physics. This project aims to accelerate computer
simulations through novel mathematical algorithms and to anchor the simulations
to controlled lab experiments for improved physical understanding. The
integrated educational activities include the training of next-generation
engineers, curriculum development for graduate students, outreach to K-12
teachers of rural Pennsylvania through a summer research program in partnership
with the Center for Science and the Schools at Penn State, and tools and data
for domain experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a gap in the fundamental
understanding of how porous materials deform and fail at microscopic scales.
Classical poromechanical models used to simulate the physics approximate porous
materials as continua and, therefore, cannot provide insights into the
microscopic origins of failure. Direct numerical simulation presents an
attractive alternative but is computationally expensive. This project will
support the development of an integrated suite of lab experiments and
computational methods with the overarching goal of: (1) enabling a mechanistic
understanding of deformation and failure of brittle porous media; and (2)
accelerating microscale simulations through physics-informed mathematical
approximations. The combined effort will contribute towards establishing
structure-property relations that are useful for designing and screening new and
resilient microstructures. It will also enable computationally demanding tasks
such as optimization and uncertainty quantification associated with
geometrically complex porous domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.