* 2145181
* CAREER: Decoding the Developmental Extracellular Niche for Instructing Lung Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Xi Ren, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2027
* USD 452,294.00

How we engineer human tissues is usually inspired by how these tissues are
induced in the body during embryonic development and how they regenerate
following an injury. The objective of this CAREER project is to uncover the
dynamic changes in the extracellular biomolecular environment that support lung
tissue maturation during development and during surgical resection induced
regeneration. This information will then be used to guide the engineering of
novel extracellular biomaterials to enable directed lung tissue maturation in
the laboratory setting from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). By
identifying and validating the essential extracellular factors, this project
will lay the foundation for deriving functional human lung tissues to help
patients suffering from end-stage lung diseases and will inspire novel
therapeutics promoting lung repair and regeneration following injuries. The
research efforts of the CAREER project are integrated with educational and
outreach objectives to promote active learning and automated student behavior
analysis in the biomedical engineering classroom, to develop an outreach program
to encourage and inspire local high school students by hosting educational
poster sessions, and to promote biomedical engineering research and education
towards the general public through collaboration with a local museum focusing on
biological arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's long-term research goal
is to engineer lung tissues that meet unique physiological and functional
requirements. Towards this goal, the objective of this CAREER project is to
catalog the dynamic synthesis and secretion of extracellular matrix (ECM)
glycoproteins over native lung alveologenesis and use this information to
instruct the induction of alveolar cells and tissues from hiPSCs. Emerging
evidence suggests that the developmentally regulated ECM deposition is pivotal
to the maturation of alveolar cells and proper lung tissue morphogenesis.
However, a comprehensive survey of de novo ECM synthesis throughout lung
development and regeneration has been challenging to obtain, due to the limited
sensitivity in detecting the production of new ECM proteins. To address this
bottleneck, this research will develop and implement a novel newly synthesized
ECM (newsECM) profiling approach for uncovering the dynamic ECM synthetic
programs accompanying alveologenesis. This strategy, by selective labeling and
enrichment of newsECM proteins free from the bulk pre-existing ECM, will enable
ultrasensitive identification of new ECM synthesis with unprecedented daily
temporal resolution. This addresses the critical limitation of current ECM
proteomics and is well suited for studying highly dynamic processes such as
alveologenesis. Building on this technological innovation, this CAREER project
will (1) decode the dynamic ECM production during native lung alveologenesis
(neonatal and adult post-pneumonectomy), and (2) engineer hiPSC-derived
alveologenesis using developmentally inspired ECM scaffolds. Achieving directed
alveolar specification from hiPSCs will provide fundamental insights regarding
lung development and facilitate the generation of patient-specific lung tissues
for drug discovery and regenerative medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.