* 2145814
* CAREER: A multiple memory systems approach to understand interval timing
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* James Heys, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2027
* USD 482,935.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many functions of the nervous
system such as learning and memory, inferring cause and effect, and predicting
future outcomes depend upon the brain’s ability to perceive and form memories of
the duration of events. Despite progress in establishing the neural basis of
timing on the scale of milliseconds and circadian timing over hours, many
fundamental questions remain about time encoding on the intermediate scale of
interval timing (i.e. second to tens of minutes). To investigate how interval
time is represented in the brain we will develop a novel behavioral paradigm
that will be used in concert with imaging methods we have developed to monitor
and manipulate thousands of brain cells in medial entorhinal cortex. This work
will provide a basis for understanding how the brain performs complex functions
that depend upon encoding of time on the scale of seconds to minutes. The
research also has the potential to guide our understanding of disease and
provide targeted therapies for several prevalent neurodegenerative diseases and
psychiatric disorders. Furthermore, this grant will support broader impacts
through a science-communication workshop that is designed to support senior-
level neuroscience graduate students, with a strong emphasis on supporting
students from under-represented backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will address fundamental questions regarding the neural circuit mechanisms
underlying interval timing. Prior work suggests that medial entorhinal cortex
(MEC) could play a selective role only during the initial learning phase of
interval timing behavior. However, an intriguing hypothesis is that MEC might be
necessary for interval timing before and/or after learning, depending on whether
the particular timing behavior is amendable to striatal-based procedural
learning, rather than playing selective role only during the initial learning
phase of interval timing behavior. In this view, timing behavior that require
temporal information to be flexibly represented or rapidly learned might
continuously require MEC. On the other hand, simple timing behaviors with task
parameters that remain constant might only require MEC during initial learning
and could be solved later on through brain circuits that serve procedural
learning, such as the dorsal striatum. This proposal will apply a novel interval
timing paradigm to test the hypothesis that MEC is necessary for interval timing
before and/or after learning, depending on the constraints imposed by the
particular timing behavior to be learned. In order to test this hypothesis we
will leverage several methodological approaches that we have recently developed
for large-scale cellular resolution functional imaging in MEC in behaving mice.
By combining these methods with a series of causal neural manipulations we will
determine which brain circuits are differentially involved in interval timing
behavior across tasks that require rapid, flexible timing versus static,
repetitive timing. Further, we will determine the neural dynamics in MEC that
underlie learning of rapid, flexible timing behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.