* 2145827
* CAREER: Enabling Human-Aware and Responsive Automation through Cognitive State Modeling and Estimation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Neera Jain, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 673,782.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research
that enables autonomous systems such as machines, robots, and vehicles, to
respond safely and collaboratively to human interactions, thereby promoting the
progress of science, and advancing the national prosperity and welfare.
Significant increases in automation are expected across the healthcare,
manufacturing, and transportation sectors. Major challenges to the safe
integration of automation in situations involving human participants are the
lack of accurate mathematical models of human behavior, intent, and cognitive
state, as well as of reliable ways of gathering relevant real-time data from
humans. This project overcomes these challenges by building a new modeling
framework that accounts for human cognitive constructs established within the
social sciences, such as trust, workload, perceived risk, and self-confidence,
while being amenable to rigorous mathematical analysis. It demonstrates how this
framework can facilitate the design of sensing and control algorithms that can
allow an autonomous system to determine, for example, how confident the human is
in taking over a task, say during driving of an autonomous vehicle. Through
close integration of research and education, the project will train engineering
students to tackle questions surrounding socio-political and ethical challenges
associated with the rapid expansion of automation in society. This will be
achieved through new interdisciplinary coursework and recurrent immersive
learning experiences that bring students together with state and federal
policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the
foundations of a control-theoretic framework for human-automation interaction
that can use real-time data to continually improve prediction accuracy. It
achieves this aim by defining a human cognitive state space and characterizing
its dynamics in a model formulation that is compatible with standard tools of
control design. A unique feature of this formulation is its interpretability,
maintained by grounding the model in established conceptual frameworks governing
human decision-making. A principled methodology for real-time parameter and
cognitive state estimation will be created that blends information from multiple
sensors with different capabilities and costs of querying, and enables
adaptation to different individuals. A generalizable technique for exciting
human cognitive dynamics, as well as guidelines for choosing the cognitive state
estimation algorithm best suited for a particular human-automation interaction
context, will be established. Laboratory and field experiments, including tests
using trucks equipped with Level 1 driver assistance features, are planned for
validation of the modeling framework and estimation
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.