* 2145635
* CAREER: Weird Machines: a New Foundation for Advancing Microarchitectural Security
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Dmitry Evtyushkin, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 192,366.00

The Central Processing Unit (CPU) is a key element of a typical computing
system. To improve performance, microarchitecture (MA) of modern CPUs include
multiple sub-systems with complex internal state and functionality. While
improving performance, these sub-systems often trigger unexpected observable
side-effects which are known to enable attacks resulting in sensitive data
leakage. The ever-growing complexity of CPU components and the complex nature of
the cross-component interaction make it challenging to detect such effects. This
CAREER project utilizes the concept of weird machines, a theoretical framework
that enables analyzing security vulnerabilities via the theory of computation.
According to this concept, vulnerabilities create a new computational model
within the original computational entity with properties not intended by its
design. Previously, weird machines were mostly used to study software systems.
This CAREER project utilizes the concept of weird machines to systematically
identify MA side effects and explore how they can be used by a potential
attacker. The investigator has discovered that the interaction of MA components
creates a new programmable computational model within the CPU microarchitecture
that is invisible to existing methods of analysis. At the same time, it can be
used to hide malicious activities or to trigger unexpected systems behaviors.
The projectâ€™s novelties are 1) using the concept of weird machines to study MA
security, 2) exploring computational capabilities of MA side effects, 3)
investigating use cases for the new model of computation. The project's broader
significance and importance are 1) improving the understanding of the attack
surface in modern computer systems, 2) establishing a new approach for
identifying and documenting MA side effects to be used for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is centered on three main
objectives. First, known MA side-effects are documented as weird machine
primitives, followed by an automated search for new side-effects. Second, the
computational capabilities and practicality of MA weird machines are
investigated including programmability of such machines and methods to improve
their reliability. In addition, the project explores the feasibility of
constructing a universal MA weird machine capable of performing arbitrary
computations. Third, the established MA weird machines framework is applied to
study known types of MA attacks, such as side channels, enabling discovery of
new attack variants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.