* 2145074
* CAREER: Towards Novel Twist Polaritonics in 2D Crystals and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Guangxin Ni, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 245,439.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: Surface
polaritons are a type of hybrid quantum particles resulting from light (photons)
strongly coupled to interfacial electric dipoles. These highly confined nano-
light waves have emergent properties that do not exist in the separate
components alone, giving them the potential to realize novel circuitry for
sensing, communications, and information processing. It is essential to trap
light at the nanoscale to generate and manipulate these polaritonic waves. The
investigators will image the flow of spatially confined nano-light in a class of
engineered two-dimensional (2D) quantum devices with a unique atomic arrangement
by stacking and twisting specific 2D layers. This research will uncover the
novel characteristics of propagating nano-light waves that occur within these
unique structures. The team expects to harness polaritonic waves to shed light
on the fascinating new physics in 2D materials and devices and pave the way for
new types of quantum nano-photonic technologies. The PI plans to integrate
research with various education and outreach activities to mentor students at
the K-12, undergraduate and graduate levels, especially those from
underrepresented minority groups. The team will also participate in integrated
outreach programs on 2D materials and nano-optics for the general public offered
jointly by Florida State University and the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory. This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic
Materials (EPM) and the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) programs of the Division
of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
team aims to push the limits of light-matter interactions at unprecedented
length scales and employ the emitted polaritonic waves to elucidate and control
emergent topological states in two-dimensional (2D) quantum devices. The primary
focus is on 2D van der Waals heterostructures and twistronics, a highly tunable
topological platform that hosts a full suite of different polaritonic modes
(plasmons, phonons, etc.) that can strongly couple with the incident photons far
below the diffraction limit. State-of-the-art scanning near-field optical
microscopy techniques will be carried out to directly launch and visualize
polaritonic waves as they travel along 2D twisted layers down to the nanometer
length scale at the desired long-wavelength photon excitations. In particular,
real-space polaritonic nano-imaging grants access to the high photon momentum
space that is far beyond what is attainable with conventional far-field optics.
With this unique scanning near-field technique, the project team plans to 1)
look for signatures of novel topological polaritonics and investigate their
intrinsic characters in 2D quantum devices; 2) explore effective control and
manipulation of topological polaritons through the moir√© superlattice potential
by tuning the relative twist angles and in situ electrical displacement fields;
and 3) understand the new physics and exotic quantum phenomena at the
infrared/terahertz low energy scales through multi-messenger nano-probe
characterizations across multiple dimensions. The research is expected to deepen
our understanding of how the topological polaritons can be generated and
utilized to probe quantum solids, and harnessing long-lived dissipation-less
flow of nano-light for future applications including quantum sensing and
communication, topological lasers and quantum circuitry in 2D twisted systems
and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.