* 2145083
* CAREER: Formation and Regulation of Chromatin-Associated Condensates
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Huaiying Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2026
* USD 426,381.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells contain membrane-enclosed
compartments to organize biochemical reactions. Cells also create membrane-less
compartments, referred to as biomolecular condensates, to concentrate proteins
and RNAs. Some condensates are formed at specific locations, including on
cellular structures such as chromosomal DNA. However, site-specific regulation
of condensate nucleation, growth, composition, and fluidity, which are essential
for condensate functions, remain largely unknown. Using a novel chemoptogenetic
tool based on light-sensitive chemicals to manipulate condensates in live cells,
this project will uncover the general principles underpinning the formation and
regulation of protein and RNA condensates on chromosomal DNA. This project will
engage underserved high school students in the research by doing experiments
with students in the Carnegie Mellon University Academic Cloud Lab, a state-of-
the-art science laboratory that students can access from a web portal. In
addition, the established curriculums will be available for other educators and
students with internet access so more students can learn science by doing
science. American Rescue Plan funding is used to support this early career
investigator at a critical stage in his career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-
liquid phase separation is implicated in the formation of many chromatin-
associated condensates, including nucleoli, transcription hubs, and DNA repair
foci. However, our understanding of the phase separation process, the regulation
of condensate properties, and the relevance of phase separation in chromatin
functions of many chromatin-associated condensates are still limited. This
project will combine chemoptogenetic manipulation in live cells with biophysical
quantification and biochemical assays to determine the necessary and sufficient
conditions for protein and RNA phase separation on chromatin in the nuclear
milieu, reveal how the nuclear environment and active signaling control
condensate growth, and dissect how condensate chemical and material properties
arise from molecular interactions. Results from this project will help determine
whether and how protein and RNA phase separation contribute to chromatin
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.