* 2145613
* CAREER: PFAS-BioAction: Innovative treatment of municipal solid waste organics through insect-mediated bioprocessing and sequestration of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Heather Bischel, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2027
* USD 418,150.00

Food and organic wastes are the largest component of municipal solid waste in
landfills. In 2018, over 30 million tons of food and organic wastes were
disposed of in landfills. The management of landfilled organic wastes is
challenging as it often requires the design and integration of treatment trains
to control odor emissions and the release of toxic leachates and greenhouse
gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. Insect mediated bioconversion (IMB)
has emerged as a promising and sustainable alternative to convert food/organic
wastes to useful products. The basic premise of IMB is that food/organic wastes
can be used as substrates to grow insects which can then be processed into
valuable products including animal feed, biofuels, and compost or higher-value
soil amendments. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to explore the
use of IMB to sequester and degrade persistent and toxic contaminants with an
initial focus on poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from landfilled
organic wastes. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator proposes to use
the black soldier fly larvae (BSFL) as model systems to investigate how PFAS
accumulate in insects and the extent of PFAS degradation by enzymes in insect
guts. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development of IMB as a
sustainable treatment technology for PFAS-contaminated landfilled organic
wastes. Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education
and training including the mentoring of a graduate student and an undergraduate
student at the University of California, Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect-
mediated bioconversion (IMB) has emerged as a promising, scalable, and cost-
effective platform to generate valuable products from organic waste streams.
However, little is known about the potential of IMB to treat and degrade
persistent and toxic contaminants such as PFAS that are often present in
landfilled organic wastes. This CAREER project proposes to investigate the
bioaccumulation and biotransformation of PFAS by black soldier fly larvae
(BSFL), a family of insects with great potential to convert organic wastes to
useful products due to their high lipids and protein contents. Two key goals of
the research are to: 1) probe PFAS interactions with model lipids and proteins
to unravel the mechanisms of PFAS bioaccumulation in insect tissues and 2)
evaluate the extents of PFAS bioaccumulation, metabolism, and bioconversion by
BSFL. To advance these goals, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to carry
out an integrated experimental and modeling research program that will combine
1) liquid-chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC-QTOF-
MS) with targeted analysis to evaluate the abundance and diversity of PFAS in
diverted food waste, finished compost, and landfill leachate, 2) atomistic
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to predict the binding affinities of PFAS to
proteins using human serum albumin as model system, 3) ex vivo assays to measure
PFAS bioaccumulation in the protein and lipid fractions of BSFL tissue
homogenates, and 4) experimental assays to measure and characterize PFAS
bioaccumulation and biotransformation in the tissues of BSFL. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development and
implementation of IMB as an efficient and cost-effective PFAS remediation
technology. To implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER
project, the PI will revise one of her undergraduate courses at UC-Davis to
include a CURES (course-based undergraduate research experiences) module that
will engage teams of three to four students through a complete inquiry cycle,
beginning with the development of a research question and a testable hypothesis
linked to the bioaccumulation of contaminants such as PFAS. In addition, the PI
plans to actively engage with engineering educators and professionals to
disseminate educational resources, share key research findings from her CAREER
project, and promote meaningful dialogue around science-based solutions for
achieving a zero-waste future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.