* 2145142
* CAREER: The Role of Common Mycorrhizal Networks in the Establishment, Environmental Change, and Persistence of an Invasive Plant Species in the Tallgrass Prairie
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Joanna Weremijewicz, North Central College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2027
* USD 617,514.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will study how fungi
affect one of the most expensive environmental issues in the US - invasive
species. Most plants in the world feed sugars to the mycorrhizal fungi living in
their roots. In return, the mycorrhizal fungi forage the soil for mineral
nutrients and provide them to their plant hosts. While in the soil, the fungi
often encounter, and colonize a neighboring root system, connecting the plants
in a mycorrhizal network. The work will investigate how mycorrhizal networks
affect interactions between Canada Thistle, or “the worst weed in the US,” and
native prairie plants. The research will also examine if mycorrhizal networks
connected to Canada Thistle change the makeup of the soil fungal community.
Finally, the work will investigate if this change enables Canada Thistle to
persist in prairies long-term. The researcher will train first-generation and
under-represented minority college and high school students, addressing a
national need to train a diverse STEM workforce. As part of the CAREER
activities, the researcher will also develop and broadly disseminate plant
science course materials for multiple levels of the college curriculum. Finally,
the researcher will provide professional development to environmental science
teachers from areas with high populations of underrepresented students. Teachers
will learn how to transform prescriptive lab exercises into inquiry-based
activities that teach the nature of science. These activities will assist the
researcher in attaining a career that is balanced by both research and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will incorporate common
mycorrhizal networks (CMNs) into existing theories and hypotheses about plant
invasions, community structuring, and functioning of arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi in nature. The research will examine the mechanistic role of CMNs in
facilitating introduced, exotic species to 1) establish in new habitats, 2)
change the biotic environment, and 3) persist within introduced areas. Using
stable isotope tracing, the researcher will examine the first and most important
interaction in establishing invasive species, competition with native plants, by
examining the mechanisms of carbon provisioning and nitrogen transfer within
CMNs. In a field study using Next-Generation Illumina MiSeq sequencing, she will
examine how invasive species alter arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities by
utilizing CMNs. Finally, the PI will test the role of CMNs in allowing Canada
Thistle to persist through plant-soil feedbacks. The project will improve plant
and scientific literacy of college students with course-based research
experiences whose results synergistically inform the research. Additionally, the
PI will provide professional development to K-12 science teachers on inquiry-
based teaching in environmental science and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.