* 2145189
* CAREER: Fluid-Structure Interactions in Pulsatile Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Vrishank Raghav, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 398,877.00

This project is motivated by a critical need to engineer durable solutions and
devices for the cardiovascular health of a global aging population. With
existing heart valve replacements vulnerable to premature failure, a recurring
challenge is the limited understanding of how the pulsing flow of blood
interacts with the heart valve leaflets and affects its long-term durability. By
exploiting recent advances in 3D imaging technologies, this project aims to
uncover the flow physics relating the influence of a pulsing flow on the fatigue
failure of flexible materials. In addition to enabling improved heart valve
designs, the research outcomes will benefit a large community of engineers and
scientists both in academia and industry who study fluid-structure interaction
physics across multiple disciplines such as - natural flight, biomechanics,
aeronautics, renewable energy, space exploration, among others. The integrated
education plan adopts a three-pronged approach including: (1) implementation of
novel game-based learning techniques to improve engagement in university
education and research; (2) outreach workshops for K-12 aimed at
underrepresented students in STEM; and (3) the adoption of Virtual Reality based
education tools aimed at the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to develop an integrated research and education program focused
on fluid-structure interactions that will reveal scaling laws-based fundamental
flow physics for flutter of flexible membranes in a pulsatile flow (e.g., heart
valves). To this end, for the first time, this project will establish a new
paradigm in higher-fidelity experimental fluid-structure interaction
measurements (using light-field imaging) to simultaneously quantify time-
resolved 3D flow fields and the associated structural motion or strain. The
novel validated experimental method will be used to gather measurements to
derive unique scalable parameters to classify regimes of flutter in pulsatile
flow and identify the associated flow physics mechanisms. Some of the
anticipated research outcomes include: (1) a sound scaling laws-based
understanding of fluid-structure interaction of flexible membranes in pulsatile
flow; and (2) an extensive database of high-fidelity experimental fluid-
structure interaction measurements for computational validation. Such improved
quantification of fluid-structure interaction physics and development of scaling
laws will enable better prediction of flutter-induced fatigue failure, a key
step towards improving longevity of biological heart valve
replacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.