* 2145372
* CAREER: Neurodevelopmental Mechanisms of Stressor Controllability and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Dylan Gee, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 665,715.00

Stress is a universal human experience that can have consequences for mental and
physical health. Stress often increases during adolescence, and the developing
brain is particularly sensitive to stress during this phase of life. Across
cultures and centuries, adolescence has been noted as a time of dramatic changes
in the body, brain, and behavior. During this time, youth are at heightened risk
for a number of neuropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety and mood
disorders, psychosis, eating disorders, personality disorders, and substance use
disorders. Recent work has begun to reveal unique facets of the adolescent brain
that may help us to understand how it develops and responds to stress and,
concomitantly, how to better support youth during this challenging time period
in their lives. This project will examine how experiences shape brain
development and the capacity to cope with stress, which is essential for
advancing knowledge about how to optimize well-being. While adolescence is most
commonly studied as a period of heightened risk, the current study will leverage
knowledge about the unique nature of the adolescent brain with the goal to
promote resilience. A better understanding of how the adolescent brain responds
to stress will have broad implications for child and adolescent well-being,
parenting, educational settings, and public policy. The broader impacts of this
project include extensive mentorship and outreach activities, which will broaden
inclusion in developmental neuroscience and provide opportunities for students
to engage deeply with the science of stress and adolescent brain development,
while also educating the general public about the varieties and effects of
stress on their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although stress can be challenging,
recent research has shown that not all stress has negative effects. Building
upon evidence that experiencing controllable stress can promote resilience in
adults, this project focuses on adolescence as a unique period of brain
development when the controllability of a stressor may be particularly
beneficial for promoting resilience. Using behavioral, physiological, and
neuroimaging approaches, this project will investigate age-related differences
in the effects of stressor controllability and mechanistic pathways linking
controllable stress to adaptive coping. Researchers will utilize behavioral
tasks paired with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study how
experience with controllable stress alters the developing brain. The researchers
hypothesize that two varieties of stress, controllable and uncontrollable, will
have differing effects on the connectivity between brain areas needed for
emotional regulation and decision-making, causing better or worse responses to
later stressors in both the lab and the real world. Through a set of behavioral
tasks designed to expose adolescents to both forms of stress and contrast them,
they hope to gain a better understanding of the underlying neural mechanisms and
the efficacy of controllable stress as a helpful intervention. Specifically, Aim
1 will examine how the experience of having control over a stressor can
influence responses to later uncontrollable stress, via modulation of brain
circuitry involved in motivated behavior. Aim 2 will examine how controllable
stress (relative to uncontrollable or no stress) influences inferences about
environmental controllability. Aim 3 will test the extent to which the effects
of controllable stress generalize to real-world settings and promote adaptive
coping behaviors in daily life. This research will inform critical questions
about neuroplasticity and how stress “gets under the skin” to shape long-term
neurobehavioral outcomes, as well as when and how interventions may be most
effective for promoting resilience in the face of
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.