* 2145849
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Protein Mechanical Stability and its Impact on Secretion
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Emad Tajkhorshid, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2024
* USD 199,511.00

Many bacteria use a nanosyringe on their surface to inject proteins into host
cells to facilitate infection.&lt;br/&gt;These injected proteins, called
effectors, are normally folded into specific three-dimensional
structures&lt;br/&gt;required to carry out their functions. However, they need
to be mechanically unfolded by the syringe&lt;br/&gt;machinery to be secreted
through the needle and into the host where they refold to their normal
structure.&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate their secretion, effector proteins are easy
to unfold mechanically—they are mechanically&lt;br/&gt;labile—whereas proteins
that are mechanically robust cannot be secreted. However, what makes
proteins&lt;br/&gt;mechanically labile or robust is poorly understood. This
project addresses this knowledge gap. A carefully&lt;br/&gt;chosen set of model
proteins and state of the art experimental and computational tools will be used
to&lt;br/&gt;elucidate what makes a protein secretable by bacterial
nanosyringes. This will define a fundamental&lt;br/&gt;bacterial infection
mechanism and may also allow future engineering of the system to inject proteins
of&lt;br/&gt;interest into host cells. More generally, the project will advance
the field by helping define the rules for&lt;br/&gt;protein mechanical
stability. The combination of biophysical and computational approaches provides
an&lt;br/&gt;outstanding cross-training opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students in the physical and&lt;br/&gt;biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How protein mechanical stability is encoded—how
unfolding by mechanical force is modulated by&lt;br/&gt;sequence and
structure—is poorly understood. This project addresses this knowledge gap by
examining&lt;br/&gt;proteins secreted by the bacterial Type III Secretion System
(TTSS), called effectors, as model systems.&lt;br/&gt;The TTSS mechanically
unfolds and secretes its effectors while other proteins stall in the
secretion&lt;br/&gt;apparatus. The PI’s team discovered that TTSS effectors are
mechanically labile compared to their noneffector&lt;br/&gt;homologs. In this
project, they explore the hypothesis that effectors have evolved to
be&lt;br/&gt;mechanically labile, so they can be unfolded by a weak TTSS
unfoldase, explaining their extreme sequence&lt;br/&gt;divergence from their
non-effector homologs. The system provides a naturally occurring model
to&lt;br/&gt;understand how mechanical stability is modulated by sequence. The
collaborative approach combines: (i)&lt;br/&gt;a high-precision single molecule
assay to determine mechanical properties of TTSS effectors and their
noneffector&lt;br/&gt;homologs; (ii) steered molecular dynamics simulations to
provide a theoretical model of the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of differential
mechanical stability within a conserved fold; and (iii) live-cell imaging to
test&lt;br/&gt;the effect of different mechanical stabilities in TTSS secretion.
This provides a comprehensive, quantitative,&lt;br/&gt;and physiologically
validated model for how mechanical stability is encoded and it impact on
TTSS&lt;br/&gt;secretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the
Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.