* 2145147
* CAREER: Laser-Cooled Molecules in an AC-Storage Ring
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Boerge Hemmerling, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2027
* USD 243,130.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General audience abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model of Particle Physics represents our current
understanding of the basic building blocks of the universe, but we know there
must be additional undiscovered physics. There is, for example, an imbalance
between matter and antimatter in the universe which cannot be fully accounted
for by the Standard Model. Precise measurements on atoms and molecules can help
search for beyond the Standard Model physics. This project seeks to produce a
sample of cold molecules chosen to be particularly sensitive to one class of new
physics. There are many other potential applications for cold molecules
including the control of the outcome of chemical reactions and the realization
of novel quantum computing and simulation platforms. All these applications
require the cooling of the molecular species to very low temperatures where full
control over the molecule is possible. The complex internal structure of
molecules, however, renders laser cooling techniques that have been applied to
many atomic species challenging and is only practical for a limited class of
molecules. Extending laser cooling to a more diverse set of species is desirable
as it opens the possibility for many novel applications. The PI and his students
will develop an electric storage ring as a precursor for cooling and trapping
species which are not suitable for traditional laser cooling schemes. This is
achieved by combining the infinite travel distance in a ring with the intrinsic
spontaneous decay of any long-lived state. Within the educational part of this
program, the PI will develop a portable magneto-optical trap for rubidium atoms
as part of a library of transportable setups to be used in local high schools
and at local science fairs. A major focus of this program is to provide people
in the local community of Riverside county, where a large proportion of the
population is from groups currently underrepresented in STEM, with an experience
of the microscopic quantum world of atoms and molecules, and to foster their
interest in a future STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports the development of an
alternating-current storage ring for atoms and molecules, which acts as a
slowing stage to bring a diverse set of molecules below the capture velocity of
a magneto-optical trap. The cooling principle applies slowing laser pulses at
each revolution inside the ring and relies on the spontaneous decay of long-
lived intermediate states as a repumping mechanism to keep the particles in the
photon scattering cycle. This combination of laser cooling and spontaneous decay
in the storage ring opens up possibilities for new applications that require
cooling and trapping atoms with metastable states or molecules with non-diagonal
Franck-Condon factors. The ring will, for instance, allow for cooling and
trapping mercury fluoride, which offers the potential to improve the current
statistical sensitivity of searches for an electric dipole moment of the
electron. Here, the repumping scheme through spontaneous decay can significantly
reduce the optical overhead required to effectively repump excited vibrational
states of mercury fluoride that get populated during the cooling process.
Furthermore, this storage ring will allow for studies of cold quantum chemistry
and collisions of atoms and molecules for which laser cooling is currently
impractical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.