* 2145050
* CAREER: Hybrid membranes as platforms for biomolecule detection, synthesis, and transport
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Neha Kamat, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2026
* USD 287,640.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;As
agriculture and manufacturing expand globally and world-wide health crises
continue to arise, the development of biosensors that allow improved molecular
detection in a variety of settings are critical for our ability to maintain
human and ecological health. Nanoparticles that can recapitulate biological
processes to sense analytes, such as a local chemical or protein, and respond
via the synthesis and secretion of biomolecules, would dramatically improve the
efficacy of biosensing applications. Towards this goal, this NSF CAREER
proposal, will design particles that incorporate stabilizing molecules alongside
membrane proteins and protein synthesis systems. The project will map how the
unique mechanical and physical properties of the particles designed impact the
sensing capabilities and bioreactivity of the designed particles. The proposed
research is expected to contribute a markedly improved biosensing platform that
could generate improved sensitivity of biological detection and enhanced
stability of cell-free systems, overcoming previous obstacles to their
deployment as autonomous systems. This advance will enable researchers and
clinicians to detect biological molecules in an array of water-containing
environments, from vasculature to ground water, allowing for the early detection
of infection and disease to microbial content. The educational objective of this
proposal will develop an educational program partnering with teachers from
Chicago Public Schools (CPS). This program will provide much-needed community
engagement training and pedagogical skills for STEM graduate students, while
providing important teacher-leader training and professional network building
for public school elementary/middle grade
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid membranes,
assembled from diblock copolymers and phospholipids, have emerged as a
potentially powerful material interface to design biosensors, drug delivery
vehicles, and bioreactors. The chemical flexibility and stability that polymers
impart to phospholipid membranes is complimented by the biological compatibility
of phospholipids with membrane proteins. In spite of important recent
demonstrations on the capacity of hybrid membranes to incorporate membrane
proteins, there is still a critical gap in the knowledge base that pertains to
the effect of membrane biophysical properties on membrane protein and cell-free
expression dynamics. These limitations in our understanding of the structure-
function relationship of synthetic membranes have seriously hampered the utility
of synthetic vesicles as cellular mimetic biosensors. The proposed research is
expected to contribute fundamental relationships between membrane composition,
membrane physical properties, and the activity of embedded membrane proteins and
encapsulated cell-free sensors. This contribution is significant because once we
have established these material relationships, a new class of membrane-based
devices can be designed that will provide a way to dynamically map chemical and
environmental changes in vascular and aquatic environments that have been
difficult to otherwise access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.