* 2145389
* CAREER: Efficient Mobile Edge Oriented Deep Learning Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Yan Wang, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2027
* USD 210,041.00

Mobile edge computing has been widely used in many applications in these years.
However, there is a gap between the extreme computational costs of prevalent
deep learning techniques and resource-constrained mobile edge computing systems.
Such a gap prevents many deep learning methods from being widely deployed in
mobile edge devices. It also significantly impacts the performance of a broad
range of real-time mobile edge applications (e.g., driving behavior analysis,
object identification, and natural language processing). This project aims to
develop a novel mobile edge-oriented deep learning framework that can
significantly improve the performance and efficiency of deep neural networks
(DNNs) on mobile edge devices. Toward this end, this project systematically
investigates challenging research problems in the life cycle of DNNs, including
architecture design, model optimization, computation reduction, and computing
acceleration. It develops efficient DNN models that can achieve efficient
training and inference on mobile edge devices. It also investigates unique
characteristics of mobile edge data and hardware and accelerates DNN executions
on resource-constrained mobile edge devices through computation reuse and
dynamic partitioning and scheduling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project connects
advanced research in mobile edge sensing and computing systems. The developed
framework leads to a solid foundation for DNN and computer architecture design
and optimization for mobile edge devices. It also strengthens the foundational
technology and analysis in designing cost-effective computer systems and
architectures for real-time mobile edge applications. The project results
significantly improve the efficiency of deep learning in a large spectrum of
research related to mobile edge computing, including the Internet of Things,
mobile and pervasive sensing, and human-computer interaction. The outcomes of
the proposal can improve hardware resource utilization in real-time data
analytics, leading to increased efficiency of scientific outputs in many
interdisciplinary communities. In addition to sharing results with the
community, this project can benefit interdisciplinary curriculums with new
research topics and tasks for undergraduate/graduate and minority students. The
education program also includes outreach efforts to a broad range of student
programs from K-5 to K-12 with local partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.