* 2145917
* CAREER: Sparse Graph-Based Codes for Network Data Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* David Mitchell, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2027
* USD 167,850.00

Driven by emerging systems, such as the Internet-of-things (smart homes,
wearables, connected cars, and so on), society is generating and using massive
amounts of data at an ever increasing rate. For example, the amount of data
created over the next three years is predicted to be more than that created over
the past 30 years. Without significant technological advances, existing
communications infrastructure will not be able to cope with this exponential
increase. This project addresses this challenge by exploring how such data can
be compressed over networks to significantly reduce the traffic that needs to be
transmitted. The main idea is to explore new data-compression schemes that
leverage untapped gains by exploiting similarities and structure in the data as
well as how the devices are connected in the network. Examples include
transmitting many related measurements in different locations of the power grid
to a single destination, or transmitting a video replay to the individual
devices of a large crowd in a sports stadium. As such, the proposed research
promises to provide a significant transformative impact on many critical
applications employing reliable networked data compression, for example in the
fields of healthcare, environmental monitoring, and finance. The project also
includes an integrated education plan to increase participation in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), particularly among minority
groups. This objective is supported by several complementary initiatives,
including targeted K-12 activities as well as related teacher training and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research significantly advances the
state of the art in network data compression by employing ideas from network
coding, graph theory, iterative information processing, machine learning, and
circuit design. The project involves several fundamental themes related to
network-aware, low-complexity, and throughput-efficient data compression schemes
which are not present in previous studies: a theoretical analysis and design of
general schemes for lossy source coding, involving a characterization of finite-
length scaling properties under message passing encoding and analysis of harmful
graphical substructures; an investigation of the fundamental rate-distortion
performance of nested graph-based codes in canonical network structures,
exploring the achievable network gains in compression for practical spatially
coupled constructions; and algorithmic advances and novel high-speed field
programmable gate array hardware architectures. The theoretical results of this
project have the potential to advance our fundamental understanding of coding
strategies to achieve network gains in source compression, opening new
opportunities and challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.