* 2145031
* CAREER: Towards Efficient and Fast Hierarchical Federated Learning in Heterogeneous Wireless Edge Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Xiaowen Gong, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2027
* USD 297,370.00

The accelerating penetration of machine learning (ML) based artificial
intelligence (AI) in a variety of domains and the explosive growth of wireless
applications spur wireless federated learning (WFL), which can achieve
collaborative intelligence via federated learning (FL) in wireless edge
networks. This project explores wireless hierarchical federated learning (WHFL),
which leverages a hierarchical communication structure to substantially reduce
the communication costs of WFL. It develops fundamental understandings as well
as adaptive and efficient algorithms and schemes for WHFL while addressing
several unique challenges that have been predominantly unexplored before: 1)
inflexibility of homogeneous computation configurations (including local
iteration number, mini-batch size, step size) for participating devices; 2)
inefficiency of bandwidth-sharing based communication resource allocation; 3)
complex impacts of the hierarchical communication structure for heterogeneous
devices. The project explores innovative cross-disciplinary research of wireless
networking and machine learning, and aims to provide useful insights of
networking research for future intelligent networked computational systems based
on data analytics. The research outcomes of this project have the potential to
enable intelligent control and management of wireless networks, and also support
various emerging AI applications over wireless networked systems, such as
connected and autonomous vehicles, and collaborative robots. Various substantial
education programs are integrated with the proposed research, including hands-on
wireless and ML/AI projects for college students, and outreach activities on
robotics for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies
hierarchical FL in wireless edge networks for devices with heterogeneous
computation and communication capabilities. The proposed research is motivated
by some key insights obtained from our preliminary work: 1) heterogeneous
computation configurations, particularly heterogeneous local iteration numbers,
have non-trivial impacts on the learning accuracy and learning cost of FL; 2)
time-sharing based communication resource allocation is more efficient than
bandwidth-sharing, while it results in non-trivial coupling between computation
configuration and communication scheduling; 3) the hierarchical model
communication and aggregation have non-trivial impacts when devices have
heterogeneous computation configurations. With these insights, the proposed
research is organized into the following three interdependent thrusts: i)
adaptive cost-aware device selection and computation configuration in a local
cluster; ii) co-design of computation configuration and communication scheduling
for fast convergence in a local cluster; iii) global model communication and
aggregation for accurate learning across local clusters. The proposed schemes
and algorithms for WHFL will be implemented to evaluate their practical
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CNS and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.