* 2145962
* CAREER: Rational Design of One-Dimensional Contacts to Two-Dimensional Atomically Thin Heterostructure for High-Performance and Low Noise Field Effect Transistors and Biosensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Suprem Das, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Field Effect Transistors (FETs) with two-dimensional atomically thin materials
and one-dimensional contacts are studied in this project. These transistors will
demonstrate high performance and low noise characteristics and will lay the
foundation for emerging technologies including biosensor devices and circuits.
Though silicon-based electronics have been the basis for innovation for several
decades, their performance at atomically thin dimensions breaks down due to the
bottleneck in its intrinsic crystal symmetry and associated physical and
chemical properties. This project investigates the use of graphene, hexagonal
boron nitride, and transition metal dichalcogenides to form atomically thin
FETs. Given their unprecedented physical properties such as material and device
tunability and energy efficiency at the atomic level, these devices will
revolutionize the use of FETs in new applications that will transform
electronics across industries such as communications, healthcare, and
environmental sensing. It is expected that these devices and circuits that
deploy them will play a great role in the development of internet-of-things
(IoT), Industry 4.0, data analytics, artificial intelligence, and machine
learning. This project will train next generation researchers, including women
scientists and engineers and those from underrepresented populations, in micro-
nanoscale science and engineering to gain expertise in addressing some of the
complex societal problems such as creating sensors for environmental monitoring
to disease diagnostics. The results obtained from this project will be
integrated in educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to demonstrate high performance and low noise field effect
transistor devices that will uniquely be used as a platform for highly sensitive
biosensors. The objectives of the proposal is to rationally design to study
correlated electrical transport and noise phenomena in number of two dimensional
atomically thin heterostructure field effect transistors involving graphene,
hexagonal boron nitride, and transition metal dichalcogenides (such as
molybdenum disulfide) by understanding (1) contact engineering with low work
function metals and semimetals as source and drain electrodes, (2) edge
contacted architectures with large transfer length and low contact resistance,
(3) manipulating polar phonons by dielectric engineering using isotopically pure
hexagonal boron nitrides and (4) development of antibody/antigen immunosensors
with high sensitivity for SARS-CoV-2. Key to all these successes requires a
fundamental understanding in material tunability in atomic scale, quantum
confinement and relation to band structure, device architecture and integration,
and correlated phenomena between electrical transport and noise physics. Based
on experimental design parameters and results (such as a two probe vs. four
probe measurement design), new device models beyond the traditional silicon
transistor and biosensor model will be developed. Quantum confined physics will
be exploited to demonstrate their structure and property tunability and their
relation to the functionality (e.g., sensing
characteristics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by ECCS
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.