* 2145967
* Structural insights into RNA promoters for RNA polymerase II-catalyzed RNA-templated transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Ying Wang, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2025
* USD 344,715.00

This project will shed light on how a DNA-directed RNA polymerase, normally
involved in transcription of cellular DNA, is also able to recognize RNA
templates. To understand how transcription polymerases can recognize RNA
templates, this project aims to determine the molecular basis of a regulatory
element within a well-known RNA template (potato spindle tuber viroid) that is
critical for recruiting the transcription enzymes. To achieve this goal, this
project will employ a combination of molecular, biochemical, and bioinformatic
approaches. The knowledge gained from this project may facilitate the
development of RNA-based technologies for basic research as well as applications
in biomedicine and agriculture, thus benefiting society in the long term. This
project will also serve as a vehicle for training undergraduate and graduate
students. Particularly, undergraduate students from Delta State University,
located in one of the least affluent regions in the US and lacking the necessary
facility for research training, will participate in summer research annually to
gain research experience and to be prepared for STEM-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by published and preliminary data, a
testable hypothesis is that potato spindle tuber viroid recruits RNA-specific
transcription factor(s), thereby enhancing the efficiency of RNA polymerase II
(Pol II)-catalyzed RNA-templated transcription. The RNA promoter region is
defined by the binding region of a recently identified RNA-specific
transcription factor, TFIIIA-7ZF. This project will map and characterize the
molecular basis/structure of RNA promoters within both sense and antisense
genomes of potato spindle tuber viroid and its relatives, using a combination of
selective 2’-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension (SHAPE) analysis,
functional mutagenesis, Pol II-based in vitro transcription assay, RNA
footprinting assays, etc. The outcomes from this project will help better
understand the nature of RNA promoters and potentially exploit RNA promoters for
usage in basic science and its applications in agriculture. While working on
this project, undergraduate students from two universities in the state of
Mississippi will receive experience in basic research in molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.