* 2145085
* CAREER: Highly Underactuated Lower-Body Exoskeletons and the Dynamics of Walking
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Alan Asbeck, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2027
* USD 701,501.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports research
that will advance understanding of human walking and create a new type of lower-
body exoskeleton for mitigation of disability and augmentation of human
performance. When people walk normally, two factors largely determine their
balance and forward progress: the location of each footstep, and how hard each
leg in stance pushes on the ground. In general, when an exoskeleton produces
forces that are slightly different from what the person wearing it expects or
wants, it affects how the person takes their next step, which in turn affects
the future exoskeleton response. The exoskeletons studied in this project
supplement the natural muscular strength of their wearers by adding to the
support forces during walking. Systematically varying the exoskeleton force and
measuring the response will reveal a map of the dynamics of balance and movement
during walking, including how these change on uphill and downhill slopes. This
new fundamental understanding of walking can then be used by the exoskeleton to
adapt to individual characteristics of any user, and from there to stimulate
desired walking patterns while decreasing the likelihood of a fall. This
research will be complemented by educational outreach, including informing the
broader public about robotics and human-robot interaction via science videos on
social media, and engaging pre-college students with workshops on biomechanics
and exoskeleton control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on a new
type of exoskeleton that uses a single prismatic actuator on each leg to apply
force from the ground next to a planted foot, directly to the wearer's center of
mass. The actuator can provide up to 80 percent of the unassisted ground
reaction force during walking. The exoskeleton hip is unactuated and free to
rotate, which allows the wearer to choose their footstep locations as though the
exoskeleton was absent. Human subject experiments will study how the human
kinematics, muscle activity, metabolic cost, foot placement, and stability are
affected by different forces on the person's center of mass under various
conditions including varying speeds and slopes -- essentially accomplishing
system identification of the coupled human-robot system. These system
identification results, together with the divergent component of motion (DCM)
framework and machine learning, will define an exoskeleton controller to provide
optimized walking assist forces based on the wearer's current state and expected
future footstep locations. The project will subsequently investigate the bi-
directional adaptation between the human and exoskeleton: how humans adapt to
the exoskeleton forces, how their subsequent footstep locations are affected by
these forces, and how the exoskeleton can best adapt to an individual human and
their personal locomotion patterns and footstep
placements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.