* 2145177
* CAREER: Interlimb Neural Coupling to Enhance Gait Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Babak Hejrati, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2027
* USD 551,912.00

Mobility issues affect many people across the lifespan. People with walking
problems due to aging or neurological disorders such as stroke and Parkinson's
disease often participate in gait training therapy to improve their walking
ability. Current gait training methods primarily focus on improving leg
movements and overlook the role of arm movement, even though many people do not
demonstrate appropriate arm swing. Walking is a complex skill requiring highly
coordinated leg and arm movements. Arm swing then is an essential component of
walking that impacts stability, balance, and energy efficiency. To improve
walking, a whole-body approach should be adopted, one that takes advantage of
how all four limbs work together in gait production. This Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project will establish a novel framework for
employing appropriate arm swing in gait training to create more effective
methods with enduring improvements for people with walking difficulties. The
objective of this project will be accomplished by quantifying normal arm swing
while considering factors such as age and walking speed, and then creating novel
approaches using wearable robotic devices to induce normal arm swing during
walking. The use of these robotic devices will enhance gait rehabilitation
providing a significant impact on society given that the ability to walk is
crucial for daily living activities, and many individuals, for a variety of
reasons, have difficulty in walking efficiently. The education plan will engage
students with disabilities, who are underrepresented in science and engineering.
Their involvement in research using assistive robotic devices will encourage
them to pursue further education and careers in this field and help with student
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is to
establish an effective gait training approach by inducing whole-body responses
during walking. This project seeks to fundamentally understand how to exploit
interlimb neural coupling and utilize arm swing to enhance gait rehabilitation.
Two major approaches for incorporating appropriate arm swing into gait training
will be investigated to determine how interlimb coupling can be used to improve
key parameters such as coordination, symmetry, variability, and walking speed.
In one approach, arm-swing patterns generated in real-time by a novel model
using thigh and shank kinematic data will be utilized in wearable robotic
devices. These devices will attempt to induce correct arm movement in
coordination with leg movements at various walking speeds while gait parameters
are recorded. In the second approach, arm swing will be altered by robotic
devices to modulate the amplitude and frequency of leg movements to improve gait
parameters. Two novel wearable robotic devices will be created as research tools
to examine how tactile and kinesthetic force feedback methods can instigate and
alter arm swing in users during walking at self-selected speeds. The interlimb
coupling in each approach will be quantified by analyzing muscle activity using
techniques such as intermuscular coherence analysis. Participants in these
studies will include healthy young and older adults, older adults with slow gait
speed, and individuals who have suffered a stroke and walk with difficulty but
are able to walk without an assistive device. This research project will employ
the intrinsic tendency to couple upper and lower extremities in creating a
highly effective gait rehabilitation approach that will be significantly
beneficial for a wide variety of individuals with gait deficits. The projectâ€™s
education plan will promote teaching and training assistive robotics among
students with disabilities, K-12 students in rural areas, and groups
underrepresented in mechanical engineering including female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Disability
and Rehabilitation Engineering Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.