* 2145195
* CAREER: The contributions of imperfect transmission and cytoplasmic incompatibility to Wolbachia frequency variation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Brandon Cooper, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2027
* USD 536,552.00

Over a billion years ago a host cell engulfed a free-living bacterium in a
remarkable event that led to the evolution of mitochondria that now provide the
chemical energy for animal, plant, and fungal cells. Recent research has
revealed that the process of microbes taking up residence inside the cells of
other species (known as endosymbiosis) is very common, especially among insects.
For example, a single microbe called Wolbachia infects more than half of all
insect species on Earth. Unlike mitochondria, Wolbachia are usually not required
for their hosts to survive and reproduce. Instead, the proportion of individuals
within a host species with Wolbachia at any time varies greatly for unknown
reasons, making it hard to predict the consequences for host biology. This
project will unravel the causes of variable Wolbachia prevalence as a model for
more broadly understanding conditions that favor endosymbiosis. This work will
also potentially contribute to improving human health. Wolbachia can block
viruses like dengue and Zika in mosquito systems, but increasing the efficacy of
this work requires identifying conditions that favor high Wolbachia prevalence.
This project will identify such conditions in natural systems. Locally, this
project will educate and train first-generation and Native Montana students in
cutting-edge laboratory, field, and computational approaches that will improve
their competitiveness in STEM-related careers. A new course at the University of
Montana focused on host-microbe interactions will be further developed to
include outreach activities aimed at exposing individuals in rural Montana to
the unique biology of endosymbiosis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Organismal
performance and fitness depends on interactions across levels of biological
organization. Among all species interactions, those between animals and
microbial endosymbionts that live inside their cells are perhaps the most
intimate, influencing host behavior, physiology, life history, and fitness. Some
endosymbionts may even contribute to reproductive isolation and speciation,
highlighting their broad importance for host biology. The evolutionary outcomes
of host-endosymbiont interactions ultimately depend on endosymbiont prevalence
in host populations, which varies widely for unknown reasons. This project will
leverage 50 million years of Wolbachia evolution distributed across divergent
host species to determine the causes of Wolbachia frequency variation. The
project will specifically dissect how genes in host and endosymbiont genomes
interact with each other and with temperature (GxGxE interactions) to influence
maternal Wolbachia transmission rates and the strength of Wolbachia-induced
reproductive manipulations like cytoplasmic incompatibility. Mathematical models
will then be used to evaluate how both genomic and environmental interactions
contribute to Wolbachia prevalence in divergent host systems. At each step, this
project includes activities that will leverage the unique biology of
endosymbiosis to educate and train first-generation and Native students in
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.