* 2145321
* CAREER: Neuromuscular Coordination (NeuroCoord)-Guided Human-Machine Interaction for Quantifying and Improving Motor Function after Stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jinsook Roh, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2027
* USD 431,679.00

Stroke is a leading cause of long-term disability in the U.S. It negatively
impacts the upper extremity (UE) function. A significant need for effective
stroke rehabilitation for the UE remains, owing to the increase in an aging
population and stroke survival rates. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) project aims to create an adaptive neuromuscular coordination
(NeuroCoord)-guided human-machine interaction platform for stroke
rehabilitation. The platform will enable researchers to make objective
assessments of motor impairment with the brain, muscular, and force data
measured in the arm. The study will also allow researchers to design a new,
individualized rehabilitation model to improve motor function in the UE after
stroke. Successful completion of the project will benefit UE motor function by
facilitating movement control as intended. Also, research activities and
outcomes will be integrated into education and outreach programs for various
students, including underrepresented students and local community
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term goal in research is
to develop a transformative rehabilitation framework, NeuroCoord-guided adaptive
stroke rehabilitation. The framework targets the activation of new intermuscular
coordination patterns, through physical interaction with the interface enabling
researchers to make objective, multi-modal assessments of motor impairment and
design an individualized rehabilitation model for improving motor functions
after neurological injuries. This CAREER project will create an adaptive
NeuroCoord-guided human-machine interaction platform for automated
quantification of motor impairment and design a novel exercise to improve UE
motor function after stroke. The Research Plan includes two objectives to
develop two important building blocks of the NeuroCoord framework for stroke UE
rehabilitation: (1) development and evaluation of a human-machine interaction
platform for multi-modal (brain, muscular, and kinetic activity) quantification
of motor impairment post-stroke under isometric and several movement conditions
and (2) altering abnormal intermuscular coordination by an adaptive NeuroCoord-
guided rehabilitation exercise. The project will provide the scientific
foundation for designing a novel human-machine interaction platform for stroke
rehabilitation, originally motivated by neuromuscular control principles. This
human-machine interaction platform is based on the innovative integration of
advanced brain imaging technology, a novel rehabilitation robotic device,
electromyography, and machine learning principles. The application of the
platform has the potential to advance the field’s knowledge for developing
automated motor assessment methods with multi-modal signals incorporating
changes in cortical organization, muscle coordination, and biomechanical force
coupling after the therapeutic exercise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.