* 2145080
* CAREER: Design, control, and understanding of lateral textures in strongly correlated heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Alex Frano, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 280,000.00

Non-technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;Among the biggest triumphs of 20th-century
solid-state physics was the quantum-mechanical description of metals,
semiconductors, and insulators. This successful model for simple materials like
Silicon propelled the technological revolution after achieving control of its
properties at the nanometer scale to make small devices. However, there are
fundamental limits on reducing their size, prompting the exploration of new
materials to render novel functionalities. Thus, major research efforts
worldwide explore a new class of materials governed by more complex quantum
mechanical principles, known as “quantum materials”, to advance the
technological revolution. Still, control of their properties at small sizes has
proven to be challenging. This project has the goal of gaining control of the
electronic behavior of quantum materials at the nanometer scale. The research
team uses newly discovered techniques to modify a material’s chemistry and
concentration of electrons at the atomic level, which will give us control of
the electronic properties with exquisite lateral spatial resolution down to the
nanometer range. With this knowledge, novel device concepts with far-reaching
implications will be developed. Students are trained on materials physics,
device concepts, and cutting-edge experimental techniques and analysis within a
framework that supports minority students. Furthermore, to broaden the impact of
the research a podcast is produced that showcases the importance and successes
of research on solid state physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract
&lt;br/&gt;This project stems from the motivation to gain control of the
fascinating electronic properties of strongly correlated transition metal oxides
at the nanometer scale. These “quantum materials” are a topic of high interest
because of their complex and tunable quantum phases. Soon after, it was realized
that growing them epitaxially in thin films and superlattices could provide ways
of tuning the properties. However, lateral control of the quantum properties has
been deemed difficult. This project has two ways to laterally modify these
properties with a spatial resolution at nano- to mesoscopic length scales.
First, the research team uses a beam of He ions focused down to nm, which can
change a material’s oxidation state and thus gain exquisite control of the
ground state properties. Secondly, since layering a quantum material next to an
optoelectronic semiconductor can yield a dramatic sensitivity of the former to
light stimulus, the team patterns the growth of the optoelectronic layer such as
to create light-sensitive areas on the heterostructure, where the quantum phases
are distinct from the areas without an optoelectronic layer on top. Students
involved in the research acquire knowledge of modern materials science and
state-of-the-art x-ray spectroscopic tools at synchrotron facilities. The
project also builds a framework to support students of minority backgrounds and
produces an audio podcast that describes the successes of last-century solid
state physics highlighting its real-world
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.