* 2145226
* A deep learning framework for high-definition prediction and interpretation of protein localization
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Dong Xu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2025
* USD 649,588.00

Proteins are molecules that perform diverse functions in various cell
compartments and subcellular organelles. Aberrant localization of proteins may
lead to harmful effects on cells, including poorly functional traits in plants,
or disease in humans and animals. Protein localization is a complicated
biological process controlled by many factors. Thus, for most proteins, their
localization mechanisms are not well understood. Moreover, experimental methods
for measuring the degree of protein localization are time- and labor-consuming.
Therefore, it is of great significance to develop protein localization analysis
methods. Current computational methods are often lacking in accuracy to quantify
protein localization at the suborganelle level. In addition, most methods lack
capacities to predict the effects of mutations on protein localization, or
reveal target signals and provide information important for elucidating the
mechanism of this process. This project will help address this gap in methos by
developing an interpretable deep-learning approach and related informatics
infrastructure for protein localization studies. The outcome will not only
improve the protein localization prediction accuracy and resolution, but also
shed light on localization mechanisms. Furthermore, the deep-learning framework
can be applied to several other bioinformatics problems, such as mRNA
localization prediction, enzyme classification and active site prediction, and
protein function prediction. The project will also provide training and research
experience in machine learning and real-world software development for various
students, especially underrepresented minorities. Virtual workshops and
community-wide competitions will be hosted annually to provide machine learning
training for students with different backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop a deep-learning framework that incorporates a sequence-
based neural network and graph neural network for suborganellar protein
localization prediction, together with applications of machine-learning
attention mechanisms. The framework’s interpretability will enable studies of
high-definition localization mechanisms, including potential novel targeting
signal identification and prediction of mislocalization driven by mutation or
regulatory alteration. In addition, the framework will be extended to study
tissue-specific or cell-type-specific localization by incorporating single-cell
data. An all-in-one web portal for protein localization prediction will be
developed to provide a code-free environment for protein localization analysis.
All the functionalities, and related data to be used and generated in this
project will be provided on the platform. The web resource will also be an
educational tool for AI learning and practices at various levels, such as high-
school biology, together with many visualization and playground features. The
prediction web services, as well as project progress and training materials will
be provided at https://www.mu-loc.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.