* 2145144
* CAREER: Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Redox Chemistry in Electrochemical Cells from First Principles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Tod Pascal, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2027
* USD 674,985.00

Fast-charging, durable and sustainable batteries are critical for the
applications of stationary, grid-scale energy storage and for propulsion in
battery electric vehicles. The chemical and physical processes that occur at the
electrode surface of a battery contacting the electrolyte has a significant
impact on the overall observed performance of the system. Understanding the
mechanisms of the chemistry and physics at the electrode’s interface with the
battery electrolyte has been an ongoing challenge due to the complexity of the
materials chemistry, morphology, and coupling of electrochemical processes.
Predictive modeling of these electrochemical interfaces is a grand challenge,
with potentially revolutionary scientific and technological applications. This
project will develop a first principles, physics based, computational platform
for elucidating the complex physics, structure, and dynamics of electrolytic
solutions next to “realistic” electrodes, i.e., those with non-uniform surface
geometries, chemistries, and morphologies. The successful completion of the
project will lead to an improved understanding of the complex processes at the
electrode, leading to new strategies for optimizing high energy density
batteries, fuel cells, and other electrochemical systems. The project includes
research opportunities for high school, community college, undergraduate, and
graduate students. An example educational effort is development of a Immersive
Material Discovery Platform to enable enriched hands-on, active learning for the
teaching of computational electrochemistry that will use virtual reality, sound,
and haptic feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the properties of the
nanoscale region at the electrode/electrolyte interface is of importance because
near a polarizable metal interface, and in contrast to the bulk, symmetry
breaking results in unique quantum mechanical effects that in turn gives rise to
modified electrolyte structure, dynamics, and thermodynamics, which ultimately
determines device function. This project’s computational framework addresses an
approach that is capable of describing solvent dynamics, and charge transfer and
reorganization physics at the electrode and in the electric double layer, while
fully capturing the response due to a change in electrode potential. The
project’s computational framework addresses the fundamental question of how
changes in the electrode electron density affects the solvation dynamics and
charge fluctuations of nearby ionic species. The project includes extensive
computer simulations with several novel algorithmic and theoretical advances.
The first objective of the project will describe the critical electrostatics
using an interface sensitive, fluctuating charge model that will allow the
modelling of Lithium in its metallic, semi-metallic and ionic states within the
same simulation cell. The second objective will develop an approach for
simulating applied voltage bias, based on self-consistently adjusting the
electrochemical potential of the dynamically varying electrode atoms. Both
advances will enable simulations of the charge/discharge process in a full-cell
battery setup. The third research objective will relate changes in the
interfacial atomic structure to the QM electronic structure by simulated X-ray
spectroscopy. These spectra will be directly comparable to recent interface
sensitive X-ray measurements, providing a feedback loop for both validating and
improving the theory. The successful completion of the project is expected to
address a critical knowledge gap concerning role of charge renormalization and
transfer at model electrodes, due to electrolyte dynamics. Research outcomes
will enable predictive design and nanoscale engineering optimization strategies
for new high energy density battery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.