* 2145130
* CAREER: Integrating a Microbial Data System with an Earth System Model for Evaluating Microbial Biogeochemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Xiaofeng Xu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2027
* USD 273,905.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate warming has become a key
threat to society, and it is projected to become even worse by the end of the
twenty-first century. In the U.S., each 1Â°C of climate warming can lead to
roughly 1.2% loss in gross domestic product. Increases in atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) have contributed to
more than 90% of climate warming since the Industrial Revolution. Microbes
account for more than 65% of global CO2 production, approximately 85% of CH4
production, and 60% of CH4 consumption in soils. However, the ability to predict
production and consumption of these greenhouse gases in terrestrial ecosystems
is constrained by the poor representation of soil microbes in Earth system
computer models, and the lack of comprehensive soil microbial data for model
development and validation. To address these limitations, this NSF CAREER
project will develop a community dataset of microbial variables and improve a
highly-used Earth system model to better represent microbial physiology and
community structure in response to changing climate. The unprecedented microbial
data system will be integrated with a microbial-explicit Earth system model to
better understand how soil microbes respond and feedback to climate change.
Next-generation scientists will be trained with state-of-art quantitative skills
including meta-analysis, ecological modeling, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of trainees (high school students,
undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoc) will be trained to:
(A) develop a microbial data system focusing on soil carbon cycling and CH4
processes; (B) improve an extant land surface model (CLM-Microbe) embedded in
the Community Earth System Model to explicitly represent microbial physiology
and community structure for CO2 and CH4 processes and to further parameterize
and validate the model at a site-level; (C) apply the improved model to quantify
microbial roles in CO2 and CH4 fluxes at various spatial and temporal scales;
and (D) develop a hierarchical mentoring system to recruit students and provide
them with training to successfully merge mathematics and ecology through
research activities on data-model integration. Four summer tutorial workshops
will be organized to broaden participation of undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in research through the San Diego State University
Maximizing Access to Research Careers program, promoting recruitment and
retention in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.