* 2145398
* CAREER: Mechanisms regulating phenotypic plasticity in a highly social hermaphroditic fish
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Devaleena Pradhan, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2027
* USD 271,016.00

This work will advance new knowledge of how the endocrine system of an organism
converts signals from the external environment to alter traits that are
expressed – a phenomenon known as phenotypic plasticity. This will be
accomplished through studying a remarkable natural system, a highly social
marine fish, the bluebanded goby, that is sex role reversed and capable of
natural sex change as an adult. In response to status instability in their
social group, these fish immediately display behavioral changes and over a few
days, a complete transformation of their reproductive organs occurs. Multiple
biochemical pathways that activate and/or deactivate steroid hormones can
rapidly turn on to modulate gene expression so that cells and entire tissues can
change future function. By combining traditional approaches and technological
advances in disciplines such as analytical chemistry, bio-engineering design,
and molecular biology, this project will provide a comprehensive understanding
of how steroid hormone signaling can regulate these complex changes. This
proposal specifically merges academic trainees from the high school to
postdoctoral level to create inclusive learning exchanges. Through enrolling in
a multi-year course, students will work toward mentored research and educational
goals where they will be encouraged to become “knowledge producers” rather than
“consumers”, building a strong foundation for future scientific pursuit. In
addition to building scientific literacy in the general population and rural
communities, this project will directly remove barriers for exposure to science
for Native American youth through education enrichment modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phenome, a set of all observable traits expressed by a
cell, tissue, organ, organism, or species, is often tightly coupled via strong
selection with changes in the physical and/or social environment. This project
investigates mechanisms by which endocrine-network molecules transduce dynamic
signals in the social environment to regulate both rapid and long-term
phenotypic responses during complex life history transitions. Lythrypnus dalli
are a bi-directionally hermaphroditic fish species that have environmental sex
determination. Stable social groups comprise of harems with a sex role reversed
male at the top of the hierarchy that provides paternal care through intense
fanning and rubbing of eggs. In response to social instability, the most
dominant female exhibits heightened aggression and territoriality, initiates
parenting, and changes gonadal morphology. Each of the three aims of the project
will address a different level of biological organization that converges
technical and conceptual knowledge to study the initiation and maintenance of
phenotypes in stable and sex changing fish: 1) discern post-translational
mechanisms by which steroidogenic enzymes regulate sex steroid synthesis, 2)
determine the steroid signaling mechanisms that regulate fin kinematics during
parenting, and 3) determine the spatio-temporal patterns of gene regulatory
networks. The third aim will be accomplished through a Vertically Integrated
Project course wherein undergraduate students will work in small groups under
peer-based mentorship to discover the anatomical distribution of endocrine and
developmental genes. Access to science literacy will be enhanced for rural
populations and tribal youth through innovative educational modules that address
specific cultural needs of the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.