* 2145011
* CAREER: Developing Informed Portraits of the Educational Experiences of Homeless, Black High-Achieving Adolescents
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Shanta Robinson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 03/31/2027
* USD 258,121.00

Existing educational inequities produce complex challenges for Black students,
particularly in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
classrooms. Black students who show promise for success in STEM while
experiencing homelessness find themselves particularly marginalized at the
intersection of race and class. The purpose of this project is to center the
voices and experiences of Black, high achieving homeless adolescents to better
understand the resources and strengths they possess, as well as those they draw
on from schools and communities of support to enhance their positive development
and achievement of educational and occupational aspirations. This deep
exploration into the educational experiences of these students, with emphases on
STEM coursework and pathways, will offer pointed guidance in how to better
engage those students and ensure their successful persistence through high
school and beyond. The project will also support graduate and undergraduate
students in STEM education research as well as sharing findings with partner
school districts as part of the educational integration plan. This research
project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work
that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. This project
is also supported by the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial
Equity), which supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education
and workforce development through research and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This qualitative, life course-focused study examines the
educational experiences of Black, high-achieving homeless Black students. Life-
coursed focused research employs semi-structured interviews that focus on how
students make sense of pivotal life experiences within societal and personal
contexts; in this case, the project highlights students’ experiences with STEM
learning at the intersections of race, ability, and homelessness with 100 Black
students via semi-structured interviews. The project is guided by overarching
aims: 1) to create “informed portraits” that document the specific and unique
educational experiences of Black, high achieving homeless high school students;
2) to evaluate how well current policies intended to define homelessness and
provide support to all students experiencing homelessness address or meet the
particular needs of these students; 3) to develop evidence-informed policy and
practice recommendations for educational stakeholders in order to increase STEM
achievement outcomes and to reduce STEM-specific inequities for Black high-
achieving homeless adolescents. The results of this research will assist
educators, practitioners, policymakers, and scholars in understanding the
personal, social, and community-based assets of housing insecure students
alongside the unique challenges they face in pursuing their educational
aspirations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in part under
the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.