* 2145240
* CAREER: Agile, Adaptable, and ScalableWireless Terahertz Networks: Architecture and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Yasaman Ghasempour, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2027
* USD 213,782.00

The use of frequencies above 100 GHz, i.e., Terahertz (THz) bands, is emerging
as one of the accepted paradigms for future (beyond 5G) wireless systems that
must cater to radically different new applications, such as autonomous and
connected robotic systems, virtual reality, and extended reality. The demand for
ultra-fast mobile and wireless systems has led the US Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to open four unlicensed bands above 95 GHz with a total of 21.2
GHz of bandwidth. These bands offer plentiful bandwidth for ultra-high-speed
data transmission. However, most existing efforts involve enabling THz
connectivity in the backhaul and fixed access. Indeed, different propagation
characteristics, wide bandwidth, directionality, and lack of real-time
adaptation prevent today’s THz wireless technologies to easily scale up and to
support mobile users. This project will tackle the fundamental barriers of
mobile THz communication and sensing. In particular, the project will design and
build practical, scalable, mobile THz wireless technologies for next-generation
communications systems. Developing new knowledge in these bands is strategically
important for setting the stage for U.S. leadership in 6G and has implications
for scientific and economic competitiveness. This project also advances
education and diversity through developing new curricula, contributing to the
training of underrepresented minorities, engaging with high-school students, and
broadening access to THz testbeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will
enable agile, adaptable, and scalable wireless terahertz networks via a
fundamentally new cross-layer architecture and control plane design. The
proposed research includes three inter-connected thrusts: (i) It will provide an
underlying building block for creating and steering custom 3D directional beams
to overcome the high path loss. It introduces a first-of-its-kind multi-slit
antenna structure to electronically steer a THz beam via the unique property of
coupling frequency, steering angle, and slit geometry. (ii) It aims to provide
uninterrupted directional communication even in the presence of nodal and
environmental mobility through demonstrating an architecture with versatile
stand-alone control-plane functions, including path tracking and THz link
diagnostics. (iii) It will introduce transformational capabilities for joint
sensing and communication above 100 GHz. Namely, repurposing a wideband data-
modulated signal emitted from the proposed multi-slit antenna architecture to
infer the location of the receiver and the surrounding objects in the medium.
These capabilities can open up entirely new realms of possibility for the design
of next-generation networks. The proposed research will be evaluated through
extensive experimentation, prototype design, and system implementation. The
results will be disseminated through close collaboration with industry and
publications in top research venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.