* 2145832
* CAREER: Probing and Exploiting Short-range Order in Crystalline Materials for Fast Ion Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Huiwen Ji, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2027
* USD 262,127.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary: Fast ion
conductors are major players in energy storage, a strategically critical area
for the holy grail of vehicle electrification and the best solution to the
intermittent and random nature of many renewable energy sources, such as solar
and wind. Past research has heavily focused on ion conductors with perfect
prototype structures. As a result, further materials discovery was limited to
incremental improvement and a narrow range of chemistry. In this project, with
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, the principle investigator investigates structurally-
disordered ion conductors with compositional flexibility that can potentially
alleviate the industry’s reliance on any single critical metal source which has
broad societal impact. The project also integrates education and research to
increase enrollment, diversity, and retention of STEM students, creating
America’s future STEM workforce. In pursuit of these goals, the PI creates
demonstration kits for college teaching and K-12 outreach, a crystal growth
course with hands-on research-based activities, and a novel augmented reality
experience for interactive crystallography pedagogy. The PI collaborates with
the Utah STEM Action Center to reach students from backgrounds underrepresented
in STEM and school districts historically underperforming in STEM and deliver
them the kits and demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The
facile transport of ions in crystalline materials enables key functionality in
various devices, such as batteries, membranes, and fuel cells. The structural
characterization of these materials, however, presents an outstanding challenge.
Their crystal structures often exhibit short-range order, whereas traditional
diffraction-based techniques are only sensitive to long-range periodic features.
As a result, past research either had to ignore it for lack of instrument
sensitivity or avoided it completely for fear of complexity and
unpredictability. This CAREER project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, overcomes
these difficulties by performing state-of-the-art synchrotron and neutron
scattering on judiciously selected ion conductors, to precisely characterize
these structural subtleties in both the mobile ion and the framework
sublattices. The project also systematically modifies the chemistry and
synthesis variables and correlate these parameters with structural observations
and property measurements to reveal previously overlooked structure-property
relationships. These insights enable the design of disruptively new materials
with fast ion transport and excellent economic sustainability. The PI also
engages in a series of education and outreach activities by taking an approach
centering on research-based, hands-on activities, to reinforce cognitive
knowledge and retention and stimulate students’ interest in higher STEM
education and careers. Specific efforts include: (1) outreach to middle and high
schools with STEM activity kits; (2) expansion of the hands-on lab sessions in a
crystal growth course; and (3) creation of an augmented reality app for
interactive crystallography pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.