* 2145410
* CAREER: A Comprehensive Seismic Investigation to the Crust and Uppermost Mantle Beneath the South Pole, East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Weisen Shen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 627,264.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the subsurface structure near the South
Pole will answer some of the most exciting scientific questions in Antarctic
Earth Science, ranging from the origin of the high subglacial mountains and the
southernmost volcanic rocks to the existence of nearby subglacial lakes.
However, it has been difficult to answer these questions since the area is
remote and the ice cover is thick. Using seismic stations deployed on top of the
ice sheet provides an alternative tool to image the continent through the ice,
as seismic signals record sensitive information about the geology of the crust
below. For example, crustal rocks with more radioactive elements may have caused
the ice sheet to melt, creating subglacial lakes, and these rocks can be
identified by their unique seismic signatures. This project plans to fill a
knowledge gap by deploying new seismic sensors in the South Pole area and
collecting data to perform a suite of modern seismic data analyses to produce a
variety of seismic observables. These observables will be translated into maps
illustrating the physical properties and chemical composition of the underlying
crust, and further help determine the thermal properties of the underlying crust
near the South Pole. These observations will provide a first-order assessment of
the sub-ice geology and insights into the origins of the features such as the
Transantarctic Mountains and numerous subglacial lakes. &lt;br/&gt;The project
will collaborate with K-12 school districts and community colleges in Long
Island and provide free geoscience tutoring, public lectures, and inviting K-12
educators to teach students from the field. These efforts will highlight the
importance of polar geosciences in a changing climate and elevate the awareness
of earth science as a viable career path for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical &lt;br/&gt;The area within 300 km of the South
Pole and its sub-ice structures are equally, if not more, critical in studying
Antarctic earth sciences. Given its gateway locality between the high southern
Transantarctic Mountains and East Antarctic craton, the area is critical for
studying geological history and modern tectonism of the continent, modeling
continental dynamics, and developing more accurate ice sheet dynamic models to
predict their response to the global climate change. However, these properties
have not been systematically studied due to both the remoteness of the continent
and its thick ice coverage. In this proposed study, the team will deploy ~ 180
high-frequency 3-component portable seismic nodes and eight broadband sensors
near the South Pole, encompassing the nearby southern Transantarctic Mountains
and the polar subglacial basins. A combination of linear nodal arrays and
2-dimensional broadband arrays will provide both spatial coverage and the
capability to resolve high-resolution subsurface structural variations. Once the
data are collected the team will apply a suite of data processing schemes
tailored for the array and study area, including 1) a comprehensive surface wave
analysis that determines both the isotropic and anisotropic structure of its
crust and uppermost mantle; 2) 2-layer receiver function analysis that measures
sub-ice layering and Poisson’s ratio; 3) a joint surface wave and receive
function inversion that builds seismic models with uncertainties; 4) a novel
crustal compositional analysis which uses the seismic attributes to quantify the
silica content of the crust, and 5) a joint Monte Carlo thermal inversion that
combines Curie-depth measurements with seismologically constrained crustal heat
generation to construct a self-consistent, uniform crustal geotherms. This
research is complemented by a comprehensive educational component that provides
high-quality earth science education to graduate students, as well as to high-
need K-12 school districts and community colleges in Long
Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.