* 2145812
* CAREER: Understanding the origins of pearlite discontinuities in eutectoid microstructures: Modeling &amp; Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Kumar Ankit, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 211,749.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many different
types of steels and several ways to categorize them. One way to group them is
according to the types of structures one sees when looking closely at them under
a microscope. Scientists who study metals call these structures that are only
visible at extremely high magnification, "microstructures". "Pearlite" or
"Pearlitic microstructures" are a type of steel that has a layered
microstructure that is hard and strong and is commonly used in applications that
require high strength such as railroads, drawbridge support cables, and cutting
tools. However, in many other applications, steel needs to be softened before
they can be formed or machined into complex shapes. Although steels have been
used and studied for many generations, understanding how different processing
conditions specifically impact steel microstructure is somewhat limited,
particularly in commercial steels where complex chemical compositions make
understanding what is occurring on an atomic level difficult. This CAREER award,
which integrates computational, experimental, and characterization techniques,
will allow for an organized study examining breaks in the layered
microstructures of Pearlitic steels and the atomic interactions that produce
them. Specifically, this study will use heating and cooling experiments on model
steels containing only three of four elements (Fe, Carbon and Manganese or
Silicon) in conjunction with computer simulations and advanced 2D, 3D and 4D (3D
through time) imaging to investigate the relationship between how materials are
made and what microstructures they come to possess. Establishing these
relationships will enable microstructure level control in the manufacturing of
steel components, which is currently a missing bit of knowledge in steel-making.
The outreach component of this project addresses the pressing need to bridge the
vast gap between materials research and national annual enrollment shortages in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE). In pursuit of this goal, this project
encourages students at all levels to pursue education and careers in MSE fields
through student-centric communication that incorporates active learning. This
approach, which can help address many community-specific needs for
underrepresented populations will be incorporated into a tailored outreach plan
for high-school, undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steel microstructures consisting of
lamellar pearlite are known to possess high tensile strength, excellent
toughness, and hardness due to their layered microstructure. However, to enhance
the formability of such microstructures, steel must be softened, which is
typically accomplished via annealing heat treatments that facilitate the
spheroidization or non-cooperative evolution of pearlite. The addition of
alloying elements, such as Manganese and Silicon can also impact pearlite
spheroidization, leading to lamellar discontinuities and improved ductility.
Unfortunately, current understanding of the mechanisms by which pearlitic
discontinuities arise and how they are influenced by alloy composition,
processing temperature, prior austenite grain size, and dislocation densities
leave much to be desired. While comprehending multi-component diffusion and
pearlitic microstructural evolution during processing is challenging, it is a
necessary step to exert greater control on microstructure which ultimately
determines mechanical properties. Since the evolution of phase morphologies
cannot be predicted through experiments or numerical calculations in isolation,
the development of an integrated approach, that combines phase-field models with
experiments, characterization, and microstructure quantification is required to
better understand processing-microstructure relations. To integrate and leverage
existing hi-fidelity tools, this CAREER award tests the hypothesis that
discontinuous growth of pearlitic lamellae in steel microstructures occur by a
non-cooperative mechanism. To examine this hypothesis, computational and
annealing studies of ternary Fe-C-Mn and Fe-C-Si steels will be complemented by
advanced characterization techniques such as X-ray Computed Tomography,
Analytical Transmission Electron Microscopy leveraging Energy Dispersive
Spectroscopy, and Electron Backscatter Diffraction. While a comparison of
simulated and characterized microstructures using spatial correlation functions
will facilitate a basic understanding of the mechanisms that induce lamellar
discontinuities in pearlitic microstructures, processing-microstructure linkages
will be deduced through Principal Component Analyses of the obtained datasets.
The broader impacts of this project exist in two parts. The first is the
development and free dissemination of an integrated experimental, computational
and four-dimensional characterization protocol for lamellar discontinuities in
steels. The second leverages the technical research of this project to deploy
student-centric education and outreach programs using active learning realized
in four segments of activity: (i) undergraduate and high-school “Idol” programs,
(ii) undergraduate research, (iii) undergraduate and graduate course
development, and (iv) remote phase-field workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.