* 2145757
* CAREER: Feedbacks From Drought on the Phytochemical Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Elizabeth Pringle, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 04/30/2027
* USD 261,847.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The western United States is
suffering from the worst drought in centuries. To predict how drought will
affect the environment, the effects of drought studies must include natural
variation across space in resources and in food webs. Plants produce mixtures of
nutrients and toxins, and this chemistry varies genetically and with changes in
the environment. Because plants use resources to form the base of food webs on
land, plant chemistry can link variation in resources with variation in food
webs. An understanding of how plant chemistry responds to extreme drought could
help in understanding plants in these larger systems. This CAREER award will
improve understanding of (a) how plant chemistry changes in response to drought
at the scales of individual plants and of plant communities, and (b) the
relationship of these changes to changes in plant-animal interactions and
decomposition. The project is based in the Great Basin Desert on the border
between Nevada and California, where extreme drought is now commonplace. The
award will test the hypothesis that extreme drought reduces environmental
variation, with consequences for system function. The project includes training
and research participation of first generation students, outdoor science
experience for grade school students, and research opportunities for community
scientists in Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought imposes acute stress on plant
metabolism, which may reduce the strength of feedbacks between trophic
interactions and soil carbon dynamics, simplifying ecological communities. To
test this hypothesis, the award will support drought experiments on focal plant
individuals and on plant communities. Using outdoor gardens of western milkweed,
the research will assess how the amount and variability of water impacts plant-
herbivore-predator interactions, as well as how plant tissues from different
watering treatments influence decomposition and soil respiration. Using drought
shelters and rainfall additions in plant communities in sagebrush ecosystems,
the research will assess how drought affects plant chemistry at the plot scale,
including changes in the chemistry of individuals and changes due to
differential survival and recruitment in the community. These measurements will
then be related to changes in arthropod communities and in soil carbon dynamics
in a spatially explicit design. Plant chemistry will be assessed using
untargeted metabolomics approaches that consider the composition and diversity
of compounds as well as their concentrations. The complexity of plant-animal
interactions will be also manipulated in the milkweed gardens using factorial
combinations of herbivores and their predators to test the importance of such
trophic feedbacks. The work will provide insight into the dynamics of future
ecosystems in the American West and the extent to which we can predict those
dynamics through an understanding of plant chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.