* 2145738
* CAREER: Equitable Adaptation to Drinking Water Salinization from Seawater Intrusion with Smart Water Portfolios
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Allison Lassiter, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2026
* USD 509,946.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project aims to improve resilience and equity of the
nation’s water infrastructure system and to advance the uptake and
implementation of smart city technologies for climate adaptation, with a
specific focus on methods of understanding how smart water technologies can be
used to adapt drinking water supply systems at high risk of salinization due to
seawater intrusion from sea level rise. The research specifically focuses on
systemic methods of understanding how smart water technologies can be used to
adapt drinking water supply systems at high risk of salinization due to seawater
intrusion from sea level rise. This integrated research and teaching will
improve resilience of the nation’s infrastructure and access to high-quality
water, two grand engineering challenges, by addressing gaps in knowledge on:
vulnerabilities and risks to critical water infrastructure; system-level
opportunities and constraints in possible adaptation strategies; the
possibilities of smart water to aid in salinity adaptation; replicable methods
for integrating smart water technologies into a water portfolio; and development
of professionals with expertise in implementing smart city solutions. The
outcomes of this CAREER plan align with NSF’s mission to advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an
interdisciplinary approach that blends methods from water resource planning,
systems engineering, behavioral economics, and smart city planning, the PI will
integrate the following four research and education tasks. Task 1 aims to
examine how sea level rise interacts with sociodemographic and other physical
vulnerabilities to contribute to spatiotemporal clusters of risk. Though many
coastal aquifer and estuarine systems have been studied in isolation, there are
few studies on broad patterns of drinking water risk. Task 2 focuses on
evaluating the use of smart water technologies for salinity adaptation, in
search of scalable, affordable methods to build salinity resilience. Alternative
smart water portfolios, alongside empirically measured water supplier attitudes
and preferences, will be modeled in a Multi-Agent System modeling framework.
Task 3 will develop a replicable method for improving uptake and implementation
of smart water technologies by examining a method known as technology
roadmapping. Task 4 aims to create a novel curriculum and community of practice
within the discipline of City Planning on technology planning. This will be
accomplished through: a pedagogical research paper that compares existing smart
city curricula to market needs; tracking professional outcomes of graduates; the
introduction of a community-based, technology planning studio; and development
of new pedagogical materials focusing on smart technology uptake and
implementation for climate adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.