* 2145549
* CAREER: Real-Time, Selective Gas Sensing in Complex Gas Compositions by Molecular Sieving via Robust Two-Dimensional Heterostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Kevin Daniels, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2027
* USD 494,579.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been an increasing need
for real-time, discriminate, sensitive, and low-cost gas sensors to promote
human health and safety in a changing world. These are needed for non-invasive
medical screening and diagnostics, environmental sensing, and explosives
detection. However, complex gas compositions, like those found in the human
breath or the environment, make conventional selective gas detection
challenging. Current solid-state sensors, while low-cost and robust, suffer from
poor selectivity in complex gas compositions. This NSF CAREER research program
aims to investigate the gas sieving capabilities of the interlayer gap between
layered two-dimensional materials for the tunable, selective, electrical
detection of gas molecules. This project's educational and outreach goal is to
engage underrepresented minorities in STEM programs through course-based
undergraduate research experiences, internships, and mentorships with local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER proposal is
to address the speed and selectivity problems in low-cost solid-state gas
sensors by investigating and exploiting the unparalleled electronic and sensing
properties of 2D epitaxial graphene (EG) on silicon carbide with
heterostructures comprised of 2D layered transition metal oxides (TMO). TMOs
innate chemical selectivity and uniquely wide interlayer spacings can be
manipulated ionically to enable tunable molecular sieves. Furthermore, selective
gas sensing within complex gas compositions can be achieved by rejecting
molecules with kinetic diameters larger than the effective interlayer spacing.
The program has main five tasks: (1) Investigate the large-scale
electrodeposition of TMOs on EG by van der Waals epitaxy; (2) characterize and
quantify the dominant sensing mechanisms of the synthesized heterostructures
through structural, electrical, and chemical characterization; (3) assess the
gas sensing performance of the 2D heterostructures with various intercalated
ions through the design and fabrication of conductometric/impedimetric gas
sensors, guided by density functional theory, numerical calculations, and
material characterization; (4) test the sensor performance against different gas
compositions and conditions by varying molecule size, temperature, pressure, and
humidity; and (5) develop a predictive algorithm based on sensor output metrics
to reduce possible cross-sensitivity with molecules of similar size and
impedance response and integrated into a portable sensing platform capable of
breath-based and environmental sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.