* 2145433
* CAREER:  Investigating Strong Electron-Phonon Interactions in Semiconducting Crystals Using Reciprocal-Space Quantum-Classical Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Roel Tempelaar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2027
* USD 601,980.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Roel Tempelaar of Northwestern University
will study strong interactions between electrons and nuclear vibrations
(phonons) in semiconducting materials for use in optoelectronic devices and
information technologies. Various transformative materials feature electron-
phonon coupling strengths exceeding those seen for commonly-used semiconductors,
enabling radically new functionalities, but also prompting the need for new
predictive theoretical methodologies that combine accuracy with scalability.
Tempelaar and his team aim to address this need by developing methods where
electrons are described quantum-mechanically while nuclei are described
classically. By adopting a momentum representation of the involved coordinates,
materials of exceedingly large sizes can be simulated. This opens ways to
quantitatively understand and control material behaviors, with implications for
the efficient harvesting of solar energy and the use of quantum states for
energy-efficient and secure information technologies. This research is
integrated with an educational component addressing code illiteracy among
economically-disadvantaged nearby highschoolers. This component aims to foster
coding exposure beyond a classroom environment by constructing an engaging
sequence of coding exercises based on abundant smartphone
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In various emerging classes of crystalline
semiconductors, including metal-halide perovskites and transition-metal
dichalcogenides, electron-phonon couplings are stronger than typically found for
inorganic materials. While such couplings strengths give rise to unique
photophysical properties, they pose the need for non-perturbative modeling in
order to unravel their mechanistic principles. Tempelaar and his team seek to
address this need by reformulating quantum-classical dynamical methods in terms
of Bloch states commonly used to describe crystal excitations. Within the Bloch
representation, basis truncations can be performed that will significantly
reduce the cost of simulations. This should enable the team to address the
evolution of photo-excitations, the photophysics emerging from chiral phonon
modes, and the dynamics of coupled spin-momentum states in hexagonal lattices
under realistic conditions. Through this research program, graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers in the Tempelaar team will be exposed to a combination
of techniques from theoretical chemistry, physics, and materials science,
fostering their development as cross-disciplinary
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.