* 2145780
* CAREER: Deciphering the Uranium Isotope Record of Igneous Accessory Phases
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Francois Tissot, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2027
* USD 104,959.00

Zircon and other accessory minerals like apatite, titanite, or baddeleyite
constitute some of the most complete archives of Earth’s history. These minerals
can be precisely dated using the Uranium-Lead radiometric method, and their
chemical resistance allows their survival over billion-year timescales. In fact,
detrital zircon are the only preserved fragments remaining from Earth’s first
500 Myr, thus making this phase a cornerstone for understanding the events that
shaped the Earth and establishing a timeline of its evolution. Recently,
variations in the uranium (U) isotopic composition of igneous rocks and
accessory phases have garnered significant attention, but the drivers behind
this variability remain unknown. If better understood, inter-crystal, inter-
mineral and inter-rock U isotope variations in high-temperature systems could
become powerful tools for studying magmatic evolution, source, oxidation state
and/or differentiation processes. The goals of this CAREER award are to (i)
identify the drivers of U isotope fractionation in accessory phases (zircon,
titanite, apatite, ± baddeleyite) and igneous melts, and (ii) build the
framework needed to ‘read’ the U isotope record of igneous systems. As part of
this award, the PI will also develop a series of age-appropriate educational
interventions that will bring the research process to students at all grade
levels (locally, and internationally) so as to foster and strengthen their sense
of identity as future scientists, and increase their sense of belonging and
retention in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the drivers of U isotope
fractionation in accessory phases and igneous melts, crystals of zircon,
titanite, apatite, and baddeleyite from localities encompassing various redox
conditions and covering a range of host-rock compositions and ages, will be
characterized microtexturally and compositionally (SEM, CL, EBSD, SIMS, EPMA),
and the valence (XANES), bonding environment (EXAFS) and isotopic composition
(MC-ICPMS) of U will be measured in the very same grains. This approach will
allow resolving the drivers of U isotope fractionation in magmatic settings.
Exploratory zircon growth experiments done under variable fO2 conditions will
directly test the role that zircon crystallization and U oxidation state have on
magma U isotope evolution. The resulting concepts will be applied in a case
study of a thoroughly characterized collection of detrital zircon crystals
documenting one of the most dramatic changes in atmospheric oxygenation
conditions on Earth: the Great Oxidation Event (GOE). This last task will test
the hypothesis that shifts in the U isotope composition of terrestrial zircon
and magmas are linked to the redox evolution of Earth’s hydrosphere and
atmosphere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.