* 2145800
* CAREER: Learning, testing, and hardness via extremal geometric problems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Joseph Neeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2027
* USD 158,037.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If P differs from NP, there are
many important computational problems that cannot be solved efficiently. Even
more importantly for applications (because in practice exact solutions are often
not needed), it is computationally hard even to approximately solve some of
these problems. The field that studies this topic, known as "hardness of
approximation," has progressed in leaps and bounds over the last two decades.
One of the seminal achievements of the field was the forging of a deep
connection between computational complexity and isoperimetric-type problems in
geometry and probability. The isoperimetric problem in the plane -- which has
been known and studied for more than 2 millenia -- asks which shape of a given
area has a minimal perimeter (the answer: a circle). If there were a better
understanding of certain probabilistic, high-dimensional variants of this
problem, it would close several open problems in hardness of approximation. A
better understanding of the limits of efficient approximate computation will in
turn lead to better algorithms for real-world computational
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is about strengthening the link
between hardness of approximation, geometry and probability. By solving new
optimal partitioning problems in geometry and probability, the investigator will
develop algorithms and prove new algorithmic hardness results. One of the
difficulties with these partitioning problems is the presence of combinatorially
many saddle points or local minima, but the investigator's recent resolution
(with E. Milman) of the Gaussian double-bubble conjecture included a new method
to circumvent this difficulty. Algorithmic consequences of these optimal
partitioning problems include (i) improved bounds for testing and learning
geometric concept classes; (ii) improved algorithms for non-interactive
correlation distillation (a problem in cryptography with applications to random
beacons and information reconciliation); and (iii) a stronger separation between
classical and quantum communication complexity. This award will allow graduate
and undergraduate students to participate in related research projects, it will
fund the development of open-source software for numerical computation, and it
will support outreach activities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.