* 2145544
* CAREER: Infinitely many new universality classes of hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Andrew Lucas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education towards discovering new kinds of fluids that can exist in nature. The
most well-known fluids are liquid water or the air around us. The equations that
govern such liquids and gases have been understood for hundreds of years. More
recently, fluid-like behavior has also been discovered in gases of ultracold
atoms, electrons flowing through metals, and even in plasmas of quarks and
gluons created at high energy particle colliders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
has recently predicted infinite families of exotic generalizations of these
previously discovered fluids. The goal of this project is to develop a
systematic way of classifying and understanding new kinds of hydrodynamic
behavior and to predict how to discover these new fluids in experiments with
ultracold atoms and quantum materials. The proposed activities will lead to a
more systematic approach to predicting the collective behavior of a broad range
of physical systems, ranging from quantum fluids of electrons or spins in
metals, to the dynamics of liquid crystals and other soft or active matter, and
even to the collective behaviors of non-equilibrium biological systems such as
bacterial suspensions or flocks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
educational and outreach activities, including the development of a new course
on modern hydrodynamics to be delivered to senior-level undergraduate and first-
year graduate students. Rather than focusing on the physics of everyday liquids
or gases, as is done in conventional treatments of the subject, this new course
will emphasize all of the many physical settings in which hydrodynamics arises
in both classical and quantum fluids: the atmosphere, electron liquids, quark-
gluon plasma, liquid crystals, and the collective motion of living organisms.
These efforts will culminate in a set of book-like lecture notes, which will be
freely available to the public. The PI also will lead a summer school,
tentatively scheduled for July 2025, at which a broad and diverse set of the
nation's top graduate students will learn about cutting edge advances in
condensed matter physics. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers will
participate in the activities funded by this award, and the PI will further
disseminate results through public lectures aimed at his local community through
departmental outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education towards
the discovery and classification of infinitely many new universality classes of
hydrodynamics, and infinitely many new non-equilibrium dynamical fixed points
which generalize the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang universality class.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research has three main thrusts. (1) The discovery of many new
universality classes of hydrodynamics, which arise in constrained quantum
systems with multipole and/or subsystem symmetries. By incorporating further
conservation laws such as momentum, or by breaking spacetime symmetries, these
hydrodynamic theories can become unstable in the presence of thermal
fluctuations, and flow to new non-equilibrium universality classes. (2) The PI
will develop new effective field theory methods to systematically predict and
analyze these new universality classes. These field theories will naturally
describe nonlinear fluctuating hydrodynamics and help lead to better
understandings of the foundations of statistical physics (including fluctuation-
dissipation theorems and the existence of thermodynamics) in far-from-
equilibrium settings. The mathematical methods developed will also help to
uncover if and when exotic non-relativistic fracton matter can be coupled
consistently to gravity. (3) Lastly, the PI will work to predict experimental
realizations of these new kinds of fluids. Two natural settings include Fermi-
Hubbard-like models in ultracold atoms confined in tilted optical lattices, and
frustrated quantum magnets. The PI will deduce the appropriate hydrodynamic
description for these exotic dynamical systems, which are expected to lead to
the discovery of exotic generalizations of magnetohydrodynamics and other models
with higher-form symmetries. Together, these three thrusts will help usher in a
more systematic and predictive approach to hydrodynamics in classical and
quantum many-particle systems with unconventional symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and outreach activities,
including the development of a course on hydrodynamics as an effective field
theory for first-year graduate students and senior undergraduate students.
Course materials from this class, including an eventual set of lecture notes,
will be freely available to the public. The PI will also lead a summer school on
dynamics in strongly correlated quantum materials, helping to train the diverse
next generation of physicists in the state-of-the-art in the field.
Undergraduate and graduate student researchers will participate in the
activities funded by this award, and the PI will further disseminate results
through public lectures aimed at his local community through departmental
outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.