* 2145655
* Facilitating Rapid Responses to SBE-Related Questions: the Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN)
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Emily Backes, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,889,370.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted nearly every aspect of life across the
globe. Furthermore, COVID-19 has illuminated issues in society that make us
vulnerable to crises in general. The Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN) has
the potential to help local and state decision makers better prepare for future
crises by focusing on issues such as economic inequality, climate change,
workplace protections, substance abuse, mental health, and education systems,
among others. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As decision makers at the federal, state,
and local level struggle to respond appropriately, they are grappling with many
complex scientific questions involving the social and behavioral sciences. The
Executive Committee, Advisory Group, and larger network engages experts who can
draw upon social, behavioral, and economic sciences and provide actionable
answers to decision makers’ questions. The responses, which are be tailored to
the question and timeline needed, contribute to our nation’s overarching
understanding of how best to deploy social, behavioral, and economic knowledge
to address the impacts of the pandemic and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.