* 2145385
* CAREER: Applying the exploration-exploitation tradeoff to understand how people connect
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Adrienne Wood, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2027
* USD 291,853.00

Loneliness is on the rise and increases the risk of mental and physical health
issues. Why are increasing numbers of people struggling to form and maintain
social ties? Connecting with others takes time, energy, and sometimes money.
These resources are limited, so people must decide which friendships, if any,
are worth the investment. Should they join a club to make new friends? Or should
they focus their time, energy, and money on strengthening their existing
friendships? And how should they invest their time and energy during a
conversation – by making small talk or delving deeper into a new topic? The
answer depends on a person’s personality and goals. But it also depends on the
context: for instance, whether a person is new to the community, how much
turnover there is in the community, and whether the community is rich in
resources or suffering from scarcity. This research asks if people adjust their
social connection strategies to optimally fit the context. A mismatch between a
person’s environment and the selected approach to socializing might increase the
risk of becoming social disconnected. The findings are expected to inform future
interventions aimed at reducing loneliness and improving the health of
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project examines how context
influences people’s decisions to explore new opportunities in social connections
versus exploit existing ones. Seven studies measure and manipulate social
constraints in a given context to determine a) how people choose interaction
partners, b) how they choose conversation topics, and c) the psychosocial
consequences of social exploration and exploitation. Each study examines social
behavior in a different context, including a computer game with hypothetical
social partners, a classroom with peers, an online chatroom, a video call, and
daily life on a college campus. The research combines controlled experiments and
agent-based modeling with naturalistic behaviors captured by crowd tracking,
mobile sensing, and topic analysis. Integrating the interdisciplinary explore-
exploit framework with social psychology advances an understanding of the causes
and consequences of everyday social choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.