* 2145888
* CAREER: Towards Reliable Operating Systems through Scalable Control- and Data-Flow Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Pedro Fonseca, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 12/31/2026
* USD 204,515.00

Operating systems kernels are an essential software component of servers,
desktops, mobile devices, and embedded devices. However, kernels are large and
particularly complex, making them exceptionally difficult to implement correctly
and prone to software bugs. This project develops testing techniques that are
especially suited to find software bugs in modern kernels, which are highly
concurrent. This project is expected to develop effective techniques to help
ensure developers find kernel defects before deployment to
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops methods that uncover and
analyze schedule-dependent non-determinism to find challenging classes of kernel
concurrency bugs. This work is composed of three main components. First, it
develops scalable techniques that analyze potential inter-thread communication
to pair sequential tests intelligently and select schedules that expose kernel
concurrency bugs. Second, it develops data-flow-aware techniques that advance
sequential test generation by producing representative sequential tests that
expose operating system non-determinism when combined. Third, it explores
methods that analyze kernel output across schedules to detect subtle semantic
bugs with a high impact on reliability and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work increases the reliability and security of virtually all classes of computer
systems, including Internet-of-Things devices, consumer desktops, data center
servers, and critical infrastructures. In addition, this work reduces the
development, testing, and operational costs and reduces the occurrence of bugs
that slip into deployed systems. Thus, this project reduces the incidence of
downtime, loss of data, and other incorrect behavior across a wide range of
systems used by billions of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All project data is
stored in public sites and university storage systems to ensure safe long-term
storage for at least seven years from the award conclusion or public release,
whichever comes later. The data produced includes system implementations and
source code, documentation, kernel analysis datasets, and mentoring material,
which will be located at
https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/pfonseca/projects/reliable-concurrent-
os.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.