* 2145092
* CAREER: Towards the Next Generation of Data-Driven and Performance-Based Multiscale Procedures in Mining Geotechnics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jorge Macedo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 581,865.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will set the stage for
creating data-driven, physics-guided, and performance-based multiscale
procedures in mining geotechnics. This project capitalizes on the unprecedented
opportunities provided by the emerging field of data science to reshape the
field of mining geotechnics and shift the paradigms for the assessment of high-
risk infrastructure, focusing on tailings storage facilities. During the last
decade, tailings storage facility failures have caused unprecedented
environmental consequences and loss of human lives worldwide. A failure in the
United States, similar to other recent ones, may cause dramatic damage to the
environment, state economies, and local communities. Therefore, the resilient
design and condition assessment of tailings storage facilities are vitally
important for regions where mining is active, such as Arizona, Nevada, Colorado,
Utah, amongst others, and have become more relevant than ever, considering the
new global tailings standards. In this context, this project will provide
fundamental insights to improve the resilience of tailings storage facilities
and set new standards to enhance the resilience of mining infrastructure in
general. The integrated educational plan will contribute to creating the next
generation of geotechnical tailings engineers with literacy in data science by
engaging undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 students in (i) Georgia Tech STEM
centers and US institutions that promote the resilience of mining
infrastructure; (ii) Georgia Tech vertically integrated projects; and (iii)
education enhancement opportunities. The outreach plan will establish a peer
pilot mentoring program for Hispanic/Latinx students that complements the PIâ€™s
current outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of
this project are to (i) investigate the multiscale mechanical response of mine
tailings and discover high-dimensional interactions through data science; (ii)
investigate the fundamental problem of assessing in situ states; and (iii)
explore the formulation of novel data-driven and performance-based procedures in
mining geotechnics. Towards these objectives, this project uses an integrated
approach that considers data science, laboratory tests, microstructural
measurements, field tests, and numerical simulations to bring novel insights to
the multiscale response of intermediate materials such as mine tailings
considering (i) microstructure signatures; (ii) the role of inherent and induced
anisotropy and cyclic loadings; (iii) field-scale system effects; and (iv) data-
driven approaches for state inversion. Insights gained from this research will
be used to probe the value of data science and formalize its use in unraveling
high dimensional interactions of mechanical properties of mine tailings and
formulating novel data-driven and performance-based procedures using machine and
active learning. This project will allow the PI to establish the foundation for
an interdisciplinary field at the convergence of data science, mining
geotechnics, and performance-based engineering that can demonstrate to the
geotechnical and hazard communities the opportunities of embracing data-driven
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.