* 2145214
* CAREER: Impacts of Lake Browning on the Photochemical Fate of Organic Micropollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Teng Zeng, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2027
* USD 402,495.00

Lakes are key natural water systems that provide critical services to people and
ecosystems including the supply of drinking water, fishing, recreational
activities, and climate regulation. Long-term water quality trends in lakes
often serve as indicators of local, regional, or global environmental changes.
Many inland lakes in the State of New York and the northeastern regions of the
United States are experiencing browning, an increase in water color due to
changing organic matter compositions, hydroclimatic forcings, and land use
patterns. Many of these lakes also receive significant inputs of organic
micropollutants (OMPs) from their watersheds. However, a fundamental
understanding of the impact of browning on the photochemical transformations and
fate of OMPs in lakes has remained elusive. The overarching goal of this CAREER
project is to characterize and quantify the impact of browning on the sunlight-
driven transformations of OMPs in inland lakes of the State of New York. The
successful completion of this research will benefit society through the
generation of new data and fundamental knowledge to support the development of
adaptive lake monitoring programs and water treatment practices to manage and
minimize the impact of lake browning on water quality in the State of New York.
Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of a graduate student and a high-school student
summer intern at Syracuse University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many inland lakes in
the State of New York and the northeastern regions of the United States are
experiencing an increase in water color (browning) due to changing compositions
of their organic matter while receiving significant inputs of organic
micropollutants (OMPs) from their watersheds. For communities and utilities that
rely on lakes for the supply of drinking water, lake browning might lead to an
increase of water treatment costs (e.g., increasing chemical and energy
consumption) to remove OMPs and achieve the drinking water quality standards
required to protect human and ecosystem health. However, there are critical
knowledge gaps in the fundamental understanding of the impact of browning on the
reactivity and fate of OMPs in lakes. This CAREER project will address these
knowledge gaps. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes
to evaluate the impacts of browning-induced changes in lake organic matter
composition and reactivity on the photochemical (sunlight-driven)
transformations of OMPs in the State of New York (NY) inland lakes. The specific
objectives of the research are to: (1) Conduct a broad characterization of the
photoreactivity of inland lake waters in collaboration with the NY Citizens
Statewide Lake Assessment Program to identify key organic matter properties
driving the inter-lake variability in photoreactivity; (2) Examine the impact of
allochthonous organic matter from acid-impacted lake watersheds on the
photochemical transformations of OMPs in lakes; and (3) Evaluate the impacts of
autochthonous organic matter from algal blooms and the effluents of wastewater
treatment plants on the photochemical transformations of OMPs in lakes. The
successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new data and fundamental knowledge to support
the watershed management decisions and water treatment practices that will be
required to manage and mitigate the impact of lake browning on water quality. To
implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will
develop and incorporate new inquiry-based modules into three environmental
engineering courses at Syracuse University (SU). In addition, the PI plans to
develop and deliver outreach programs at SU to 1) broaden the participation of
students from underrepresented groups in water quality research and 2) promote
environmental literacy among lake community members and the public in
collaboration with the NY Citizens Statewide Lake Assessment
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.