* 2145526
* CAREER: Political-Industrial Ecology of Petrochemicals: Energy Metabolism, Landscapes and Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Jennifer Baka, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2027
* USD 56,201.00

This project will investigate regional transformation associated with resource
development in shale gas basins. Petrochemicals in these regions are produced by
chemically processing ethane, a by-product contained in shale gas, into inputs
for manufacturing plastics. This project will study social and environmental
relationships through the following activities: 1) analyze the potential
environmental impacts along petrochemical supply chains; 2) stakeholder
workshops with government, industry, civil society, and academic representatives
to identify diverse perspectives on petrochemical development; 3) create an
immersive virtual fieldtrip of petrochemical corridors; 4) design an online
course on the energy history of shale gas basins; and draw on research, outreach
and education components to identify potential negative socio-environmental
outcomes of petrochemical development and mechanisms to mitigate those
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize theory and methods from
political-industrial ecology, an emerging sub-field of geography. Political-
industrial ecology aims to consider natural resource development in relation to
their broader political-economic, historic, and environmental contexts. Through
this political-industrial ecology framework the project will: A) produce a
spatially explicit material and energy flow analysis of the petrochemical supply
chain; B) develop a comparative governance analysis of the different federal,
state, municipal regulations and private governance practices regulating
petrochemical corridors; and C) perform scenario analysis of alternative
governance arrangements that consider systemic risk and cumulative impacts.
Collectively, the project will create a novel understanding of the inter-
relationships between environmental systems, livelihoods and regulatory
practices in petrochemical producing regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.