* 2145473
* CAREER: Musculoskeletal Modeling with Wearable Sensors and Smartphone Cameras
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Eni Halilaj, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2027
* USD 496,613.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on democratizing
gait analysis for rehabilitation research and therapy. Mobility is a hallmark of
human health, yet mobility limitations continue to reduce personal independence
and overall quality of life in nearly a third of Americans. Musculoskeletal
conditions alone cost the United Statesâ€™ economy 5% of its overall gross
domestic product. Traditionally, mobility has been studied in gait laboratories,
with expensive equipment, trained personnel, and time-consuming data processing
pipelines, limiting studies in size, setting, and monitoring time. Recent
advances in computer vision and wearable sensing could bring motion tracking
with smartphones and wearable sensors to laboratories, clinics, and patient
homes at negligible costs, growing studies from tens to thousands of subjects.
Current approaches for motion tracking from videos and wearables, however,
remain insufficiently accurate for research and clinical translation. One of the
challenges is that they are primarily data-driven, relying on limited training
data that do not include patients with mobility limitations. This project will
merge the complementary strengths of artificial intelligence (AI) and physics-
based modeling into a new motion-tracking paradigm that is widely accessible,
dynamically robust, and equitably accurate across human demographics and
abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this project are to
(1) create and evaluate a new computational framework for musculoskeletal
modeling with wearable sensors and smartphone videos, and (2) use this framework
to answer fundamental questions about the role of cyclic loading on cartilage
health. This work will empower biomechanical engineers and rehabilitation
specialists by fundamentally changing the amount and type of data they use to
answer scientific questions around mobility limitations. The technical
contributions will integrate multibody dynamics with state-of-the-art machine
learning models to enable accurate motion tracking from wearable sensors and
smartphone cameras. Additionally, subject-specific anatomy from medical images
will be incorporated into these modeling frameworks to enable the estimation of
internal biomechanics. The scientific contributions will advance the field of
orthopaedic rehabilitation by generating previously unavailable knowledge on how
subject-specific joint mechanics modulate cartilage response to cyclic loading
in natural environments, which will be critical in the design of personalized
rehabilitation technologies for osteoarthritis prevention. The project will also
leverage the pop-science appeal and practical utility of AI to inspire, train,
and retain the next generation of multidimensionally diverse rehabilitation
engineers. Activities include (1) collaborative outreach events with Facebook
Reality Labs to expose Pittsburgh area K-12 students to futuristic motion
capture facilities (Inspire), (2) educational software that synergistically
generates annotated datasets to improve computer-vision algorithms, while
teaching high-school students about trustworthy AI (Train), and (3) an AI
toolkit that promotes equity and inclusion in higher education
(Retain).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.