* 2145616
* CAREER: Automated Forensic-in-the-Loop Cyber Defense Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yonghwi Kwon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2027
* USD 108,059.00

Cyber-attacks are becoming increasingly advanced and sophisticated. Advanced
attackers monitor their targets for a long time to find out about their
vulnerabilities and protective strategies. Such advanced attacks are extremely
challenging to prevent and investigate due to their sophisticated and advanced
tactics and resources and by their strategy to penetrate the system in
unexpected/overlooked ways. Worse, attackers use sophisticated tactics, such as
obfuscation and evasive techniques, to thwart or delay forensics investigations.
Attackers also compromise a wide range of system components and resources,
making it extremely difficult to restore and harden the system. Delayed or
incomplete forensic analysis makes it difficult to properly secure the victim’s
organization on time, leading to significant damages and losses. To this end,
this project develops novel techniques to (1) prevent diverse attacks
thoroughly, (2) conduct rapid and comprehensive forensic analysis, and (3)
protect the victim’s system rigorously. This project also involves educational
activities that broadens participation in computing, by organizing mentoring
workshops and coaching the University of Virginia’s Collegiate Cyber Defense
Competition team, which includes many female students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an automated forensic-in-the-
loop cyber defense infrastructure that coherently integrates novel defenses,
forensic analysis, and hardening approaches. First, the investigator develops
attack vector agnostic protection and detection approaches by perturbing inputs
and runtime environments that are the weakest links of the attacks. Second, the
investigator develops novel automated techniques to detect and eliminate anti-
forensic techniques applied to malware. Furthermore, to handle evasive malware,
the investigator introduces the adaptive counterfactual execution technique to
evolve the runtime environment and execution context. Finally, the investigator
develops an automated root cause analysis technique that diagnoses loopholes and
identifies potential fixes (e.g., secure
configurations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.