* 2145134
* CAREER: Socially-Aware Control of Autonomy: Reshaping Urban Mobility in Traffic Networks with Mixed Vehicle Autonomy
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Negar Mehr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

As cities grow everywhere, and urban roadways become overburdened, efficient
strategies are required for improving urban mobility. With the emergence of
autonomous cars, there is an opportunity to reclaim urban mobility provided that
a proactive control and planning approach is taken. In this project, our goal is
to develop fundamental theory and domain-driven techniques for leveraging the
opportunities that autonomous cars provide to achieve mobility-efficient smart
cities. We consider mixed-autonomy traffic networks which are road networks that
are shared by human-driven and autonomous cars. We will develop a set of
algorithms for socially-aware control of autonomous cars in these systems. More
precisely, we develop control algorithms that take into account the social
implications of the co-existence of human-driven and autonomous cars and
guarantee overall societal good. Our project enables the transformation from the
current reality to the brighter future, in which autonomous cars harmoniously
interact with the road and network traffic control systems to increase
mobility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To unlock the mobility potentials of autonomous
cars, a key control challenge is to account for how humans adapt and respond to
autonomous cars’ actions such as routing decisions. We focus on travelers’
routing decisions and develop design and control algorithms that induce
efficient routing decisions. We use routing games for modeling travelers’ route
choices over traffic networks and tackle research challenges associated with
controlling the core components of a mixed-autonomy network. (i) We will develop
algorithms for altruistic control of autonomous cars’ routing decisions, that
is, autonomous cars that are routed in the favor of society. (ii) We will
develop pricing algorithms that affect humans' routing decisions such that the
network is steered towards desirable states. (iii) Finally, we will develop
planning strategies for network topology design and capacity regulation that
induce efficient routing decisions by travelers. Our proposed control strategies
will also be validated through extensive real-world experiments and traffic
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.