* 2145241
* CAREER: Neural basis of visual shape perception
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Yasmine El-Shamayleh, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2027
* USD 689,309.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The perception of complex visual
shapes is a hallmark of the primate visual system and a foundation for many of
our decisions and actions. The goal of this CAREER project is to advance
knowledge of how the primate brain supports this important visual capacity. The
research will investigate a brain region involved in the analysis of visual
shape information, identifying its organization and its role in perception. The
research will employ a powerful combination of approaches: measuring and
perturbing the activity of specific subsets of brain cells during behavior. The
project also includes educational activities for disseminating core concepts of
the research to the general public. The educational activities will focus on
pre-college (K–12) students in predominantly low-income neighborhoods of New
York City. New teaching materials, exhibit demos and lab-based workshops will be
developed in collaboration with the non-profit organization “BioBus” and with
public outreach programs at Columbia University’s Zuckerman Institute. Each
activity will highlight a core principle of the research, thereby creating a
fruitful integration of research and education. The collective outcome of these
educational efforts will be to enhance diversity, equity, inclusion and access
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER project endeavors to deepen our
understanding of the neural basis of visual shape perception in primates. The
research will focus on elucidating the neural computations performed by visual
cortical area V4—a region enriched in neurons selective for visual shape
information. The research will address two major unknowns about this cortical
area. The first class of experiments will use laminar recordings to characterize
the organization of shape-selective neurons across V4 cortical layers. Findings
from these experiments have the potential to clarify the circuit-level
mechanisms underlying visual shape analysis, and may reveal key organizing
principles of higher-order cortical circuits in primates. The second class of
experiments will use optogenetic silencing to assess the causal role of V4
activity in the ability to perceive fine differences in shape. Findings from
these experiments have the potential to establish a direct role for this
cortical area in visual shape perception. The collective outcome of these
research efforts will be to transform the level at which we understand visual
shape processing in the primate cerebral cortex, from a largely descriptive
level to a deeper mechanistic one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.