* 2145383
* CAREER: Supramolecular Chemistry at the Interface of Lipid Bilayers and Water
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Nathalie Busschaert, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2027
* USD 641,520.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Nathalie
Busschaert of Tulane University will study the fundamental supramolecular
chemistry behind small molecules that interact with lipids in biological
membranes. Lipids are an important class of biological compounds and play a role
in a variety of physiological functions, such as energy storage, providing a
hydrophobic barrier, and signal transduction. There is therefore a need for
small molecules that can interact with certain types of biological lipids. The
biggest challenge, however, is that lipids mostly reside in membranes as 'lipid
bilayers' that possess unusual physical properties complicating the development
of lipid-binding molecules. Dr. Busschaert aims to design novel small molecules
that can selectively bind to one type of lipid over other types of lipids and
study the effect of various physical membrane properties on this binding event
using model liposome-based systems. The project is anticipated to help establish
general guidelines for the design of molecules that can selectively bind to
specific lipids within lipid bilayers, which can have a broader impact on the
field of supramolecular chemistry by exploring lipids as an unusual target, help
elucidate lipid biochemistry and biophysics, advance human health and provide
fundamental knowledge for any application involving membranes. This work is
expected to have a further broader impact on the participation of women in STEM
fields, as Dr. Busschaert will oversee a number of supramolecular chemistry
inspired activities to increase the participation of women and minorities in
STEM at every level of education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of
the project is that lipid head-groups are comparable to traditional
supramolecular targets such as phosphate anions and ammonium cations, but that
the unusual physical properties of lipid bilayers need to be considered when
designing lipid-binding molecules. So far, there have only been a few reports of
small molecules binding selectively to certain types of lipid head-groups.
However, in most cases the binding of the host molecules with the lipid of
interest was determined in organic solution or in one type of liposome. Such
investigations ignore the lipid diversity in biological membranes and do not
take into account the effects of the unique physical properties of lipid
bilayers. The binding of lipid head-groups takes place at the membrane-water
interface, which makes it an unusual type of supramolecular interaction. The
interface region is partially hydrated and is therefore presents a different
situation from that observed with supramolecular interactions in water and or in
organic solution. Furthermore, lipid bilayers display a fluid, liquid
crystalline state that displays neither solution kinetics nor solid state
dynamics. The central hypothesis will be tested by synthesizing a variety of
compounds designed to bind to specific lipid head-groups, and then
characterizing the binding of these compounds with model liposome-based systems
using a variety of techniques, including nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), UV-
Vis spectroscopy, surface plasmon resonance and isothermal titration
calorimetry. These activities are designed to help identify the effect of
hydrophobicity, physical membrane properties (e.g., lipid shape, acyl chain
length, membrane curvature), and multivalency on binding to lipid
bilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.