* 2145627
* CAREER: Harnessing Mineralogy and Polymer Science to Elucidate Mechanisms and Mitigation Strategies for Mineral Scaling in Membrane Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Tiezheng Tong, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2027
* USD 418,386.00

Membrane-based technologies such as reverse osmosis (RO) are increasingly being
utilized to provide clean water in the United States and worldwide under a
rapidly changing climate and growing water scarcity. Currently, RO is the best
available commercial technology for extracting and recovering clean water from a
wide range of impaired water sources including seawater, inland brackish water,
and municipal/industrial wastewater. However, the formation and precipitation of
inorganic scales at the surface of RO membranes severely limit their water
recovery and adversely impact the overall process efficiency and cost of water
produced by RO desalination and water reuse plants. Compared to
organic/biological membrane fouling, the mechanisms of formation and
precipitation of inorganic scales at RO membrane surfaces are poorly understood
as they involve complex chemical reactions and nucleation phenomena at polymer-
mineral-water interfaces. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to
advance the fundamental understanding of mineral scaling at the surface of RO
membranes. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development
and implementation of more efficient and cost-effective solutions to control and
mitigate mineral scaling in RO desalination and water reuse systems. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of a graduate student and an undergraduate student at
Colorado State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane scaling remains an
important and unresolved challenge that limits the water recovery and overall
system efficiency of commercial reverse osmosis (RO) desalination and water
reuse plants. There are still critical knowledge gaps in the fundamental
understanding of RO membrane scaling. First, the key physical/chemical processes
and factors that control the extent of mineral scaling in RO membranes are not
well understood. Second, the utilization of surface modification to mitigate
mineral scaling in RO membranes has met with only limited success. Third, there
is a lack of fundamental knowledge and principles to guide the design of
antiscalants to mitigate the formation and precipitation of amorphous silica
scales in RO membranes. This CAREER proposal will address these critical
knowledge gaps. The guiding hypothesis of the proposed research is that polymers
used as RO membrane surface modifiers or antiscalants can control the extent of
mineral scaling by altering the thermodynamics and kinetics of scale nucleation
events at membrane-water interfaces and the subsequent attachments of nascent
mineral scales to membrane surfaces. Two key goals of the research are to: (1)
Characterize and unravel the roles of scale nucleation thermodynamics, kinetics,
and mineral-membrane affinity on the extent of RO membrane scaling and (2)
Develop structure-property-performance relationships to guide and inform the
design of scaling-resistant RO membranes and polymeric antiscalants to minimize
and prevent RO membrane scaling. The successful completion of this project has
the potential for transformative impact through the generation of new
fundamental knowledge to advance the development of more effective strategies to
control and mitigate membrane scaling in RO desalination and water reuse plants.
To implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the
Principal Investigator (PI) will work with the Native American STEM Institute of
Colorado State University (CSU) to develop and implement lectures and hands-on
experiments for Native American high school students to learn about the critical
science and engineering of challenges around water sustainability including the
desalination of seawater and brackish water. In addition, the PI plans to
partner with the ENpower Bridge program of CSUâ€™s Engineering College to
encourage and recruit students from underrepresented groups to pursue
undergraduate/graduate education in Environmental
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.