* 2145382
* CAREER: General And Optimal Layered Network Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Cody Dunne, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2027
* USD 235,380.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human decision-making in fields
such as medicine, computer science, physics, and sociology rely on structured
data. Networks have long been common models in computer science for structuring
data. However, only recently network visualization has become more commonly used
tool; for instance, publishers are starting to use visualizations of networks in
news articles. Layered network visualizations show either changes in networks
over time or flows between states. They help visualize complex dynamics such as
how water moves through the parts of a steam engine. Creating an optimal layout
based on human readability criteria is an open challenge. Existing algorithms
creating visualizations prioritize computational speed over human readability.
The goal of this project is to create general and optimal layout algorithms for
layered network visualizations that prioritize readability instead. Optimal
layouts are particularly beneficial for domain applications where readability is
paramount, e.g., in medicine where mistakes can have significant consequences.
Through integrated research and education, the project will motivate students to
work on meaningful human problems by combining applied and basic research;
attract and train the next generation of visualization scientists, with a focus
on people from underrepresented groups; and widely disseminate research results
to help future researchers and designers create more effective visual data
exploration and decision-making tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance the state-of-the art in visualizing layered networks and lead to more
effective visual data exploration and decision-making tools. It will provide
optimal layouts for critical tasks and baselines for evaluating layout
heuristics. Five formative studies will produce a corpus of general requirements
for layered network visualization which will guide future researchers and
practitioners. These requirements will be integrated into a user-customizable
optimal layout algorithm. The algorithm, as well as approximate and heuristic
layout approaches, will be released in a free and open-source library for
layered network visualization. Domain-specific and general computational and
human-subjects research will provide evidence-backed design guidelines that are
transferable across domains. Experiments will define scalability limitations
both in terms of human readability and technical feasibility. This project will
contribute to assessing future layout algorithms by providing benchmark
datasets, evaluation methodologies, and optimal baseline implementations.
Combined applied and basic research studies will lead early-career graduate
students to publications and careers working on prosocial problems in cross-
disciplinary teams. The project will engage grade 6--12 students from groups
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics through
summer camp activities and develop instructional materials for teaching graduate
students in courses without prior visualization components. Research outcomes
will be publicly disseminated at academic venues, online, and through domain
collaborators. To encourage rapid and unrestricted adoption and replicable,
reproducible research all products---such as preprints, source code, study
materials, and datasets---will be released free and open-source on a reliable
long-term archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.