* 2145787
* CAREER: Indistinguishability Prevents Information Leakage in Real-Time Schedulers
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Sibin Mohan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 114,485.00

Modern society relies heavily on systems that operate within strict timing
requirements such as in engine control units in automobiles, aircraft avionics
and navigation systems, programmable logic controllers in manufacturing plants,
industrial control systems in the electricity sector, and many hundreds of
others. The recent advent of autonomous cars, drones and internet-of-things
(IoT) further expands the reach of these "real-time systems". The limitations of
such devices viz., small computing power, less memory, limited battery power,
has serious consequences for security, specifically, they become much harder to
protect and defend. This research develops systematic security mechanisms for
real-time embedded systems in critical applications to control what can be
observed about them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An important reason why real-time
systems are vulnerable is the fact that they are predictable by design, thus
leaking critical information. Leakage, say via timing "side channels", might be
misused as part of a campaign to disrupt normal operations by knowing the
schedule of when critical applications will run. Any mitigations to information
leakage must still allow real-time systems to operate within their required
timing constraints. This project improves the security of real-time systems
using concepts inspired from the area of differential privacy that was developed
for database security, where the fundamental concept is to hide personally
identifying information from queries on large databases by injecting "noise" in
a systematic manner. By analogy for real-time systems, this project focuses on
system states at runtime and develops the notion of "schedule
indistinguishability" by strategically adding "noise" to the task scheduler, so
individual tasks cannot be distinguished separately and cannot be known. The
concept of "epsilon-indistinguishability" is developed to measure the
probability of information leakage of schedule and timing information by
observation of task-level behaviors. A task scheduler that effectively and
efficiently uses indistinguishability is designed and prototyped. In addition,
the project focuses on developing metrics for real-time systems to measure and
assess the risk mitigations of using schedule indistinguishability. The long-
term goal of this research is to explore the relationships of
"indistinguishability" for cyber-physical systems and their application domains
with regard to security, safety, dependability, and
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.