* 2145202
* CAREER: Information Extraction and Integration with Applications to Healthcare Question Answering
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ndapandula Nakashole, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2027
* USD 230,472.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Getting a comprehensive answer to
a medical question from Web search engines can be time-consuming because health
information, as is common on the Web, is scattered across many websites. One
difficulty is the prevalent vocabulary mismatch between different sources due to
synonymous words, morphological variations, abbreviations, and different word
orderings. Another challenge is that, for those who are not medical experts,
health information can be complex and difficult to comprehend. Supportive visual
representations can be helpful to various people, for example, those reading
text not in their first language, older adults, or more generally, non-experts.
To address these challenges, this project brings together health information in
a single unified place by assimilating, synthesizing, and storing health
information in a broad-coverage resource with a shared vocabulary. Such a
resource serves the purpose of facilitating fast access to comprehensive answers
to health questions to save people time who otherwise might need to spend a
substantial amount of time reading different sources to connect the dots and get
a complete answer to their information need. To help people understand complex
health information, the project will generate summaries that combine text and
supportive visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel
techniques for integrating information from disparate sources. This entails
identifying relevant content and reconciling the mismatch in the vocabularies of
different sources. To enforce a shared vocabulary across sources, the project
will develop novel techniques for entity linking, that are not limited to
recognizing entities seen at training time, as new diseases, treatments, other
types of medical entities can emerge. For broad coverage, the project will
consider content written by clinicians, researchers, and consumers. The project
will convert this information into a graph structure that can be used to learn
representations that further enhance coverage of the resource while maintaining
high precision. The project will also develop novel techniques for multimodal
summaries of healthcare answers to facilitate understanding of complex
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.