* 2145352
* CAREER: Information, Algorithms, and Learning
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Annie Liang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 04/30/2027
* USD 207,848.00

This award funds research on topics at the intersection of economic theory and
computer science. This project is motivated by the growing use of machine
learning algorithms to guide decisions such as who should receive bail or
receive a loan. This project will contribute towards a better understanding of
the opportunities and the dangers of such algorithmic approaches. The principal
investigator (PI) plans to work in two steps. First, the PI will theoretically
model the welfare implications of algorithmic predictions, focusing on tradeoffs
between goals such as the “fairness” of the algorithm (i.e., whether the
algorithm’s errors are disproportionately borne by one social group over
another) and the accuracy of the algorithm. Second, the PI will propose new
methods for understanding how predictions made by black box methods differ from
those made by economic models, focusing in particular on how well these
predictions generalize to new unseen domains. This research will develop new
results in economic theory and new methodologies for the interpretation of
economic data. The award also funds new curriculum development for a university
major combining Economics and Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
project has three components. The first project provides a conceptual framework
for algorithmic decision-making and a characterization of how the “fairness-
accuracy” Pareto frontier depends on the inputs to the algorithm. The second
project proposes new measures for evaluating economic models, including a
measure for the restrictiveness of the economic model and a measure for the
portability of the economic model. The final project proposes a model of
information flow on social media platforms when the social norms that govern
acceptable expression are in flux. This project focuses on characterizing when
and how expressed views systematically differ from the true distribution of
opinions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.