* 2145268
* CAREER: Towards Proactive and Collaborative Mobility-Aware Edge Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Lena Mashayekhy, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2027
* USD 413,113.00

The significant increase in both IoT (Internet of Things) network size and data
volume opens up attractive opportunities for data analysis and learning to
support decision making and derive scientific discovery and innovations.
Multiaccess Edge Computing (MEC) enables IoT devices to offload their delay-
sensitive resource-intensive tasks to nearby edge devices. However, spatio-
temporal uncertainties due to user mobility bring the most challenging obstacles
for MEC in providing predictable performance and guaranteed Quality-of-Service
(QoS). The research mission of this CAREER proposal is to develop foundations of
proactive and collaborative mobility-aware MEC systems to improve QoS for IoT
applications, minimize data movement, and optimize the overall system
performance. This project focuses on all aspects of mobility in MEC, which
include these scenarios: (i) mobile IoT devices/edge devices move as their own
decisions; (ii) the system makes the use of mobile edge devices to move to a
specific demand area; and (iii) the system incentives the mobile IoT devices to
move to receive better QoS. In support of the project mission, this project will
design a novel data-driven approach to infer vital mobility patterns leading to
QoS violations, and will develop a unique proactive offloading and service
deployment approach based on an integrated community detection and
multidimensional flow approach. This project will investigate the design of a
proactive learning-based approach to act autonomously based on any changes that
may lead to QoS violation. This project will facilitate dynamic placement and
relocation of mobile edge devices in providing low-latency edge services. This
project will also investigate the effects of suggesting location changes to IoT
devices and edge devices with location flexibility, and will design a reverse-
auction mechanism and a two-sided mechanism to balance the system load and
further improve response time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
integrate teaching, research, and outreach activities to broaden exposure to
systems research and increase student retention and representation of
underrepresented students by providing meaningful and exciting student
involvement and finely-tuned mentorship. The proposed research plan will address
the technical challenges in building mobility-aware MEC systems for realtime
processing demands of mobile IoT applications to enable edge intelligence along
the cloud-to-thing continuum and will enrich the scientific knowledge of
advanced computing system design. The availability of collaborative mobile edge
devices will improve the quality of edge services for end-users and will empower
many more innovative applications that are simply not yet possible today. The
proposed educational plan will educate students on modern notions of MEC and
prepare them for related professions. A substantial quantity of the materials of
this project will be made publicly available online in the form of tutorials,
talks, publications, codes, datasets, and testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.