* 2145387
* CAREER: Curing-Induced Microcracking in Thermoset Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Marianna Maiaru, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 03/31/2027
* USD 568,263.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award enables contribution of new
knowledge related to the manufacturing process for thermoset composite
structures. Thermosets are advanced polymers that can be reinforced with high-
strength fibers to create lightweight composite materials with complex
architectures. Their manufacturing process involves chemical curing reactions,
heat generation, and heat conduction that result in a change of phase from a
liquid polymer mixture to a cross-linked solid structure. Stresses built up
during the process can cause very small cracks to be formed, which can
contribute to subsequent failures in the structure. Extensive curing-induced
microcracking is a key technological challenge in the production of critical
structural components for space exploration, wind energy production, and current
and future transportation. The manufacturability of the next generation of high-
performance, lightweight structures depends upon fabricating damage-free complex
composites with enhanced mechanical properties. This award supports fundamental
computational and experimental research to provide the necessary knowledge for
developing crack-free thermosets, optimizing composite performance, and reducing
the time and cost to create better composite parts. This research program will
be integrated with educational and outreach activities, including developing an
e-learning platform with engaging learning activities, K12 summer programs, and
internships that aim to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
research and positively impact engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this project is to reveal the fundamental mechanisms of curing-
induced microcracking in thermoset composites. This project will establish
process-property relationships to predict curing-induced damage mechanisms in
thermosets across the micro and macro scales, which will enable new
manufacturing capabilities. Knowledge generated from this research will allow
manufacturers to tailor their processes to prevent curing-induced damage. This
project will test the hypothesis that layer/layer and fiber/matrix property
mismatches and resin shrinkage cause microcracking when the material is
processed below its glass transition temperature and after gelation, depending
on the resin viscosity and toughness. Advanced multiscale process modeling
techniques that account for thermal gradients, resin exothermic reactions,
mismatch in thermomechanical properties, shrinkage, and residual stresses will
be implemented. A new time-independent characterization technique for
determining material properties at intermediate degrees of cure based on off-
stoichiometry polymer proxies will be tested. This novel approach to learning
constitutive relations of thermosets during curing will be used to identify and
quantify viscoelastic and viscoplastic resin properties during manufacturing.
In-situ testing during curing will aim to validate the approach for three
material systems, including 3D woven textiles, bonded adhesives, and thermosets
for additive manufacturing. The planned result is an experimentally-validated
physics-based multiscale process modeling framework to design and optimize
enhanced composites which can help the composite industry by providing a missing
link between material, manufacturing, and properties in order to prevent
microcracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.