* 2145553
* CAREER: Hierarchical Commit or Defer Problems with Learning: Methods and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Juan Borrero, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) grant supports research that will investigate
theoretical and computational approaches to commit or defer problems with
decision-making hierarchies. Problem settings in vaccine design, disaster
response, and smuggling prevention, among others, involve decision-makers
observing a system evolving over time who periodically decide whether to commit
non-renewable resources, or defer their use, to optimize the system's overall
performance. The evolution of the system is subject to randomness and its
performance may depend on other decision makers, about whom there may be
incomplete information, who seek to optimize their own performance. The research
supported by this award seeks to determine what rules should guide commit or
defer decisions in these settings, how and to what extent the decision-maker
should use the information feedback observed, and how to computationally find
the commit or defer decisions in specific problem settings. The educational
activities include the creation of an online game to teach fundamentals of
multistage decision-making to K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard
commit or defer problems (CDPs) assume a single decision-maker and cannot model
problems that involve multiple decision-makers, e.g., a Leader and a Follower,
who interact in a hierarchical manner. This project will establish a
mathematical and algorithmic framework to solve hierarchical CDPs. The framework
will improve our understanding of real-life CDPs and their practical
requirements. The project will simultaneously address a number of technical
challenges. First, the Leader may face global resource constraints, such that
the resources spent in one period, cannot be replenished in future periods;
second, the Leader's performance depends on the optimal actions of the Follower;
and third, the Leader learns about the uncertain parameters of the Follower's
problem by observing their reaction to the Leader's actions. By using approaches
at the interface of hierarchical and online optimization, the project will
rigorously establish the manner by which commit or defer decisions should be
made in hierarchical settings under uncertainty. Furthermore, the project will
use tools from mathematical programming and probability to uncover how and to
what extent the decision-maker should use the information that is learned, and
then formulate and solve for optimal or near optimal policies in large instances
of relevant applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.