* 2145845
* CAREER: Scalable Algorithms for Nonlinear, Large-Scale Inverse Problems Governed by Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Andreas Mang, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2027
* USD 101,685.00

Large-scale inverse problems governed by dynamical systems are of paramount
importance in numerous scientific disciplines. Examples include geoscience,
medicine, climate science, manufacturing, national security, and economics.
Inversion is an indispensable tool to infer knowledge from data in a consistent
and predictable way, enabling scientific discovery, decision-making, and
ultimately dependable model- and data-informed predictions. However, the
practical use of inversion remains limited unless uncertainties can be
quantified as they propagate through models and algorithms, Uncertainty
quantification adds significant mathematical complications and massive
computational costs to an already challenging problem. This project will develop
a generic mathematical framework for large-scale, statistical inverse problems
alongside software infrastructure with algorithms that scale on modern and
future computing architectures. It blends mathematical methods and theory with
data-intensive applications and good algorithmic practices to advance the
frontiers of computational and data-enabled sciences, with the ultimate
aspiration to promote data-driven scientific discovery and model-based
prediction and by that, science in general. Alongside research activities, an
educational and dissemination program is developed to communicate the results
under this work to STEM students and researchers, and a broad audience of
computational scientists and application specialists. The project will train
students in areas that have seen exceptionally high industry demand in the US in
recent years, such as optimization, statistical inference, data-enabled science,
performance evaluation, and workload characterization. Educational activities
include hands-on research experiences for graduate and undergraduate students,
explicitly encouraging participation by minorities and underrepresented groups.
Public domain software modules will be made available to a broad STEM audience
and practitioners. Applications of this work include medicine, imaging, and
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental mathematical and computational
aspects of optimization under uncertainty, statistical inference, and the
solution of large-scale inverse problems will be investigated in this project to
promote the progress of scientific discovery and data exploration. The
overarching aim is the design of fast computational kernels and scalable, black-
box algorithms that rigorously follow mathematical and physical principles, have
a sound theoretical basis, and provably converge to an optimal solution
independent of the problem dimension. This includes the development of adaptive,
hierarchical numerical schemes and mixed-precision algorithms, enabling high-
accuracy computations if desired, and low-accuracy approximations when possible,
targeting high data-throughput applications. The project explores (i)
foundational mathematical aspects and the deployment of fast (scalable)
algorithms for transport-based variational inference, (ii) the design of
problem-informed regularization schemes for nonlinear inverse problems, and
(iii) the integration of randomized algorithms and learning for the construction
of low-order surrogate models for optimization, inference, sampling, and
preconditioning. Effective numerical techniques and computational kernels for a
fast evaluation of gradient and curvature information and their approximation
are of paramount importance for the designed methodology. The performance will
be assessed for parabolic (diffusion-dominated) and hyperbolic (advection-
dominated) dynamical systems of varying complexity with applications in
computational medicine, climate science, and
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.