* 2145875
* 5th International Conference on Epigenetics and Bioengineering (EpiBio)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Albert Keung, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 13,986.00

This award will support attendance by students and early career researchers at
the 5th International Conference on Epigenetics and Bioengineering (EpiBio) on
November 4-6, 2021 hosted on a virtual platform. The meeting will bring together
interdisciplinary expertise in the field â€” allying biology, chemistry, physics,
data processing (bioinformatics), and engineering to foster the development of
novel methodologies and tools to answer biological questions in epigenetics. The
conference will feature 6 technical sessions, as well as panel discussions and a
poster session. The conference will provide several opportunities for students
to network with others (including leading professionals in their field of
interest), present their work, learn about new technologies, and receive
feedback on their writing. The conference will feature an additional "black in
chromatin" networking event to highlight the achievements of black scientists
and engineers in the field. The funding will allow for the support of students
from underrepresented groups in engineering, in addition to students from non-
coastal colleges and HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will focus on
various diverse areas of epigenetics and bioengineering, including biophysics of
chromatin, emerging technologies, epigenetics in health and development, sensing
epigenetics modifications, perturbing chromatin and epigenetic editing, and
nuclear organization. The conference will allow attendees to gain an
understanding of current advances and future prospects in epigenetic
engineering. The meeting will foster collaboration among scientists and
engineers of various backgrounds from academia and industry, and provide an
invaluable training opportunity for students and early career professionals. As
fundamental knowledge of epigenetics and epigenetic tools can be used to
increase our understanding biological processes and develop selective and
effective therapeutics, research in this field has the potential to greatly
impact society outside of the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.