* 2145713
* CAREER: Achieving Ultra-Low Latency under Heterogeneity and Uncertainty in Edge Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Weina Wang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 03/31/2027
* USD 393,966.00

Edge computing has been envisioned to be a paradigm beyond cloud computing that
supports emerging applications such as autonomous driving, augmented reality,
and automated mobile robots. However, to realize the envisioned latency
breakthrough of edge computing and put this new paradigm into operation, a
critical piece that is still missing is algorithms that orchestrate the data and
the computation to guarantee ultra-low latency. The overall objective of this
CAREER proposal is to fill this gap by developing (i) orchestration algorithms
that dynamically coordinate data and computation for edge computing systems to
meet stringent latency goals, and (ii) theoretical foundations to characterize
the fundamental resource requirements and optimal operating points of edge
computing systems. The algorithmic innovation and provisioning insights for
achieving ultra-low latency in this proposal will guide the deployment of edge
computing systems in large scale, greatly benefiting latency sensitive edge
applications with strong societal impacts such as cognitive assistance for the
elderly and disabled and autonomous driving. The theoretical advances under this
proposal will make fundamental contributions to research in stochastic systems,
creating new research focuses for interdisciplinary research communities at the
intersection of electrical engineering, computer science, and operations
research. This proposal will have significant educational and community impact.
Both the theoretical approaches and the experiment platforms will be
incorporated into the curriculum and course projects at graduate and
undergraduate levels at Carnegie Mellon University. Online platforms will also
be leveraged to disseminate educational and research materials related to this
project for a greater reach. Continuing and expanded efforts will be spent on
STEM outreach activities to K-12 students, mentoring students from
underrepresented groups for research, promoting the visibility of researchers
from underrepresented groups, and initiating online seminars to outreach to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop (i)
orchestration algorithms that dynamically coordinate data and computation for
edge computing systems to meet stringent latency goals, and (ii) theoretical
foundations to characterize the fundamental resource requirements and optimal
operating points of edge computing systems. In particular, this goal will be
achieved in two representative operating modes of edge systems (Thrusts I and
II), respectively, based on which edge nodes are authorized to process the data
generated by clients and whose computing power is being exploited. Then the
uncertainty in communication and computation environments will be addressed in
an orthogonal thrust (Thrust III) learning-based orchestration. The proposed
research will result in the currently missing algorithmic innovation and
provisioning insights needed for guaranteeing ultra-low latency in edge
computing systems. Specifically, orchestration algorithms will be developed to
jointly and dynamically utilize the communication resources under the emerging
5G and beyond wireless technologies and the dispersed computing power of edge
servers and edge clients. The cross-cutting approach in this proposal is
motivated by the observation that future edge systems will be of large scale,
and the approach builds upon significant recent results on large-scale
stochastic systems. These results demonstrate that with the right orchestration
algorithms, it is possible to achieve ultra-low latency and high system
utilization simultaneously in large systems. This proposal will further advance
the theory for large-scale stochastic systems to a much greater generality to
address heterogeneity, uncertainty, interactions among different types of
resources, and dynamic performance-based job execution. These are new unique
challenges arising in edge systems and modern applications in general that are
highly underexplored in traditional approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.