* 2145162
* CAREER: Fundamental Discovery with Solid-State Spin Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Alexander Sushkov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 11/30/2026
* USD 296,201.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of dark matter is one of the most
fundamental open questions of modern science. As searches for the dark matter
have advanced, axions - that arise naturally from model solutions of what is
known as the strong-CP problem - and axion-like particles have emerged as
particularly compelling candidates. The search for these particles opens an
experimental window into physics at ultra-high energy scales, up to the Planck-
scale, and discovery of axion-like dark matter would provide potential insight
into the earliest evolutionary stages of the Universe. This CAREER award
supports the development of a precision laboratory experimental platform based
on solid-state electron and nuclear spin ensembles and magnetic sensing to
advance the search for axions and axion-like particles with sensitivity in the
nano-electronvolt to pico-electronvolt mass range. The award will develop an
outreach program directed toward young students and the general public with a
focus on developing non-standard problem-solving skills of complex real-world
challenges. This program will partner with the Boston University GROW and MIT
BLOSSOMS programs to develop novel online content with connections to the study
of the cosmos and dark matter, and will focus on building connections with
schools in the Boston-area with large populations of students from
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award leverages the
established technical achievements of the Search for Halo Axions with
Ferromagnetic Toroids (SHAFT) experimental platform. Specifically, the platform
realizes a magnetic field sensitivity of 150 aT per square root(Hz) over a range
of 10 kHz to 1 MHz, representing the most sensitive magnetic field measurement
with a broadband magnetometer technology. Two primary measurements are planned
as a part of the awarded activities. The first will operate the apparatusâ€™ SQUID
sensors within a dilution refrigerator at 0.1K temperature to improve the
sensitivity to the electromagnetic coupling of axion-like dark matter to
approximately 3e-12 GeV near 20 pico-electronvolt mass. This measurement would
represent more than an order of magnitude improvement over current experimental
sensitivities. The second complementary measurement will be made possible by
integrating into the magnetic sensing apparatus solid crystals that host
ensembles of nuclear spins, optimized for searches for time-varying nuclear
electric dipole moments (EDMs) induced by the EDM interaction of axion-like dark
matter. The search will involve high-resolution optical spectroscopy and
measurements of the nuclear spin relaxation parameters, with the goal of
achieving 20 percent nuclear spin polarization by direct optical
pumping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.