* 2145412
* CAREER: Scalable, Penetrating Multimodal Neural Interfaces for Adaptive Closed-Loop Neuromodulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Samantha Santacruz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2027
* USD 459,726.00

In the United States, anxiety disorders are the most prevalent neuropsychiatric
illness, defined as an illness of the mind and nervous system, yet standard
treatments for these disorders have failed to show a significant reduction in
the prevalence or severity of illness. A major challenge is that anxiety
disorders develop from disruptions in highly interconnected groups of brain
areas, which are referred to as neural circuits, and the appropriate
technologies to characterize these neural circuits are lacking. This CAREER
project will develop and leverage a neural interface technology to characterize
neural circuits impacted by anxiety disorders. Ultimately the work will increase
understanding of neural mechanisms underscoring anxiety-related behavior and
potentially lead to new treatment options. The research objectives in this
proposal are integrated with an educational and outreach plan to increase
visibility and training in neuroengineering. Specifically, the plan includes the
following activities: establishing a neuroengineering research concentration;
experiential learning and mentoring opportunities for women and underrepresented
minorities; interactive and remote learning outreach activities; and
multidisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shortcomings of existing therapies for
neuropsychiatric illnesses, such as anxiety, highlight the urgent need to better
understand functional interactions in the affected neural circuits. The goal of
this CAREER project is to develop a transformative multimodal neural interface
fabrication process and design that will pave the way for establishing neural
circuit mechanisms of anxiety-related behavior. Existing multimodal neural
interfaces typically leverage manual assembly techniques that are not
practically scalable and fail to reach brain areas beyond the superficial
cortex. These shortcomings will be addressed by two foci. The Engineering Focus
will develop microfabrication and microassembly processes for a neural interface
design that can be easily optimized to different applications. The advantages of
developing these processes include greater device yield, lower variation in
fabricated devices, and design scalability to high channel counts. This work
also distinguishes itself from the state-of-the-art in its holistic design that
leverages a highly biocompatible material that easily integrates with the
fabrication pipeline and is appropriate for multimodal functionality. Under the
Biological Focus, the deep penetrating neural interface will be used to examine
how approach-avoidance choice information is represented and communicated across
relevant neural circuitry and implement an electrical neuromodulation paradigm
to establish causal circuit mechanisms underlying aberrant changes in anxiety-
related behavior. The knowledge gained through this work will provide a
fundamentally new strategy to develop scalable multimodal neural interfaces and
lay the foundation for neural circuit-level characterizations of any
neurological condition â€“ ultimately leading to new neuromodulatory
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.