* 2145407
* CAREER: Teaching Old Data New Tricks: Leveraging Legacy Field Data to Investigate Ice-stream Shut down and Inspire a New Generation of Cryospheric Scientists
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Matthew Siegfried, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2027
* USD 696,481.00

Antarctic ice streams and outlet glaciers are the primary conduits of glacier
ice from the interior of the continent to the ocean, where net ice loss
contributes to global sea-level rise. Any process that speeds up or slows down
the rate at which these ice streams move can appreciably impact the balance
between ice gain and loss in Antarctica, with important implications for coastal
communities worldwide. Processes that can lead to ice-stream acceleration are
frequently studied, whereas ice-stream stagnation, which most recently occurred
in Antarctica about 180 years ago, is studied less often. This project will
leverage two decades of existing data from field experiments in Antarctica on a
decelerating ice stream. The team will re-process these datasets from five
different NSF-funded projects using modern geophysical methods to build long
time-series of observations that provide insight into ice-sheet processes and
test hypotheses about how stagnation occurs. In parallel, the team will leverage
existing experiential field data to develop unique immersive learning modules to
provide an accessible mechanism for the next generation of STEM students to
experience Antarctic field work. Finally, this CAREER award will support a new
pathway for a diverse cohort of researchers in the glaciology community by
establishing and hosting annual regional Colorado Glaciology meetings that will
connect community college educators and local glaciology researchers to exchange
ideas, develop collaborations, and advertise opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a quarter century of previous work has proposed that
Whillans Ice Stream, West Antarctica, may stagnate by the mid-21st century, yet
the processes that drive stagnation are still largely considered only in coarse,
idealized terms. This project will leverage 13 years of continuous Global
Positioning System data and 29 years of seismic data to interrogate ice-stream
deceleration and stagnation processes. The multi-decadal datasets will indicate
the evolution of stick-slip motion of the ice stream, long-term and spatially
varying ice-thickening trends, and subglacial lake activity. These data will be
used to explore how coupled ice-stream/subglacial-hydrology dynamics may lead to
ultimate stagnation. In addition to the scientific investigations, the team will
ensure the long-term archiving of unprocessed legacy field data to support the
ability of future generations to apply novel techniques to past datasets. This
project will include research experiences for students from the Colorado
community college system and will develop three educational modules using low-
cost immersive technologies to inspire and promote ice-sheet science to students
from 6th grade to graduate school as well as the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.