* 2145077
* CAREER: Enhancing the Robustness of Human-Robot Interactions via Automatic Scenario Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Stefanos Nikolaidis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

There is a need for new techniques to assess humans and robots’ interactions at
home and in the workplace. Traditionally, human-robot interaction is tested with
human subject experiments. While these experiments are necessary to evaluating
human-robot interactions, they are often limited in the number of environments
and human behaviors that can be observed. Furthermore, it is not well understood
how to build robots that account for infrequent and undesirable behaviors found
when testing such systems. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
supports fundamental research to improve human-robot interactions by
automatically creating simulated human-robot interaction scenarios that reveal
undesirable behaviors, as well as integrating the generated scenarios into the
robot’s learning process. Results from this work will provide the field of
robotics with a theoretical and experimental tools for allowing the robot to
adjust to new and challenging scenarios. Tightly integrated with the research
activities, the education plan will introduce scenario generation in robotics
education and artificial intelligence competitions to improve students'
understanding of robots' capabilities and limitations and inspire them to pursue
a career in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the science of
robust, complex human-robot interaction by automatically generating and learning
from diverse, challenging and realistic scenarios in simulation. It will
investigate computational foundations for the design of quality diversity
algorithms that efficiently search the scenario space. It will then develop
frameworks that integrate the developed algorithms with generative models to
optimize a low-dimensional space of complex and realistic scenarios. The project
will close the loop between scenario generation and learning by exploring and
characterizing methods for efficiently selecting challenging scenarios to form a
curriculum for learning. Dissemination of all developed algorithms through open-
source software and workshops will help bring ideas from quality diversity
optimization and scenario generation to a wider robotics
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.