* 2145835
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Elastic Computing over the Cloud - from Theory to Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Mingyue Ji, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2027
* USD 202,025.00

Modern cloud-services rely on virtual machines due to their high efficiency and
flexibility. Alongside regular services, current new offerings from cloud-
service providers allow exploiting under-utilized virtual machines at a fraction
of the original cost. Such computing resources, however, are highly
heterogeneous and elastic. Heterogeneity means that virtual machines can have
different computational speeds and storage constraints. Elasticity means that
these virtual machines can be preempted under short notice (on the order of
minutes) if a high-priority job appears; on the other hand, new virtual machines
may be available over time to compensate for any shortage of computing
resources. Such behavior can result in computational failure or significantly
increase computing time. In response to the challenges of both heterogeneity and
elasticity in cloud systems, this project will formulate new heterogeneous
elastic computing frameworks, aiming for optimal and implementable solutions.
The results of this project can lead to sizable economic benefits. The project's
educational activities are designed to integrate research into teaching, and
include mentoring both graduate and undergraduate students, alongside outreach
programs to undergraduate and K-12 students, women, and underrepresented
minorities with the goal of fostering interest in transformational computing
technologies. Another highlight of this project is the newly developed YouTube
channel by the investigator that is intended to educate everyone regardless of
age, gender, or race. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by practical measurements
and constraints, this project formulates new heterogeneous elastic computing
frameworks with both coded and uncoded storage placements. Then, it develops
novel methodologies using combinatorial and information-theoretic tools to
establish fundamental tradeoffs for such systems. Using these theoretical tools,
the project designs low-complexity algorithms for real applications and
evaluates them on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) in order to show
significant gains of the proposed approaches compared to the state-of-the-art
solutions. The project is structured around research topics: (1) heterogeneous
coded storage elastic computing; (2) heterogeneous uncoded storage elastic
computing; (3) secure uncoded storage elastic computing from user’s perspective
and (4) heterogeneous elastic computing: convert theory to
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.