* 2145357
* CAREER: Learning and Using Community-Driven Natural Language Processing Models
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Anthony Rios, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2027
* USD 217,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing interest in
applying Natural Language Processing (NLP) to a wide array of tasks, including,
but not limited to, health, online moderation, and education. NLP-related
research has generally focused on large models uniformly applied to everyone
independent of their writing style and social norms, thus, assuming a one-size-
fits-all solution. Nevertheless, NLP-based models do not perform equally for all
communities because of different writing styles (e.g., dialects) and choices of
topical discussion (e.g., Sports vs. Technology). Furthermore, social norms vary
between communities, making the original intended use of some NLP models
potentially irrelevant. Hence, applying the same NLP model to everyone may cause
harm if communities are not directly considered. Therefore, researchers and
practitioners must evaluate NLP models on community data before they deploy
them. They must also work with communities to determine whether the technology
is sound given the community's social norms and needs. This project will address
two critical questions: "How can stakeholders know whether the model will harm
specific communities when put into production?" and "What community-specific
language patterns cause errors in various NLP models?". By answering these
questions, this project intends to develop tools to help communities participate
in the technology development process, which will enable them to decide whether
a specific technology is relevant to the community or not. Finally, this project
will also create standards-based lessons for high school students in San Antonio
by training local high-school teachers in community-driven NLP, which will
potentially help local students better consider NLP applications in their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this project will provide researchers and
NLP practitioners with a better understanding of applying and developing NLP
models for small communities rather than focusing on a one-size-fits-all
framework. Specifically, to address this goal, this project has three
objectives. Objective 1 will identify strategies to find correlations between
community-specific language and NLP model performance. This objective will
result in a better understanding of the inductive biases of NLP models for
community-specific applications. Objective 2 will create a tool that can
facilitate participatory NLP design by helping community-specific stakeholders
identify potential good and harmful outcomes that may be caused by applying a
specific NLP model. More importantly, the objective will help decision-makers
decide when NLP should or should not be deployed in their communities. Objective
3 will identify methods to improve NLP models for specific communities. The goal
is to identify methods to incorporate a community's unlabeled data into existing
labeled NLP datasets to improve community-specific model performance. Finally,
the project will impact the broader NLP community via the release of open-source
software that implements the tools and techniques this award
generates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.