* 2145879
* CAREER: Slip rates and earthquake timing of distributed Quaternary crustal deformation to evaluate structural accommodation of clockwise rotation of the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ashley Streig, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 219,204.00

Historically, few damaging earthquakes have occurred in the Pacific Northwest
region of the United States, although the region overlies the seismically active
Cascadia Subduction Zone. Earthquake resilience efforts here have largely
focused on the offshore Cascadia Subduction Zone and its potential for
magnitude-9 (M9) earthquakes. Damaging earthquakes on onshore faults, such as
the Seattle fault, are also a poorly understood threat to the region. Few active
faults have been identified onshore in Oregon, but new laser terrain imagery
(lidar) has revealed widespread and previously unknown active faults distributed
across the landscape. The purpose of this project is to establish paleo-
earthquake timing and fault slip rate information for these newly discovered
faults and to incorporate them into the team's regional model of fault bounded
crustal blocks that accommodate deformation in the Pacific Northwest. This
information can be used to update the USGS National Seismic Hazard Map and
models of fault style and activity. This project will add to the broadening of
participation of under-represented groups in an important STEM discipline, by
providing support for female and underrepresented minority graduate and
undergraduate students through graduate student research assistantships and paid
undergraduate internships in the field of earthquake geology. It also provides
for support an early career female principal investigator. The project will
collaborate with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry in Portland, OR, to
develop an interactive demo exhibit on regional tectonics and earthquake
geology. The primary goal of this museum partnership is to educate K-12
audiences, teachers, and parents about geology, plate tectonics, the field of
earthquake science, and earthquake hazards in their community. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Oblique northeast-directed subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate and
northward impingement of the Sierra Nevada block drive active clockwise rotation
of the entire Pacific Northwest region relative to stable North America. Geo
block models break the region into a system of fault-bounded rotating blocks,
defined by regions of similar global positions system (GPS) station velocities.
GPS-defined block boundaries are thought to be the focus of active faulting, but
not all block boundaries coincide with a known fault system. The proposed
project seeks to identify Quaternary active structures, characterize their slip
rates, and to close the strain budget shortfall between geodetically determined
block models and geologically mapped structures accommodating translation from
long-term crustal rotation. This project is designed to improve understanding of
crustal deformation through targeted tectonic-geomorphic and paleoseismic
investigations in the central Pacific Northwest where the rates and timing of
faulting during the past 30,000 years remain unconstrained. Data in this time
range would bridge the observational gap between geodetic (short-term) and
bedrock (long-term) observations of rotation and would resolve discrepancies
between block models and models of distributed shear. Data collected in this
study will evaluate the persistence of rigid to semi-rigid block boundaries
determined from GPS velocity data. Results of the proposed study will improve
our understanding of complex crustal accommodation of Pacific Northwest rotation
in Holocene to late-Pleistocene time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.