* 2145184
* CAREER: A Data-Driven Approach for Verification and Control of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Majid Zamani, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2027
* USD 209,308.00

This CAREER project develops formal verification and controller synthesis
schemes for complex cyber-physical systems (CPS) with unknown closed-form models
by embracing ideas from control theory, computer science, and operations
research. Emerging examples of such systems include autonomous cars, autonomous
transportation networks, smart grids, and integrated medical devices. The main
novelty of this project lies in bypassing the model identification phase and
directly verifying or synthesizing control software for CPS against complex
safety requirements using just data collected from their behaviors. This project
also quantifies rigorously a confidence guarantee on the verification outcomes
or the correctness of synthesized control software, which can be improved based
on the amount of data. Given an acceptable confidence, unfortunately, the
required number of data grows rapidly with the size of the system. This is known
as the sample complexity. To tackle this issue, particularly, for large-scale
CPS, the project finally proposes a divide and conquer strategy by breaking the
data-driven verification or controller synthesis problems into semi-independent
ones, where solving each subproblem requires a much smaller amount of data. The
research outcomes of this project will contribute to the long term education
plan of the PI by i) developing unified courses on CPS with an “end-to-end
view,” starting from the foundations of control and discrete systems theory and
moving to hardware/software implementations; ii) bringing hands-on learning to
those courses by the platforms and benchmarks developed in this project; and
iii) finally, improving undergraduate retention rates by leveraging the outreach
programs at the University of Colorado Boulder to recruit first generation and
underrepresented engineering students and engage them in the platforms used in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a scalable data-driven
approach for formal verification and synthesis of control software for CPS with
unknown models (a.k.a. black-box systems). To do so, given temporal logic
requirements (e.g., those expressed as linear temporal logic formulae) for CPS,
they will be decomposed into simpler tasks based on the structures of automata
representing them. Then, those simpler tasks are tackled by constructing so-
called barrier functions using data collected from the systems. Particularly,
the conditions over barrier functions for those simpler tasks are first
formulated as robust convex programs (RCP) which are technically semi-infinite
linear programs. Solving those RCP directly are not tractable due to unknown
models. Instead, this project considers a set of data collected from the system
and solves scenario convex programs (SCP), which are finite linear programs.
Barrier functions resulted by solving SCP are combined to verify the given
requirement or to provide a controller enforcing it. The project also quantifies
rigorously a confidence (a.k.a. out-of-sample performance guarantee) on the
verification outcomes or the correctness of synthesized controllers. To tackle
the underlying sample complexity for large-scale CPS, this project proposes an
adaptive sampling and a modular data-driven schemes by exploiting the natural
structure present in the system. Finally, the proposed algorithms will be
implemented into open-source software tools to automate the proposed data-driven
techniques and evaluated on Artificial Pancreas systems and a team of scale-
model autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.