* 2145742
* CAREER: Efficient and Reliable Data Transfer Services for Next Generation Research Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Engin Arslan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2027
* USD 316,936.00

Research networks are crucial for data intensive, distributed, and collaborative
science projects as they provide high speed connectivity between research and
education institutions. However, users of research networks are unable to
efficiently utilize available resources as existing transfer applications suffer
from scalability issues at high speeds. This project designs and develops a
scalable and robust data transfer framework for next-generation research
networks to improve their utilization. Enhanced network performance in research
networks allows seamless execution of next generation distributed science
applications, thereby paving the way for breakthrough discoveries to be made
swiftly. This project also promotes collaboration between scientists at
geographically separated institutions by means of reducing the time it takes to
share data. In addition to research contributions, this project has strong
education plan tightly integrated into its research plan. The plan involves
trainings for scientists to help them better utilize advanced
cyberinfrastructure resources when dealing with large scale data, game
development for middle and high school students to teach networking concepts,
and summer schools for high school students for underrepresented groups to teach
programming and networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As trend towards data
intensive distributed science continues, it is becoming increasingly important
to develop data transfer services that can scale to next generation terabit per
second networks and beyond. To achieve this goal, this project focuses four key
research directions: First, it innovates a modular file transfer architecture to
separate I/O operations from network transfers to enable dynamic and component
specific tuning. Second, it implements Quality of Service support for delay
sensitive distributed workflows to meet their stringent performance
requirements. Third, it develops scalable, secure, and low overhead integrity
verification for file transfers through in network caching/computing and
probabilistic error checking mechanisms. Fourth, it integrates the developed
algorithms to commonly used workflow management systems to increase its adoption
by a broader science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.