* 2145314
* CAREER: Disentangled learning of high dimensional biomedical data in the presence of inherent heterogeneity
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Sha Cao, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2027
* USD 596,508.00

The advancement in high throughput technologies is revolutionizing the fields of
biomedical research, giving rise to large-scale patient-derived molecular
datasets, including matched multi-omics data, single cell or spatially resolved
-omics data, as well as longitudinal -omics data. Despite the growing trend of
analyzing such complex data to further our understanding of the molecular basis
in states of human disease, the inherent biological heterogeneity is challenging
the conventional paradigm to treat a given diseased system as a uniform entity:
patients may form different disease subtypes present with variable clinical
outcomes, and cells collected from the same patient sample may display different
phenotypic states. Biological and clinical interpretability in the face of the
high dimensional molecular features remain to be another challenge. The proposed
project will address key challenges in: 1) simultaneously detecting
biologically/clinically meaningful patient/cell subgroups and extracting their
unique defining genomic features; and 2) integrated learning from data of
multiple modalities, with strong systematic batch effect, or collected over
time. Thus, the proposed work has high potential to discover new knowledge and
to induce new approaches significant to health data science research. The
project will result in algorithms, such as high dimensionality reduction,
clustering and data integration, that are broadly applicable across the whole of
data science, to address a wide range of research and industry
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes novel ideas of disentangled
learning to simultaneously address the high dimensionality and inherent
heterogeneity issues for three most popular biomedical data types: multi-omics,
tissue resolved -omics, and longitudinal -omics data. The following three
critical challenges are to be addressed: 1) Detecting biologically/clinically
meaningful patient subgroups by leveraging multi-omics data through novel
supervised clustering methods; 2) Discovering heterogeneous cell populations in
noisy tissue resolved omics data and multi-task learning of multiple tissue
samples through a Poisson based low dimensional embedding model; and 3)
Characterizing heterogeneous disease trajectories using longitudinal and high
dimensional -omics data through a fusion learning model. For all three
scenarios, a common theme of disentangled learning is proposed to ensure the
biological/clinical interpretability of the analysis results. The inherent
heterogeneity within and across the subjects are divided to distinct subgroups
or subpopulations, each of which is characterized by their unique features
extracted from within a high dimensional feature space. All proposed methods are
embraced with extensive utility in both academia and industry. Educationally,
the proposed peer learning education module, R Shiny based tool development
research, and summer workshops on data science, all targeting high school and
undergraduate students, can well serve as a platform not only for inspiring and
retaining students, but also training them for future STEM workforce roles.
Thus, the proposed project is promising to have far-reaching educational
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.