* 2145890
* CAREER: Hemodynamic Mechanisms of Heart-Aorta-Brain Coupling with An Integrated Preventive Medicine Education Program for Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Groups
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Niema Pahlevan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2027
* USD 430,338.00

The human body works based on a delicate balance of blood flow dynamic between
the heart, the aorta (the largest vessel extending from the heart), and other
major organs like the brain. Understanding the interactions between the heart,
aorta, and brain is a key step towards detecting and treating both heart disease
(i.e., heart failure) and brain diseases (i.e., dementia). The goal of this
CAREER project is to understand how the heart and the brain impact each other so
that easy-to-use and cheap heart-brain monitoring devices can be developed for
underserved communities. The educational part of this CAREER project is based on
the “See One, Do One, Teach One” philosophy to encourage health monitoring and
preventive medicine in low-income families. In addition, this CAREER award will
generate a database that will benefit researchers in other fields such as
artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart failure
(HF) is a condition characterized by the inability of the heart to circulate
blood in the vascular network. Epidemiological studies have shown that simply
being a member of a socioeconomically disadvantaged community is an independent
risk factor for both incident HF as well as increased hospital readmission for
HF. Additionally, reducing the risk for the development of dementia is of the
utmost importance due to the absence of effective treatments. As is the case
with HF, lower socioeconomic status translates to higher prevalence of dementia.
Understanding the complex fluid dynamic coupling (hemodynamic interactions)
between the heart, aorta, and brain is a crucial step towards diagnostics and
therapeutics of not only HF and dementia, but also other related diseases. The
general hypothesis of this proposal is that wave dynamics in the aorta dominate
the pulsatile hemodynamics of the heart, the brain, and the nonlinear
interaction between the two. The investigator’s main goal is to elucidate
systems-level effects of aortic hemodynamics on heart-brain interactions. In
order to achieve this goal, the investigator will combine state-of-the-art
experimentation, cutting-edge numerical simulation, and novel hybrid physics-
informed machine learning approaches. Ultimately, the outcome of this research
will facilitate improved understanding of the pathophysiological pathways in
highly complex diseases such as HF, Alzheimer’s, and dementia. The long-term
goal of this CAREER project is to develop diagnostic and monitoring devices for
heart diseases and vascular brain damage. This project is jointly funded by the
Engineering of Biomedical Systems and Fluid Dynamics programs of the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the
Engineering Directorate and by the Mathematical Biology program of the Division
of Mathematical Sciences in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.