* 2145631
* CAREER: Principled Approaches to Securing Next-Generation Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Syed Rafiul Hussain, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 114,346.00

Cellular networks are the most pervasive and primary means of global-scale
communication that enable connectivity for billions of devices worldwide. Yet,
while being such core infrastructures of a nation, there is a lack of systematic
and rigorous security analysis frameworks and secure-by-design principles to
ensure secure and reliable operations of these networks. Even though cellular
technologies have evolved over generations, trust assumptions have largely
remained the same whereas adversary capabilities have significantly grown. The
adversary capabilities will thus continue to grow and violate the security
guarantees of next-generation cellular networks that we rely on today.
Therefore, the overarching goal of this project is to secure the next-generation
cellular networks through the development of algorithms and systems that verify
the security and privacy guarantees of cellular network protocols' design and
implementations with respect to next-generation adversaries that can break the
current trust assumptions. The proposal's educational content will offer and
organize courses, cellular capture-the-flag (CCTF) competitions, and K-12
workshops focusing on the security and privacy of emerging networks and systems.
Undergraduates, women, and underrepresented students will be recruited to
encourage their engagement in research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the security of
cellular networks from the ground up by incorporating security analysis starting
from the design to implementations and real deployments. Unfortunately, it has
been difficult to achieve this vision in practice due to the following three
important grand challenges: (i) Lack of models and properties for security
analysis; (ii) Lack of automated and holistic security analysis framework; and
(iii) Lack of techniques to create correct and secure cellular protocol
implementations. This project seeks to address these broad challenges in a
unified framework through (a) Developing a formal static security analysis
framework to scalably analyze the protocol model of the design, i.e., the
cellular standard of next-generation cellular networks; (b) Designing and
implementing dynamic security analysis framework for analyzing and verifying the
security of cellular protocol implementations; and (c) Developing cellular
network-specific protocol modeling language and code generation mechanism to
produce high-assurance reference implementations of cellular protocols. Results
from this work have the potential to fundamentally improve the security of
current (5G) and next-generation (6G) cellular networks and thus will make a
significant impact on national and global security. Tools, models, properties,
and findings will be shared in the public domain to promote and advance the
science and community of cellular networks, directly benefiting cellular
stakeholders, developers, and standard bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.