* 2145461
* CAREER: Nanoscale temperature mapping across interfaces using scanning transmission electron microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Geoffrey Wehmeyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 437,986.00

Interfaces between materials pose a major barrier to the thermal management of
nanotechnologies ranging from transistors to light-emitting diodes and heat-
assisted magnetic recording devices. Improvements in the fundamental
understanding of nanoscale heat flow mechanisms across these interfaces could
allow engineers to tailor the composition and structure of interfaces for
optimized cooling strategies, leading to improved device durability and
efficiency. However, it is currently difficult to test the predictions of
competing interfacial thermal transport theories at the nanoscale because
thermal experiments are not able to map temperature at the relevant near-
atomistic lengthscales. This work will develop scanning transmission electron
microscopy nanothermometry experiments and use atomistic calculations to
elucidate the mechanisms of interfacial thermal transport and to provide high
spatial resolution insight into the interface structure-thermal property
relationship. This project will also build upon existing collaborations between
Rice University and Houston-area community colleges to implement summer research
experiences for community college students and to develop outreach events that
promote career opportunities in nanotechnology and thermal management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test models for interfacial
phonon heat transport by mapping temperature with sub-nanometer spatial
resolution across strongly bonded interfaces. The nanothermometry measurements
will leverage the temperature-dependent thermal diffuse scattering that has been
detected in scanning transmission electron microscopy diffraction patterns and
annular dark field images. This thermal diffuse scattering is directly related
to the local atomic vibration amplitudes, which increase with increasing
temperature. Calibrating and mapping the thermal diffuse scattering as a
function of beam position will allow experiments with sub-nanometer electron
beam diameters to measure the temperature profile with ultrahigh spatial
resolution. These thermal electron microscopy experiments will be compared with
theoretical predictions by combining atomistic modeling of temperature-dependent
atomic vibrations near interfaces with multislice electron diffraction
calculations to quantify the thermal diffuse scattering. The results will
provide insight into the underlying physical mechanisms of interfacial thermal
transport across semiconductor-semiconductor and semiconductor-metal junctions.
Future application of this fundamental knowledge could allow engineers to
improve the thermal design of interfaces in nanoelectronics and information
storage technologies, with the goal of enabling more efficient device
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.