* 2145577
* CAREER: Modeling Genetic Variation Using Deep Generative Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Volodymyr Kuleshov, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 498,860.00

The cost of genome sequencing has decreased by orders of magnitude over the past
two decades, enabling the creation of datasets comprised of up to millions of
genomes of plants, animals, and humans. The long-term vision behind this
research is to develop new methods for analyzing such datasets and to understand
how genetic and environmental factors determine complex traits relevant to
medicine and agriculture. Existing methods for analyzing genetic data often
struggle with the size and the complexity of today's massive datasets. This
research seeks to improve existing approaches via novel techniques in artificial
intelligence and machine learning. Specifically, this project will develop new
mathematical models of genomic sequences that will serve as the basis for
algorithms for genetic data analysis, including for tasks such as analyzing
human ancestry, understanding the effect of genetics on disease, and more. The
second part the project will explore a specific application of the new models--
assaying genomic sequences with high accuracy and low cost and will develop
open-source software for this task. This software will contribute to supporting
the cost of acquiring massive genetic datasets, and will facilitate large-scale
genetic studies. These efforts will positively impact downstream applications
that rely on accurate genomes--medical genetics, animal breeding, and others--
and will contribute to enabling cheaper and more accurate medical diagnosis,
explaining the role of genetics in human disease, and helping breed more
nourishing crops, ultimately improving human and environmental health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term research vision behind this project is to
create next-generation algorithms for statistical genetics based on novel
methods in machine learning and deep learning. This proposal begins a first step
in this direction by creating novel methods for modeling genetic variation and
apply them to two important problems in statistical genetics; that is, genotype
imputation and low-pass genome sequencing. Both problems involve determining the
complete sequence of a genome from a small number of measurements obtained using
an inexpensive assay. Specifically, this research has two primary aims: (1) to
develop a novel deep generative model of genetic sequences that replaces
classical approaches based on hidden Markov models and that can serve as the
foundation for algorithms throughout statistical genetics; (2) to significantly
reduce the cost of genomic assays via novel algorithms for imputation and low-
pass sequencing based on the new model. Central to this effort is the
development of new techniques, approaches, and frameworks in deep generative
modeling that address challenges posed by genetic data--including high
dimensionality and long range sequence dependencies--and that are useful beyond
genomics. Ultimately, we envision this work laying the foundation for a new
field of deep statistical genetics and inspire new algorithms for problems
throughout the field, including haplotyping, ancestry inference, genome-wide
association study analysis, polygenic risk scoring, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.