* 2145699
* CAREER: Engineering thermal biosensors for remote control of mammalian cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Lukasz Bugaj, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2027
* USD 470,907.00

Using live cells as therapeutic agents requires strict control of the
manufacturing process. Strict control implies accurate and rapid sensing and
response. The objective of this project is to engineer a protein with
temperature-sensitive activity. The protein could act as a sensor or as a switch
to respond to local temperature fluctuations. Connecting this protein function
to cellular regulatory networks could allow researchers to rapidly manipulate
cell metabolism. A protein from a fungus will be the model system. Collaborating
with the local school district will lead to new educational modules directed at
high school students. These activities will enhance participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM education and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of this proposal is that a fungal protein, whose activity is
naturally controlled by both temperature and light, can be engineered to be
purely thermo-responsive, and that this thermally-regulated activity can be
tuned and coupled to transcriptional and post-translational processes.
Specifically, this work will develop a protein whose dissociation from the
plasma membrane is controllable by temperature. In Aim 1, the temperature
dependence of membrane localization of the engineered protein will be measured
and modeled. In Aim 2, the temperature sensitivity will be tuned so that
membrane localization can be controlled across temperature ranges relevant for
mammalian cells (&gt; 37 °C). In Aim 3, molecular circuits will be developed
that couple thermal control of membrane localization to intracellular
biochemistry that controls gene expression or posttranslational modifications,
which will provide modular strategies for thermal control for a wide variety of
downstream applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.