* 2145657
* CAREER: Understanding Structure-Function Relationships of Polyoxovanadate-Alkoxide Clusters from a Bottom-Up Perspective
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Pere Miro, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 02/28/2027
* USD 625,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Pere Miró and his research group at the
University of South Dakota are using advanced computational approaches to
understand the nucleation and growth of functionalized polyoxovanadate-alkoxide
clusters, as well as the ability of these clusters to catalyze the reactions of
small molecules. The development of molecular catalysts that have the ability to
accelerate complex chemical reactions involving many electrons remains a major
challenge due to changes that often affect the durability and behavior of such
species under harsh reaction conditions. Therefore, understanding and
controlling the properties of these catalytic compounds is of fundamental
importance, and relies on the ability to manipulate the evolution of transient
species in solution. The polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters under study here will
provide a useful platform better understand fundamental aspects of the
synthesis, reactivity, and durability of metal oxide catalysts, in general, as
well as the catalytic activation of small molecules. This work will contribute
to the long-term goal of the Miró research group to use modern computational
methodologies to discover new roadmaps for the nucleation of molecular mimics of
catalytic metal-oxide materials. The project includes an educational outreach
program involving hands-on workshops at neighboring tribal colleges, the
engagement of tribal undergraduate students in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) research, and leading National Chemistry Week activities
for students at K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pere Miró and his research
team will use high-level quantum chemical calculations and neural network
algorithms to examine the nucleation mechanism of first-row functionalized
polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters--up to the formation of hexameric species--as
well as to better understand the impact of dynamic experimental conditions on
the structure-redox relationships and multi-electron reactivity of the clusters.
Specifically, a combination of density functional theory calculations
benchmarked against domain-based local pair natural orbital coupled cluster and
second-order complete active space methodologies are being used to characterize
nucleation intermediates and derive neural network potentials to streamline the
exploration of the nucleation space. This research seeks to enrich the
understanding of structure-function relationships that control nucleation and
electrocatalytic properties. The scientific broader impacts of this work include
transforming the way the organometallic chemistry community views function-
oriented synthesis of these species using computational methodologies and to
guide the discovery of new functionalities. The project also will provide
advanced training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
including directed training opportunities for students from groups that are
underrepresented in the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.