* 2145482
* CAREER: Generating High Quality Vulnerability Corpora for Benchmarking and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 197,886.00

Software vulnerabilities pose a major threat to the safety and security of
computer systems. There is a large body of research on how to automatically find
vulnerabilities in programs, but test data for evaluation of this research--
large, ground-truth corpora of vulnerabilities--are expensive to create and
hence in short supply. The goal of this project is to create techniques for
automatically generating benchmark corpora of software vulnerabilities that can
be used to rigorously assess vulnerability discovery tools, allowing researchers
and end users alike to better understand what techniques are most effective,
leading to more effective tools and ultimately safer software. The project also
aims to use automatically generated vulnerabilities to cheaply create training
exercises for cybersecurity education, broadening access to cybersecurity
expertise and helping to build the next generation of security
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although prior work such as LAVA (Large-Scale
Automated Vulnerability Addition) has demonstrated that vulnerability corpora
can be created automatically, the vulnerabilities it creates are unrealistic
(containing many artifacts that made them easier to discover than real
vulnerabilities) and not very diverse (consisting only of pointer corruption
errors). This project aims to address these issues by developing new techniques
that: 1) use large language models trained on code to synthesize vulnerabilities
that are realistic and diverse; 2) place vulnerabilities in hard-to-discover
paths through directed symbolic execution; 3) allow new vulnerability classes to
be added quickly with a customized domain-specific language; and 4)
automatically generate exploits for each vulnerability. Together, these
techniques will allow highly realistic vulnerability corpora to be generated
cheaply and on-demand. Aside from the benefits gained by having a limitless
supply of vulnerabilities to use as benchmark corpora, the project will also
investigate the use of vulnerability injection to create "capture the
flag"-style exercises for education; such challenges are an extremely popular
and effective means of teaching a variety of cybersecurity skills, but they
require large amounts of time, money, and expertise to create and manage. If the
creation of these challenges can be partially or wholly automated, it could
bring new educational opportunities within reach of a broader and more diverse
population by dramatically lowering costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.