* 2145565
* CAREER: Modeling Situated Intention during Nondeterministic Pedestrian-Vehicle Interactions through Explainable Compositional Learning of Naturalistic Driving Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Renran Tian, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2027
* USD 185,788.00

With the fast progress of artificial intelligence, vehicles with higher levels
of automation are entering daily life. Automated driving technologies are
expected to improve traffic safety, promote travel efficiency, protect the
environment, reduce mobility barriers for older generations or people with
disabilities, and thus deliver overall societal benefits. However, existing
algorithms embedded in autonomous vehicles still face fundamental challenges in
recognizing the quickly changing intentions of pedestrians moving on the road
and sidewalks, making it hard to predict their behavior and plan vehicle
motions. Such limitations impede the implementation of fully autonomous and safe
cars in city environments and create additional risks for pedestrians and other
road users. This project focuses on developing novel techniques to model and
predict the complex and changing intentions of pedestrians. By learning the
thinking process of drivers and their driving responses, an algorithm will be
created to equip the automated cars with similar capabilities to interact with
pedestrians and other road users smoothly and safely. The research process will
include naturalistic driving data collection, subject experiments, knowledge
modeling, and learning algorithm development. The developed algorithm will be
evaluated in an immersive virtual environment. The project also includes
activities to promote user-centered design in engineering education, foster the
awareness of biases and ethical issues related to artificial intelligence
technologies, and increase the participation of underrepresented communities in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project surmounts limitations of current pedestrian behavior prediction to
achieving mutual intelligibility between autonomous vehicles and pedestrians.
Principally, unlike the traditional static view of pedestrian intention at a
critical moment, this research investigates the relationship between non-verbal
actions and intention changes of pedestrians moment-to-moment in dynamic
(changing) and interactive situations. The project collects temporal video
segments and human reasoning descriptions simultaneously through event-
segmentation-based video experiments. Then, it develops a compositional learning
method to learn and combine language features with visual features. This method
can avoid the rigid structure of expert-selected feature space by creating
collective features from ordinary drivers, and the three-level explainability of
the learning model can justify model outputs from input features. Finally, the
developed intention prediction model will be evaluated through subject
experiments in a virtual interactive pedestrian simulator. The research findings
will be shared through industrial collaborators and conferences, and a
pedestrian behavior benchmark dataset will be disseminated to the public. The
research results will be included in engineering education to promote design
approaches that take into account the users’ feelings, values, and overall
mental state (empathic design). These educational activities will include
courses at the investigator’s university, the autonomous driving research
community, and industry. They will increase the awareness of critical human-
centered AI issues like biases, trust, and social intelligence in design of
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.