* 2145276
* CAREER: Probing and Manipulating Electronic and Spin Degrees of Freedom in Paramagnetic Single Molecule Circuits
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Maria Kamenetska, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 01/31/2027
* USD 701,995.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr.
Maria Kamenetska of Boston University is investigating the electronic and
magnetic properties of single paramagnetic molecules wired into an electric
circuit. The use of molecules as switches, transistors, or qubits could enable
the development of smaller and more powerful electronic devices than what is
currently available. Of particular interest for this application are
paramagnetic molecules, which have intrinsic magnetic properties, making them
candidates for applications in non-volatile memory and in quantum information
science. Maria Kamenetska and her group use an approach based on scanning
tunneling microscopy to measure current through a single molecule bound to metal
electrodes. These experimental measurements are complemented with computational
investigations to elucidate how the chemical environment influences the
electronic and magnetic properties of the resulting molecular circuits.
Understanding chemical interactions between the electrodes and paramagnetic
molecule can improve circuit reliability, control, and functionality, with
potential for magnetic sensing and gating in single molecule circuits. Broader
impacts focus on training a diverse and quantum-literate workforce at the
interface of molecular science, electronics and quantum technology as well as
building and improving the curriculum of and mentoring students in the newly-
implemented Chemistry and Physics undergraduate major at Boston
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to identify chemical design
principles and nano-manipulation techniques for forming robust single
paramagnetic molecule circuits and to investigate their emergent electronic and
spin degrees of freedom. Experimental approaches, such as inorganic synthesis
and scanning tunneling microscope break junction (STMBJ) single molecule
conductance measurements are coupled with density functional theory (DFT) and
non-equilibrium green function (NEGF) computational techniques to achieve a
comprehensive and iterative study of magnetically-functional single molecule
circuits. Three terminal electrical measurements are performed using an
electrochemical STM configuration to reveal the effect of metal-molecule
chemistry on electronic degrees of freedom of the junction, while STMBJ
measurements on ferromagnetic electrodes allow spin-resolved electron transport
measurements. DFT calculations support the experimental work and provide further
insight into structure-property relationships in metal-molecule junctions. The
broader impacts focus on student training at the interface of molecular science,
electronics and quantum technology. A newly developed Chemistry and Physics
undergraduate major, that aims to promote diversity and inclusion, serves to
create of an environment that encourages interdisciplinary science at an early
career stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.