* 2145512
* CAREER: Nonlinear Resonances of Highly Damped, Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Mehmet Kurt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2027
* USD 687,643.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant promotes the
progress of science and advances the national health through research that
enables an improved understanding of impact and vibration-induced damage in
highly damped, soft materials, for example, human brain tissue, thereby paving
the way for improved diagnosis of pathologies and design of protective devices.
Soft materials are found across a variety of engineering domains, ranging from
elastomeric dampers in aerospace applications to compliant robotic devices
designed for wearability. Traditional techniques for characterizing the response
of material structures to dynamic loading fail for soft materials due to the
combined effects of large deformations and complex material behaviors. In
contrast, the experimental and theoretical framework developed in this project
will focus precisely on resonant conditions that produce significant material
deformations and activate the strongest dissipative and nonlinear forces. This
framework will generate new insights into the occurrence of localized damage in
soft materials, for example during transient loading events such as sudden
impacts. These insights will be particularly transformative for structural
health monitoring of soft structures, including biological systems such as human
organs. Project outcomes have the potential to inform research in the
biomechanics of traumatic brain injury, one of the leading causes of death and
disability among children and adolescents in the US. A closely integrated
research and education plan will excite student engagement in STEM through
curriculum development, outreach workshops on helmet design, and digital arts
exhibits. A dedicated effort to increase participation from the LGBTQ+
community, where a STEM visibility and underrepresentation problem currently
exists, includes annual events, workshops, and mentoring networks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental contributions to a modeling
and system identification framework for characterizing the deformation response
of highly damped, soft materials to steady-state and transient loading, with
particular emphasis on deformation localization and damage in heterogeneous,
membranous material systems. It achieves this aim by analyzing amplitude
resonance backbones in models of highly damped, soft material systems with
complex, distributed internal forces, studying the correspondence between such
amplitude resonances and the transient impact response, and validating these
predictions using magnetic resonance imaging of silicone phantoms representing
biological tissue. An efficient computational framework will be developed to
enable parameter continuation of amplitude resonance backbones for large-scale
models using an innovative combination of the method of harmonic balance,
finite-element simulations, and a novel Bayesian Fourier Neural Operator-based
machine learning technique. Computational modeling of real-world head impacts
will be used to determine the relationship between amplitude resonance backbones
and impact-induced strain localization patterns in the human
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.