* 2145417
* CAREER: Investigation of Thermal Transport in Moiré Pattern Structured Materials to Push the Extremes of Thermal Modulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Xian Zhang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2027
* USD 389,279.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable devices made of two-
dimensional (2D) materials based on atomically thin crystals such as graphene
promise to revolutionize modern microelectronics by enabling high flexibility,
intrinsic thinness, and unprecedented device performance. However, one
significant challenge to the advancement of diverse and transformative
applications is gaining control over thermal transport. For example, thermal
transport needs to be increased to compensate for the heating issue caused by
the reduced thermal conductivity at high levels of stress and decreased for
efficient thermoelectric energy conversion and thermal insulation devices. The
overarching goal of this research is to achieve efficient, in-situ, and
reversible thermal control via manipulating 2D materials’ Moiré patterns, which
are created by adjusting the relative twist angle of mismatching crystal lattice
between the two 2D materials. The knowledge learned will potentially push the
thermal modulation limits in skin-like wearable devices made of atomically thin
2D materials, and enable modern devices from beyond-Si electronics and sensors
to superconducting thermal switches. This project will tightly integrate
research, education and outreach, with interactive games, workshops, novel
curriculum, hands-on research mentoring, and research tool sharing to engage
students in thermal technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims
to create new knowledge about crystal lattice order enabled thermal transport
and develop twist angle tuning as a powerful strategy for thermal modulation.
The twist angle tuning method applied to 2D Moiré pattern structured materials
provides an in-situ, continuous and reversible tuning strategy without the need
for changing the materials’ chemical composition, thereby bypassing the
challenges associated with traditional wearable devices. Experimental approaches
of materials synthesis, device nanofabrication and thermal characterization are
emphasized and reinforced by analytical modeling. By systematically varying
twist angle as well as the 2D Moiré patterns’ mechanical deformation and global
geometry, in-depth understanding of lattice orders, lattice constants, geometry
and thermal conductivity will be uncovered. Such knowledge will be a major leap
in fundamental understanding of thermal physics, establish thermal modulation
principles to achieve desired thermal transport outcomes, and revolutionize
future wearable device platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.