* 2145809
* CAREER: Bridging the gender gap by investigating and counteracting the influence of gender brilliance stereotypes on girls’ STEM participation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Lin Bian, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2027
* USD 396,342.00

The increased demand for intellectual talent has highlighted the need for more
female scientists, yet women are consistently underrepresented in the STEM
domain. A pervading stereotype associating intellectual talent with men rather
than women is a powerful cultural message that is in part responsible for this
gender gap, termed the gender brilliance stereotype. This pernicious stereotype
emerges early and immediately shapes children’s interests. To tackle this gender
disparity from its developmental roots, this project will address three
interrelated questions: (1) How do children internalize the gender brilliance
stereotype? (2) How does the gender brilliance stereotype influence children’s,
especially girls’, motivation? (3) What strategies can be developed to promote
girls’ involvement in STEM? Findings from this research will transform
understanding of the barriers posed on girls and lay a solid foundation for
devising interventions to engage them in STEM. The project will also support
graduate and undergraduate students in STEM education research and a course
related to this research will be developed as part of the educational
integration plan. Ultimately, this work will contribute to reducing gender
inequalities. This research project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating experimental and longitudinal
approaches, the project will focus on 5- to 7-year-old children and provide a
comprehensive investigation of the gender brilliance stereotype. Specifically,
this research will investigate the contextual factors contributing to children’s
endorsement of the stereotype, with a focus on parenting practices and will
explore three psychological mechanisms through which the stereotype shapes
girls’ motivation. The research design includes a series of experiments, and
analyses include correlational approaches and identifying causal links between
environmental sources and gender stereotypes. Young students and their parents
will engage in brief tasks and respond to questionnaires that probe their
underlying assumptions about the role of gender in STEM. In addition, the
researcher will develop a role-model intervention to alleviate the negative
consequences of the stereotype, namely, the early gender imbalance in
participation in STEM activities. This project will advance the state of
knowledge about the early-emerging psychological processes that underpin women’s
underrepresentation in STEM and beyond. It will also bridge research and
education by yielding information for parents, teachers, and museum educators on
how to reduce the gender brilliance stereotype and its negative
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in
part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.