* 2145509
* CAREER: Strengthening US Infrastructure and Communities through Science-Informed Disaster Policy and Engineering Civic Engagement
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Allison Reilly, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 561,467.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project is to fundamentally advance understanding of
the convergent nature of federal disaster policy, local resilience actions, and
risk in the built environment for researchers, decision-makers, and future
practitioners. The work will focus on the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Public Assistance (PA) program, which is the primary source of disaster
relief for state and local governments to restore damaged infrastructure. The
structure of PA could give rise to a moral hazard, whereby state and local
governments defer maintenance, eschew mitigation, and permit development in
risky places, all with a full expectation of receiving aid. On the flip side,
there is anecdotal evidence that navigating this system is daunting and that
communities with fewer resources may receive less aid. Ultimately, knowledge is
poor on how PA influences local infrastructure decisions, infrastructure
quality, and community outcomes. This work will serve as a preliminary
evidentiary basis for debate on policy reform. The impact of the work will be
expanded at multiple levels, including with policymakers through carefully
constructed workshops designed to co-produce knowledge, and with future
practitioners through engineering-civics modules so that engineering students
can recognize their role in creating resilient communities. A civics education
provides the societal context in which engineers will practice and gives them
the impetus to address pressing societal questions related to America’s
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop
an integrated multi-scale framework to serve as an evidentiary basis for debate
on disaster policy reform. Novel aspects of the work include (1) isolating how
local capacity influences the level of PA that is awarded and its repercussions
on distributive equity and local recovery pathways using statistical models; (2)
comprehensively evaluating decision-making processes by local officials in
response to federal disaster policy using utility theory and semi-structured
interviews; (3) integrating this knowledge into flexible simulation models to
conduct ex-ante testing of policy reforms. Model validation and knowledge
sharing will occur during workshops designed to engage policymakers,
researchers, and engineering practitioners. This work will serve as an exemplar
of how integrating engineering, data science, and risk domains can inform
proactive and climate-ready disaster policy and also the importance of educating
future engineers on how federal infrastructure policy influences risk in the
urban landscape. As such, this CAREER project will incorporate an engineering-
civics education across multiple engineering courses, including a new data
science course “Data Analysis for Civic Impact.” The civics program will be
externally evaluated yearly and students will be monitored longitudinally to
understand how civic-learning shapes how engineering students think about their
civic duty and how they can contribute to pressing national infrastructure
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.