* 2145571
* CAREER: Physics-Reinforced Data-Driven Prognostics and Co-Design for Marine Hydrokinetic Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Yufei Tang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 01/31/2027
* USD 634,514.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will fundamentally
advance knowledge related to the monitoring and design of marine and
hydrokinetic (MHK) energy systems, including marine current turbines and wave
energy converters. MHK systems could contribute significantly to a diversified
energy economy, improving the nation’s energy security and reducing reliance on
fossil fuels. However, these systems generate power from puissant resources,
such as strong water currents and/or large waves, which impose physical stresses
on the equipment that are several times greater than wind turbines of similar
power ratings. These constraints lead to stringent design requirements that
increase capital costs. Further, operation and maintenance costs are high
because access to equipment is limited due to their offshore geographical
location and harsh corrosive environments. This research project will provide
the theoretical and computational foundation to enhance MHK systems’
maintainability, survivability, and efficiency. The long-term goal of this
project is to transform the conventional MHK turbine design process from a
sequential approach, where subsystems are designed individually and strong
coupling among them is neglected, generally leading to a suboptimal design, to a
novel co-design framework that simultaneously accounts for control, reliability
and operational expenditure of the overall MHK system with coupled subsystems.
This simultaneous co-design at the earliest stage allows for mutually beneficial
subsystems and could significantly improve the overall system performance. This
project will thus improve energy systems and accelerate progress in the blue
economy. Results will be disseminated in collaboration with the National
Renewable Energy Lab and industry partners, as well as through open-source
tools, accelerating technology transfer. Outcomes will be integrated into new
research-intensive curricula and a new energy resiliency certificate, and
opportunities will be provided to students from groups underrepresented in STEM
to participate in marine renewable energy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project aims to develop efficient and robust prognostics (prediction of
the remaining useful life) and diagnostics (fault detection and identification)
tools of MHK turbines, for the goal of establishing a unified design framework
that accounts for control, reliability, and operational expenditure of MHK
systems. The project will explore a spectrum of tools from domain mechanistic
models to deep learning. The research activities will integrate domain-specific
physics knowledge and multi-source data in a synergistic manner. Specifically,
the project will address the following three research challenges. (1) The data
scarcity challenge: there are not enough data to train an effective
prognostics/diagnostics model for MHK because the industry is new. This project
will develop a novel physics-reinforced knowledge transfer learning approach for
designing efficient models that uses wind big data as the source domain,
constrained by the physics in MHK as the target domain. (2) The data quality and
concept drift challenge: system dynamics may change over time and sensor data
are subject to failures because MHK devices are to be deployed in harsh, remote
areas for long-term operation. This project will develop a novel graph and
reinforcement learning approach for designing robust models using both sensor
network structure information and stream pattern of multi-sensor time series.
(3) The heterogeneous, multi-directional couplings and co-optimization
challenge: turbine geometry, control, reliability, and maintenance strategies
should be designed simultaneously to optimize MHK turbine performance. This
project will build responsive surface models, that represent the relationships
between design parameters and performance index, based on both experimental data
and dynamical simulations. White-box co-optimization tools based on deep neural
decision trees will be developed to optimize the turbine design parameters.
Taken together, results from this research will establish a solid foundation for
robust predictive monitoring and co-design of complex large-scale dynamic
systems, such as onshore and floating offshore wind farms, connected vehicles,
and intelligent structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.