* 2145478
* CAREER: Promoting science motivation and learning through instructional support of curiosity
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jamie Jirout, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/28/2027
* USD 467,450.00

This project will explore how to promote students’ curiosity as a way of
supporting science learning. Students’ interest in science significantly relates
to their science performance, but few list it as their most interesting subject.
One way to promote interest in science and to make learning and teaching more
enjoyable is to support students’ curiosity. In addition to its importance to
motivation and innovation in STEM areas, curiosity has been shown to lead to
learning that more personally meaningful and better remembered. Curiosity can be
momentary, including the recognition that there is something specific to be
learned and the desire to seek that specific information at that particular
time, but it can also be developed as a stable characteristic of comfort with
uncertainty and a general inclination to seek out what is unknown and can be
learned. This research project will study how curiosity develops, the ways that
classroom learning experiences influence curiosity, and how curiosity can be
taught so as to support STEM learning. It will include a series of lab
experiments and classroom-based studies with 2nd grade students. The project
will also involve an extensive education and teaching component in which
undergraduate students will be mentored in research methods and K-12,
university, and museum instructors will be mentored on what, according to
research, are the best teaching practices for inspiring curiosity. The project
is funded as a CAREER award from the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning, with co-funding from the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK12) program,
which supports applied research in STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few
research studies on curiosity and information have been conducted with children
and even fewer have been conducted in real-world school contexts. This research
will entail a series of lab experiments and classroom-based studies exploring
the influence of learning experiences on 2nd grade students’ academic curiosity
and the association between curiosity and engagement, motivation, and learning.
The studies will address the following aims: 1) Understand how to create
curiosity by assessing how learning experiences influence students’ curiosity to
learn; 2) Explore what curious classroom learning looks like by testing the
associations between curiosity and engagement and motivation to learn in
classrooms; and 3) Investigate learning from curiosity by testing whether
learning when curious leads to more robust understanding and transfer. The work
will build on on-going correlational research on curiosity and learning and
attempt to draw causal links though a treatment condition design. The
development and validation of measures of curiosity and of children’s preference
for uncertainty for use in real-world settings promises to be of benefit to
other researchers in the field. In addition, the project will involve an
assessment of the alignment of findings about how to foster curiosity with
university-level teaching practices, including studies of long-term impacts of
curiosity in college students. The educational integration will be done in
partnership with the university’s Center for Teaching Excellence, a local
children’s museum, educators across domains, and student researchers. What is
learned from this research can help to identify ways of sparking students’
momentary curiosity during instruction and ways of creating a classroom climate
that supports more stable curiosity to develop learners who continue to seek out
new things to learn across STEM subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.