* 2145502
* CAREER: Quantifying the Sea Salt Aerosol Size Distribution in the Coastal Atmosphere: The Role of Wind and Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Alison Nugent, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2027
* USD 157,893.00

This study will investigate the role of wind, waves, and other atmospheric and
oceanic properties that influence the production of sea salt aerosol in coastal
environments of three Pacific islands. Sea salt aerosol are natural particles
suspended in the atmosphere, formed at the ocean surface from breaking waves and
bursting bubbles. Despite their small size, they are important in the marine
atmosphere as they directly and indirectly impact phenomena including solar
radiation and cloud formation. However, due to scientists’ incomplete
understanding of the sizes and number of particles produced by breaking waves,
especially in coastal regions, it is difficult to assess their impacts. This
study will use low-cost, 3D-printed instrumentation both for sampling sea salt
aerosol, and for observing weather on multiple Pacific islands. Enhanced
estimation of the amount of sea salt in the atmosphere and additional real time
weather information will improve weather and climate predictions worldwide.
Also, using high-quality, low-cost, hand-made instrumentation allows for this
work to be accessible and engaging for students in a unique way, highlighting
the role of curiosity, problem solving, and hands-on methodology from start to
finish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to investigate the role of
the coastal environment in determining the size distribution of sea salt aerosol
particles (SSA) measured in-situ within the coastal marine boundary layer. SSAs
are especially important due to their role in direct and indirect radiative
effects, including aerosol-cloud interactions, providing one of the largest
uncertainties in future climate scenarios. It is notoriously difficult to
measure large coarse mode SSA (&gt; 3 microns), and as such, few observations of
this size range exist. Using portable, low-cost, 3D-printed and Arduino
controlled instrumentation, this study will regularly measure coarse mode SSA
size distributions under a wide variety of environmental conditions and in
multiple locations in order to provide a consistent, quantifiable, and
climatological understanding of SSA production in tropical coastal environments.
In addition, 3D-Printed Automatic Weather Stations (3D-PAWS) will be built and
installed by undergraduate students in area schools on Oʻahu and training
workshops will be provided on two additional Pacific Islands to jumpstart
cyberinfrastructure and build capacity for atmospheric monitoring on remote
Pacific islands. These efforts will lower barriers and create opportunities by
providing the foundation for learning and implementing applicable
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.