* 2145551
* CAREER DBER: The Role of Internal Attention in Undergraduate Biology Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Ido Davidesco, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2026
* USD 431,705.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Attention is dynamic and tends to fluctuate between
external and internal states, and thus focusing attention on an instructor in
undergraduate science courses for a long period of time is extremely taxing.
While external attention, the selection and modulation of sensory information
(e.g., focusing on an instructor’s voice while ignoring background noise), has
been studied extensively, very little is known about the functional significance
of internal attention, the selection and modulation of internally generated
thoughts (e.g., quietly thinking about a prompt while ignoring distracting
thoughts). Some researchers and practitioners have suggested that “thinking”
periods can promote the development of student ideas, while others argue that
internally-generated thoughts are primarily off-task and lead to poor learning.
The current CAREER project at the University of Connecticut will attempt to
reconcile these competing claims by exploring how opportunities to focus
attention internally during a biology lecture can support or jeopardize student
learning. Further, since it is currently unknown how often students switch
between internal and external states of attention and how long these states
last, this project will manipulate the frequency and duration of “thinking”
periods during a lecture and examine the impact on students’ conceptual
understanding of core biology concepts. Whereas most prior research on student
attention relies on self-reports, this project will explore and validate neural
indicators of attention, measured with electroencephalography (EEG), which can
be collected continuously without interfering with naturally occurring learning
activities. Finally, the project will explore an innovative method of engaging
undergraduate biology students as study participants as well as investigators of
their own attentional states and associated brain activity. Taken together, this
project will propel research both in the cognitive sciences and in discipline-
based education research and inform the design of learning experiences in
undergraduate science education that leverage attention fluctuations. The
project is funded as a CAREER award from the EHR Core Research (ECR) program,
which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning, with co-funding from the Perception, Action, Cognition (PAC) program
in SBE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about internal attention and how
it can support or hinder student learning. Some Discipline-Based Education
Researchers (DBER) and practitioners have proposed that providing students with
opportunities to focus their attention internally during a lecture (such as the
first step in the “think-pair-share” classroom activity) can promote student
learning, but the results of cognitive science research on the topic has been
inconclusive. Some studies link internally-generated thoughts to poor learning,
whereas other studies have linked it to increased creativity, problem solving,
and goal setting. The current project will attempt to reconcile this divide in
the literature by: (1) investigating how internal attention (“thinking”) periods
during a biology lecture can promote or hinder student learning by manipulating
the frequency and duration of these periods as well as the guidance provided to
students; (2) identifying neural signatures of attention fluctuations during
biology learning using EEG (more specifically, EEG spectral power and brain-to-
brain synchrony across students at different frequency bands will be extracted
and compared between periods of internal and external attention); and (3)
developing Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CURE) in which
biology students will investigate their own attention states and associated
brain activity with low-cost, portable EEG technology. By investigating student
attention using ecologically-valid biology materials and EEG technology that can
be later deployed in classrooms, and by developing and disseminating an
innovative CURE, the project will contribute to undergraduate STEM education and
pave the way for future DBER-cognitive science cross-disciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.