* 2145283
* CAREER: Intelligent Manipulation in the Real World via Modularity and Abstraction
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Yuke Zhu, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Cang
* 03/31/2027
* USD 599,995.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to enable
intelligent robots to see, think, and act in real-world tasks. Recent years have
witnessed great strides in deep learning for robotics. Yet, state-of-the-art
manipulation algorithms still fall short of generalization and robustness for
widespread deployment. It poses a major obstacle to real-world applications from
industrial automation to general-purpose household robots. This research will
accelerate the deployment of adept and reliable robots from research settings to
real-world environments. It will make fundamental contributions to
transformative robotics technologies in practical applications, including
manufacturing, healthcare, and home assistance. As part of the project, the
education plan will integrate this research into undergraduate and graduate
education through course development and research mentorship. The outreach
activities will include an open-source software initiative and K-12 educational
programs for high school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this project is to build new algorithms and tools for intelligent robot
manipulation in the real world. The crux of this research is a suite of
algorithms that build effective abstractions and harness these abstractions to
synthesize sophisticated behaviors. Concretely, the research has three
intimately connected research themes: 1) developing perceptual abstraction with
object-centric representations, 2) building motor abstraction with sensorimotor
skills, and 3) modeling complex manipulation tasks with these abstractions. The
algorithms will be rigorously evaluated at the module and system levels and
deployed on the physical robot hardware to perform a spectrum of household
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.