* 2145774
* CAREER: Mitigating Flaky Tests
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* August Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 225,474.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Softwareâ€™s increasing impact on
daily life means there is a need high quality, correct software. The most common
approach to check for software correctness is through software testing. The
implicit assumption is that a failing test signals the presence of a bug.
However, this fundamental assumption is invalidated by the presence of flaky
tests, which are tests that nondeterministically pass or fail when run on the
same code. Intuitively, there is a nondeterministic component in the code under
test or environment that is expected or even desired (and therefore not a true
bug in the software), but a developer may have written a flaky test that does
not take this nondeterminism into account, resulting in the test to sometimes
pass and sometimes fail. When there are flaky tests in the test suite, a
developer can no longer trust their test results. If the test failures no longer
guarantee the presence of a true bug, developers may then choose to ignore all
test outcomes instead of investigating further. At this point, testing become
effectively useless, and developers risk critical bugs slipping into the
released software. Flaky tests are a common problem faced by developers in
industry and the open-source community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to mitigate the negative effects of flaky tests. To accomplish this
goal, this project will (1) develop techniques to more efficiently detect flaky
tests by leveraging code evolution, (2) develop specialized testing environments
that can reduce flaky test failures without needing to modify code under test,
and (3) enhance software engineering techniques that rely on testing to become
flaky-test aware so as to not be misled by unreliable test failures. Beyond
traditional flaky tests, this project will also (4) investigate and develop
techniques to detect and repair tests that are flaky with respect to
nonfunctional properties, such as execution time. Finally, given the parallels
between flaky tests and difficulties in computational reproducibility, this
project will also (5) develop techniques to increase the reproducibility of
computational research results based on insights from the work on flaky
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.