* 2145663
* CAREER: Heavy Noble Gases in the Azores Archipelago
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Rita Parai, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2027
* USD 415,150.00

The terrestrial atmosphere and ocean are unique among Solar System bodies. The
heavy noble gases (neon, argon, krypton and xenon) trace where volatiles
elements and compounds like carbon, nitrogen and water originated and how their
budgets have been distributed between the deep Earth and surface reservoirs over
time. Measurements of heavy noble gases in volcanic samples from localities
influenced by mantle plumes have yielded new insights into volatile origins and
transport, but precise data have come from unusual samples, rather than typical
subaerially-erupted ocean island basalts. This integrated research and
educational work will harness new technical capabilities to measure heavy noble
gases in subaerially-erupted ocean island basalts from the Azores archipelago;
this will shed light on how the mantle plume sampled at the Azores acquired and
lost volatiles over Earth history and advance the field towards a better
understanding of mantle plume volatile signatures. A modern curriculum that
presents different isotope systems used to study the geochemistry of the mantle
within a uniform framework will be developed and disseminated to broaden the
pool of undergraduates who pursue advanced study of the geochemistry of the deep
Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heavy noble gases (neon, argon, krypton and
xenon) provide unique and powerful insights into volatile accretion, early
mantle differentiation, and volatile transport between the interior and surface
reservoirs. However, heavy noble gases are difficult to measure in most ocean
island basalts due to sample degassing and atmospheric contamination. New
analytical techniques have enabled the measurement of heavy noble gas
compositions resolved from the atmospheric composition in olivines from ocean
islands. This project will sample well-studied sites in the Azores archipelago
to obtain large quantities of fresh material for high-precision analysis of
helium, neon, argon, krypton and xenon abundances and isotopic ratios. New data
will be used to probe mantle volatile origins, test for heterogeneous signatures
of volatile loss among mantle plumes, and investigate the efficiency of
atmospheric volatile transport into the mantle in the deep past. This project
will develop and test a new introductory curriculum for mantle radiogenic
isotope geochemistry including noble gases, presented within a unifying
framework. Work to disseminate the curriculum to teachers through a workshop and
online portals and facilitate its integration into courses will increase and
broaden the pool of undergraduates who pursue advanced study of mantle
geochemistry, including the noble gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.