* 2145367
* CAREER: Building Reliable Distributed Systems with Refinement Types
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Lindsey Kuper, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2027
* USD 232,742.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's most important computer
systems are distributed systems: those that consist of multiple machines that
communicate by sending messages over a network, and where individual machines or
network connections may fail independently. Programming such systems is
notoriously difficult and error-prone due to messages being reordered or delayed
and the possibility of machines and network connections failing. Widely-used
protocols are meant to ensure, for instance, a given message delivery order or a
given data consistency policy, but machine-checked proofs ensuring the
correctness of executable implementations of these protocols are rare. The goal
of this project is to mechanically verify real, executable implementations of
distributed systems, using powerful tools built into a general-purpose
programming language. The project's novelties are in its focus on immediately
executable implementations, and in its modular verification approach that
separates lower-level message delivery concerns from higher-level application
semantics. The project's impacts will be in improving the overall
trustworthiness and reliability of distributed software systems. The project
further aims to create approachable entry points to research, and to develop
students' scientific communication skills, by integrating the creation of zines
and videos about distributed systems verification into the investigator and
project team's teaching and research practices, and making the resulting
materials freely available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach
to language-level distributed systems verification centers around refinement
types: data types that let programmers specify logical predicates that restrict
the set of values described by a type, and that can be checked at compile time
by an SMT solver. The project uses Liquid Haskell, which extends the Haskell
programming language with support for refinement types, and which can further be
used for extrinsic verification, that is, defining functions to state and prove
theorems. The investigator and team will use Liquid Haskell to develop
mechanically verified, modular libraries for implementing distributed systems. A
novel verified message delivery library will form the foundation for additional
verified components, such as libraries providing replicated data types and
distributed data stores. Furthermore, the project investigates combining the
strengths of Liquid Haskell with those of interactive proof assistants such as
Agda. These investigations culminate in a comprehensive survey of such hybrid
automated/interactive verification tools, and provide a holistic scientific
understanding of the design space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.