* 2145004
* Understanding Regulators of Collagen Crosslinking Enzymes for Tendon Formation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Nathan Schiele, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 04/30/2025
* USD 402,341.00

Tendons act as a mechanical connection from muscle to bone. Understanding how
tendons develop mechanical function is important because tendon injuries are
common, treatment options are limited, and damaged tendons rarely regain their
full strength. Collagen is a major contributor to tendon strength. However, much
is unknown about the conditions that influence collagen formation during normal
tendon development. For example, several types of enzymes crosslink and
stabilize collagen in tendons, but how cells coordinate the production of these
collagen crosslinking enzymes during tendon development is unknown. This project
addresses this knowledge gap by exploring the signals that control enzyme
production by cells. This research will generate new knowledge on how collagen
crosslinking is regulated. Findings from this research will contribute to a
greater understanding of the mechanisms of tendon formation and may lead to
advanced therapies to treat the altered mechanical function and disability found
with tendon injuries. Integral to the project are activities to improve
retention in STEM and the diversity of graduates in engineering. The project
creates hands-on research experiences and the writing exercises for students
enrolled in a multidisciplinary engineering course. It also funds undergraduates
to conduct faculty-mentored research, develop and submit NSF graduate research
fellowship applications, and present their research at scientific conferences.
Finally, the project includes K-12 outreach activities and laboratory
tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this research is to define
the mechanisms that control collagen crosslinking enzyme production by cells.
Adult stem cells and tendon cells isolated from developing rat tendons
associated with high forces, the Achilles tendon, and low forces, the tail
tendon, will be evaluated in culture as model systems to determine if these cell
populations have unique control mechanisms. To test mechanically responsive
pathways that regulate collagen crosslinking enzyme production, cells will be
exposed to a range of mechanical stimuli using a bioreactor and treated with
targeted cell signaling pathway inhibitors. The role of biological signaling in
enzyme production will be evaluated using different biochemical growth factors
that are known to impact tendon growth and injury, while conducting cell
signaling pathway inhibition and analysis. Research outcomes will advance
knowledge of the mechanisms that regulate collagen crosslinking enzyme
production by tendon and stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is
jointly funded by Biomechanics &amp; Mechanobiology (BMMB) Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.