* 2145797
* CAREER: Rational Design of Ferroelectric Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Rohan Mishra, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2027
* USD 225,858.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, computational,
and experimental research integrated with education to accelerate the discovery
of a rare class of semiconductors and advance the understanding of their
physical properties. Semiconductors, such as silicon, have conductivity between
that of insulators and metals and are essential components of electronic devices
used for information processing, solar cells, and light-emitting diodes. Typical
electronic devices include one or more interfaces between alternating layers of
the same semiconductor material to which either additional positively or
negatively charged impurities have been added. These interfaces often reduce the
efficiency of the electronic devices. This project aims to develop a class of
semiconductors that can operate without the need for creating such interfaces.
Such semiconductors, by virtue of their atomic structure, have a built-in
electric field that can help move charges across them. Moreover, the direction
of the flow of charges within such semiconductors can be switched by an external
electric field. By eliminating the interfaces, this class of semiconductors is
expected to enable the realization of significantly more effective and efficient
devices with applications in energy generation and storage, information storage
and processing, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach
activities of this project involve using Augmented Reality (AR) to vividly and
clearly illustrate complex material structures and dynamical processes at the
atomic level. These activities will be implemented as modules in undergraduate
and graduate curriculum to jump-start studentsâ€™ understanding of complex
material structures and enhance retention of structure-property correlations. AR
datasets will be disseminated through an online repository to enable widespread
use at other institutions, energizing students about entering the field of
materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, computational and
experimental research integrated with education to accelerate the development of
ferroelectric semiconductors, a rare class of electronic materials that combine
the properties of both semiconductors and ferroelectrics in a single material.
The research will employ a combination of first-principles density-functional-
theory calculations, group-theoretical methods, and materials informatics to
predict new, stable, ferroelectric semiconductors with a wide range of
properties that are inaccessible in either of the individual classes of
materials. Those ferroelectric semiconductors that are predicted to have the
most promising set of properties will be synthesized and their properties
characterized through collaborations. Subsequently, the role of microstructure
and composition on the functional properties will be evaluated using a
combination of electron microscopy and density functional theory calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education goal of this project is to engage, excite,
and educate students about understanding and predicting properties of materials
by knowing their atomic structure. This objective will be achieved through the
development of augmented-reality (AR)-based atomic models of various material
structures and dynamical processes, and their dissemination as modules to
efficiently explain structure-property correlations. These modules will be
implemented in various Materials Science courses at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and will be made available online for use at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.