* 2145105
* CAREER Exploring the Role of STEM Faculty Beliefs &amp; Classroom Culture on Undergraduate Minoritized Students Experiences Achievement and Persistence in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Afiya Fredericks, University of the District of Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 03/31/2027
* USD 588,141.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project seeks to generate new knowledge about the
approaches and strategies of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) professors at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
how they successfully cultivate growth mindset classroom cultures, as
experienced by their students, to create more equitable learning environments
for minoritized students. Negative stereotypes about who can and cannot succeed
in STEM adversely affect progress toward the U.S. goal of developing a high
quality, diverse STEM workforce. STEM interest and persistence amongst
minoritized students (e.g., Black, Latinx, Native American), in particular, are
alarmingly lower when students encounter negative stereotypes and inequitable
educational environments. Higher education faculty have the power and autonomy
to directly influence STEM learning environments and bring about the changes
necessary to support students’ participation and persistence in STEM fields, but
little is known about how professors’ beliefs are communicated and how they can
cultivate a growth mindset classroom culture. Furthermore, there is a need for
exploration of how Black students experience mindsets in STEM classrooms where
they are not the racial minority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growth mindset is belief
in the malleability of intelligence and abilities. This CAREER inquiry uses a
sequential explanatory mixed-methods approach to examine the relationships
between STEM faculty beliefs, classroom culture, and the experiences,
achievement, and persistence of Black students at HBCUs. The project studies
HBCU professors of STEM introductory courses and their students to investigate
beliefs and pedagogical practices, perceptions of classroom culture, and STEM
engagement, persistence, and achievement. Classroom observations will enable
investigation of the presence of mindset messages and climate. This work
integrates research and education to generate new knowledge and explanations
about how to cultivate growth mindset classroom cultures and the associated
impact on minoritized students in STEM. Findings will inform the development of
a workshop for STEM faculty, the creation and implementation of a graduate
colloquium to support and prepare future STEM faculty and the development of
course modules, case studies and presentations for broad impact. This project is
funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP), which is committed to enhancing the quality of undergraduate
STEM education and research at Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) in order to broaden participation in the nation's STEM workforce and in
part by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. This award is funded in
whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.