* 2145925
* CAREER: Linking systemic stem cell activation to vertebrate limb regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Jessica Whited, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2026
* USD 712,400.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salamanders can completely
regenerate their legs following amputation throughout life. How they regenerate
is still mysterious despite centuries of research. Humans and other mammals have
very limited natural limb regeneration abilities, restricted to just the very
tips of the fingers and toes. Meanwhile, some invertebrates, like planarians,
can regrow almost every body part. The huge variation in regenerative ability is
also not well understood. This project aims to fill in missing information about
how salamanders regenerate limbs. It will also address how similar these
processes in salamanders are to regenerative processes in other super-
regenerators and to injury responses in mammals. A systemic response to
amputation was recently discovered in axolotl salamanders in which some cells
throughout the body are activated to make new cells. The identity and function
of these cells will be addressed. Recent data also indicates the nervous system
transmits signals that distant cells use to sense an amputation. This project
will test several molecules detected in nerves to determine if they are required
for the body-wide injury response. It will also address the role of molecules
that travel in the blood in transmitting amputation injury signals in axolotls.
Finally, the project will examine molecules important for body-wide injury
responses in planarians and mice in the axolotl context. Together, these
experiments will build understanding of how systemic responses are linked to
local regeneration of a body part. They will also fill in gaps in knowledge
about evolution of regenerative processes, and they will inform future
regenerative medicine approaches. This project will also train many
undergraduate students in a new course and through a laboratory exchange
program. Finally, it will reach out to the public with a weekly web documentary
that interviews scientists from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the recent application of a variety of molecular genetic tools in axolotl,
amputation responses and subsequent limb regeneration can finally be understood
at a mechanistic level. This project seeks to define the connections between
systemic progenitor cell activation, defined as cell-cycle re-entry, and limb
regeneration in axolotl. The fate and identity of systemically-activated cells
will be investigated using integrative retroviruses in vivo as well as
transgenic axolotls and single-cell RNA-seq. The specific roles of the nervous
and circulatory systems in systemic activation will also be examined
experimentally, using both gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches, and
building on RNA-seq data from peripheral nerves and responding tissues as well
as plasma proteomics. The project will also test for possible conserved roles of
previously identified factors in injury responses in both planarians and mice,
such as EGR1, Wnts, and HGF, in the axolotl system. Together, these experiments
will inform a developing model in which systemic injury responses may represent
ancestral processes that have been differentially elaborated upon at the local
injury site during evolutionary time, manifesting in a large range of
regenerative outcomes in extant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.