* 2145421
* CAREER: Research in Strong-Field Gravity and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Vasileios Paschalidis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2027
* USD 256,526.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). The project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission, by promoting the progress of science, and laying foundations that will
help advance the national prosperity and welfare; In particular, the award will
enable research on compact binary systems in general relativity and modified
gravity by combining theory and multi-messenger observations with gravitational
waves. The work will advance our understanding of nuclear physics at densities
and temperatures that arise in the deep interiors of colliding neutron stars,
which cannot be probed by experiments on Earth. New tools will be developed for
understanding gravity through a synergy of gravitational wave observations by
LIGO, and the anticipated electromagnetic signals that will be detected by
ground and space-based telescopes observing from the radio to the hard gamma-ray
bands. The group will develop new codes for modeling binary neutron stars and
binary black hole-neutron stars with the aid of supercomputers. Such theoretical
work is crucial for the successful interpretation of and the extraction of
fundamental physics from existing and future observations of compact binary
systems. The award will support the training, education and further career
development of students in STEM fields, including minorities and women. The
award will enable the development of the Computation and Mathematics Program for
incoming Arizona Science Students (COMPASS) initiative, which will bridge and
smooth the high school-to-college transition for students, and facilitate the
success and retention of underrepresented minorities in Physics, Astronomy and
other scientific fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific projects have a two-
fold goal: a) advance our understanding of strong field, relativistic gravity,
nuclear physics and theoretical astrophysics; b) facilitate the detection and
physical interpretation of gravitational waves and their possible
electromagnetic counterparts. A substantial part of the effort will focus on the
investigation of the inspiral and merger of compact binaries (binary neutron
stars, binary black hole-neutron stars) and their gravitational wave and
electromagnetic signatures. Methods will be developed for utilizing these
observable signatures to extract information about fundamental physics, in
particular about the nature of gravity and nuclear physics above the nuclear
saturation density. More specifically, codes that run on supercomputers will be
developed to solve the equations of a scalar-tensor theory of gravity with
future application to binary black hole-neutron stars in order to develop
techniques that test whether there are any scalar-field induced deviations from
Einstein gravity that can be triggered by either charge (dark, electric or
magnetic) or by magnetic fields, and to test the equivalence principle in this
regime for the first time. Using existing codes, methods will be developed for
probing the unknown thermal part of the equation of state at nuclear densities
by using the gravitational wave and electromagnetic signatures from binary
neutron star mergers. The proposed studies are extremely timely in light of the
recent detection of gravitational waves by the LIGO and Virgo collaborations not
only as generated by binary black holes, but also as generated by compact
binaries with at least one neutron star. The project will benefit the
interpretation and detection of gravitational waves and their electromagnetic
counterparts not only by current and upcoming gravitational wave detectors and
telescopes, but also by future ones. The proposed research will be accomplished
via large-scale supercomputer simulations accompanied by analytic
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.