* 2145811
* CAREER: Genomic, cellular, and physiological effects of whole genome duplications on organismal energy production
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Joel Sharbrough, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 545,199.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genetic
underpinnings of how plant cells produce energy represents a central goal in
plant biology, especially in the context of crop improvement efforts. However,
the connection between genes and the energy-related traits those genes encode is
complicated for two primary reasons: (1) energy-related genes are spread across
three separate cellular compartments (the nucleus, the chloroplasts, and the
mitochondria), and (2) all plants have experienced one or more whole genome
duplication events, in which the nuclear genome has been doubled or more, during
their evolutionary history. Indeed, many of our most important crop species have
more than two copies of their nuclear genome inside their cells. How this
“genomic redundancy” affects energy production is largely unknown; however, the
balance between nuclear genome copy number and the mitochondria and chloroplasts
appears to be critical to plant energy production. We will employ and train a
diverse group of early career scientists at New Mexico Tech (Hispanic Serving
Institution), to investigate how plant cells maintain this balance. Much of the
research will take place in the context of Course-based Research Experiences in
which undergraduate and early-stage-graduate students will simultaneously learn
the necessary biological techniques and contribute to the understanding of plant
bioenergetics. We will also engage high school students in the genomics
revolution by sequencing the genomes of creosote and snowflower live-and-in
person at Socorro High School (Socorro, NM) and North Tahoe High School (Tahoe
City, CA) respectively, and one high-school intern will participate in plant
genomics research at NMT each summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whole genome
duplication events (WGDs), in which the nuclear genome is doubled or more as a
result of allopolyploidization or autopolyploidization, are a major force for
plant diversification. Because the cytoplasmic genomes are separately replicated
(and inherited) from the nuclear genome, the stoichiometric balance between the
three genomic compartments (i.e., cytonuclear stoichiometry) is expected to be
perturbed following WGD. Recent work indicates that cytonuclear stoichiometry is
maintained following WGD in both monocots and eudicots, suggesting that gene
dosage balance between the nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes represents an
important component of polyploid lineage formation and evolution. We therefore
hypothesize that cytonuclear stoichiometry is critical for establishing the
cell’s chloroplast and mitochondrial content, such that variation in cytonuclear
stoichiometry leads to variation in photosynthetic and respiratory performance
and that the genomic architecture of cytonuclear stoichiometry is responsive to
changes in nuclear genome size and content. We will test these hypotheses first
in diploid, polyploid, and aneuploid contexts by quantifying and measuring
organelles, evaluating photosynthetic performance, and comparing nuclear vs.
cytoplasmic transcript pools of single cells. We will also perform association
tests in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome and confirm those associations with
molecular knockouts to disentangle the complex genomic architecture underlying
cytonuclear stoichiometry. The diverse coalition of researchers employed as part
of this research will be instrumental in setting the stage for future applied
efforts aimed at improving metabolic function in polyploid crops, both by
addressing knowledge gaps and by adding to the human infrastructure necessary
for 21st century agricultural improvement efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.