* 2145877
* CAREER: Understanding the Immunometabolism-Epigenetic Crosstalk in Dendritic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Abhinav Acharya, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2027
* USD 409,203.00

Immune cells, which protect our body from diseases and disorders, need energy to
function. Energy pathways can be manipulated by delivery of metabolites
(substances involved in metabolism) which can act to modify immune cell function
and metabolism. This CAREER project will utilize new synthesis techniques to
generate nanoparticles of metabolites, which will then deliver these metabolites
to specialized immune cells called dendritic cells, which are central to the
initiation of primary immune responses. The work will advance understanding of
energy metabolite-mediated changes in immune cells which can then be leveraged
to generate robust immune responses against a variety of diseases including
infections, cancer and inflammatory diseases. Additionally, under this project,
a computer game will be designed to educate the player on various aspects of
metabolism. This project will also engage undergraduate and graduate students
and will highlight the importance of biomaterials, metabolism and immune system
to the surrounding public community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy metabolism is a
key player in all known diseases and disorders, (e.g. cancer and autoimmune
diseases); however, there is a poor understanding of energy metabolite-mediated
changes in immune cells at the epigenetic level (e.g. transcription factor and
histone glycosylation/succinylation). The investigator’s long-term research goal
is to study how the metabolite-based biomaterials control the function of immune
cells at both epigenetic and functional levels. Towards this goal, the focus of
this CAREER project is to understand the energy metabolite, transcription factor
and functional protein axis in dendritic cells (DCs). The research presents a
method for engineering particles that deliver metabolites to DCs in vitro and in
vivo. This project will make engineering contributions by developing synthetic
routes of metabolite-based nanoparticles that function as both carrier and
cargo. Life science contributions will be made by identifying correlation
between metabolites, transcription factors and epigenetic markers in DCs.
Importantly, this project will determine the epigenetic changes in DCs due to
succinylation/glycosylation of transcription factors and histone. The joint
approach of immunology and engineering will help further develop the field of
energy metabolite-based control of DC function, which has exciting potential for
the discovery of new drug targets and development of therapeutics that treat an
array of immune system-associated diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.