* 2145346
* CAREER: Learning Optimization Algorithms from Data: Interpretability, Reliability, and Scalability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Zhangyang Wang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Efficient and scalable optimization algorithms (a.k.a., optimizers) are the
cornerstone of almost all computational fields. In many practical applications
of optimization, one will repeatedly perform a certain type of optimization
tasks over a specific distribution of data. Learning to optimize (L2O) is an
emerging paradigm that automatically develops an optimization method (optimizer)
by learning from its performance on a set of past optimization tasks. Then on
solving new but similar optimization tasks, the learned optimizer can
demonstrate many promising benefits including faster convergence and/or better
solution quality. As a fast-growing new field, many open challenges remain
concerning both L2O's theoretical underpinnings and its practical applicability.
In particular, the learned optimizers are often hard to interpret, trust, and
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets those research gaps and expands
to mid-term and long-term research directions pertaining to the foundations of
L2O. Specifically, the project proposes a multi-pronged research agenda
including: a novel symbolic representation that makes L2O lightweight and more
interpretable; a Bayesian L2O modeling framework that can quantify optimizer
uncertainty; new customized designs of L2O model architectures and regularizers
that can robustly encode problem-specific priors; and a generic amalgamation
scheme to bridge L2O training to classical optimizers as teachers. Each thrust
addresses a unique aspect of L2O (representation, calibration, model design, and
training strategy). Meanwhile, those thrusts are compatible with each other and
can be applied together. The proposed efforts synergize cutting-edge technical
advances from deep learning, symbolic learning, Bayesian optimization, and meta
learning. Successful outcomes are expected to turn L2O into principled science
as well as a mature tool for real applications. This project has an integrated
plan of result dissemination, education, and outreach. In particular, all new
algorithms resulting from the project will be integrated into the Open-L2O
software package, developed and maintained by the PI's
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.