* 2145853
* CAREER: Engineering next-generation chimeric antigen receptors for cancer immunotherapy using phospho-proteomics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Nicholas Graham, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2027
* USD 458,569.00

The immune system fights cancer as well as infections. Cancer immunotherapy
attempts to harness and bolster this capability. One FDA-approved immunotherapy
involves modifying white blood cells from the patient to recognize and attack
tumor cells. The resulting cells are referred to as CAR-T cells. Understanding
CAR-T activity could enable design of improved cancer immunotherapy. Identifying
the signaling pathways that enhance tumor killing in CAR-T cells is a primary
objective of the project. This research project will integrate a broader
educational plan to educate students, teachers, and the public. Multi-year
outreach to a local high school will provide hands-on experience to a
predominantly Hispanic student population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chimeric
antigen receptors (CARs) are comprised of modular protein domains including
intracellular signaling/co-stimulation domains. CAR activation stimulates
intracellular phosphorylation cascades that promote the cytotoxic functions of T
cells. Phospho-proteomics offers quantitative characterization of protein
phosphorylation. The governing hypothesis is that a rigorous and comprehensive
investigation of CAR signaling using phospho-proteomics will uncover principles
of CAR function. This could enable rational engineering of next-generation CARs.
Using CD19 as a model antigen, this project will attempt to expand knowledge of
CAR signaling and CAR design criteria. The project will pursue the following
scientific objectives: 1) Identify signaling pathways that promote CAR-T cell
cytotoxic function; 2) Define CAR signaling pathways that enable resistance to
exhaustion; and 3) Develop third-generation CARs with improved cytotoxicity and
increased persistence. This research will establish a platform that can be used
for engineering analysis of CAR signaling and will provide a general framework
for CAR design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.