* 2145010
* CAREER: Investigating the Use of Empathy-Building Interventions in Experiential Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Daniel Krutz, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2027
* USD 245,350.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
understanding how to teach students to create inclusive and unbiased software.
The project focuses on the development of empathy-building interventions and the
study of their impact on students. It is hypothesized that empathy-creating
interventions will advance experiential computing education by increasing
student understanding and motivation of computing topics and will result in the
development of more equitable and inclusive software. This project will generate
knowledge regarding the impact of empathy-creating interventions in software
engineering, the most effective methods for creating empathy, and appropriate
methodologies for including empathy-creating interventions in experiential
computing education. The proposed work will be the first known substantial
effort to develop and evaluate empathy-creating interventions in experiential
computing education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives addressed by
the project include: 1) understanding the benefits and impacts of empathy-
creating interventions in experiential computing education, 2) recognizing
appropriate methodologies to include empathy-creating interventions in
experiential computing education, and 3) understand if experiential empathy-
creating interventions can help to reduce bias. This work will example the
effectiveness of two forms of interventions in building empathy: experience- and
expression-based interventions. Experience-based interventions allow the
perceiver to encounter a scenario through the targetâ€™s perspective using either
a hands-on or theoretical activity. Expression-based interventions teach
participants to recognize the internal states of the participant and respond
appropriately. To address the defined research objectives and collect data for
analysis, students will use the created interventions in a diverse range of
classes including both foundational and more advanced computing courses. The
interventions will also be included in non-traditional classroom environments,
such online course offerings and outreach events for high school students.
Outcomes for this project will contribute to the foundational understanding of
experiential education from a theoretical and practical perspective, benefiting
a variety of topics in computing education, including general computing,
accessibility, artificial intelligence, machine learning, autonomy, and human-
computer interaction. This CAREER award is supported by NSF's IUSE:EHR Program
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.