* 2145312
* CAREER: Detailing the mechanism of plasma-mediated oxidative depolymerization of plastics to chemicals by metal-organic frameworks in liquid water at ambient temperature
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Noppadon Sathitsuksanoh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2027
* USD 444,267.00

A central problem in plastic recycling is that current processes yield low-value
products, making plastic recycling economically unattractive. This CAREER
project seeks to improve understanding of a new plasma-based upcycling process
for transforming discarded plastic into valuable products, helping to mitigate
the ever-increasing plastic pollution that negatively impacts the environment
and health of the world’s population. The objectives of this research program
are to analyze the mechanism whereby a plasma (consisting of charged particles)
breaks down plastic in ambient-temperature water in the presence of a catalyst
to produce carboxylates, a group of oxygen-containing organic chemicals that can
readily be used to produce high-value materials. This research will lay the
groundwork for transforming a broad range of discarded plastic into high-value
chemicals, working toward a circular end-of-life approach for dealing with
plastic pollution. The transformation process uses a low-energy plasma generator
that can be powered by renewable electricity from wind and solar sources, making
the process economically viable and reducing its carbon footprint. This research
will be integrated with educational and outreach programs to increase engagement
of underrepresented minorities and women in STEM, and to educate both STEM and
non-STEM majors about chemical processes that can benefit the environment. These
activities will emphasize the importance of plastic upcycling for a healthier
environment and a sustainable society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common plastic for
packing, such as polyethylene, polypropylene, and polystyrene, is inert and
capable of withstanding high temperature. Thus, derivation of useful materials
from waste plastic normally requires energy-intensive measures, such as
pyrolysis, that convert plastic to alkane-like compounds. The objective of this
project is to develop an alternative approach to plastic conversion based on a
catalytic plasma-mediated depolymerization process that operates at ambient
temperature and in liquid water. This process begins with modification of the
waste plastic surface to increase its wettability and to reduce the polymer
backbone C-C bond strength, followed by plasma-mediated depolymerization in the
presence of a metal-organic framework catalyst. The proposed research seeks to
1) measure the effects on plastic depolymerization activity of the type and
extent of surface functionalization with sequence of polar groups, and 2) detail
the mechanisms of plasma-assisted depolymerization and analyze selectivity
towards carboxylate products. The project’s education plan centers on developing
an innovative interdisciplinary undergraduate course, “Giving Life to Discarded
Plastics” designed for STEM and non-STEM majors and incorporating the SODOTO
(See-One-Do-One-Teach-One) method of teaching to build student engagement,
communication, and teamwork skills. In addition to the course, the principal
investigator will institute summer programs that introduce chemistry concepts to
students with diverse backgrounds, emphasizing how chemistry can help address
environmental problems, focusing on the benefits of plastic upcycling, and
helping to inspire interest in STEM careers. The course and summer initiatives
will expand the PI’s on-going efforts to recruit underrepresented minorities,
women, and underprivileged students at the secondary
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.