* 2145493
* CAREER: Securing the AI Stack in Autonomous CPS under Physical-Layer Attacks: A Systems Perspective
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Qi Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2027
* USD 213,234.00

Recent years have witnessed a massive surge in real-world development and
deployment of autonomous cyber-physical systems such as autonomous driving cars
and delivery drones/robots. To achieve high-level autonomy in complex
environments, the Artificial Intelligence (AI) stack plays a central role, a
type of “brain,” which makes them highly security-critical. Prior works have
studied adversarial attacks against AI algorithms used in autonomous cyber-
physical systems, but mostly focus on the AI algorithm-level security properties
in complete or partial isolation of the physical context. As these algorithms
are only components of the entire system, however, it is both more practically
meaningful and effective to study and address their security problems from a
systems perspective, especially when under the more general and fundamental
physical-layer attack model. This project aims to create a suite of systematic
methodologies, solution frameworks, and platforms that can achieve system-level
security analysis and defense designs for the AI component of autonomous cyber-
physical systems under physical-layer attacks. With the growing deployment and
commercialization of autonomous cyber-physical systems in the real world,
success in this should directly benefit the safety of everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two research thrusts to
cover both the attack and defense sides of the proposed system-level security
research. First, to enable system-level security analysis, this project will
develop novel system-to-AI and AI-to-system mapping methodologies, by overcoming
various design challenges such as systematically maintaining physical
realizability and semantic equivalency in physical-layer attack generation, and
effectively accommodating the diversity of real-world system designs and
implementations. Second, to develop system-level defense designs, this project
will systematically identify and leverage novel design opportunities from both
individual system and the operation ecosystem perspectives, including new
classes of physical invariants, novel attack-resilient sensor fusion designs
leveraging system-level properties, and novel designs that leverage other
participants in the operation ecosystem and infrastructure support. This project
will also develop a simulation-based evaluation platform with uniform and
extensible attack and defense development support, which will be used to
facilitate both research and education of autonomous cyber-physical system
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.