* 2145374
* CAREER: Rare Earth Elements Recovery from Nanoporous Ion-Adsorption Clays using Seawater
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Wen Song, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2027
* USD 406,806.00

Rare earth elements (REEs) are required materials in nearly all clean energy
technologies that will enable the decarbonization of energy systems. For
example, dysprosium is a heavy REE that is used to make the permanent magnets
found in wind turbines and electric vehicles. Heavy REEs like dysprosium are the
scarcest and most valuable, and they are produced predominantly from nanoporous
ion-adsorption clay deposits. Current practices for REEs recovery from ion-
adsorption clay deposits lack control over recovery rates and require enormous
volumes of chemical solutions called leachates, which can result in severe
ecological impacts. Environmentally-benign leachates such as seawater are a
promising alternative for recovering REEs directly from ion-adsorption clay
deposits. However, there is limited understanding of how these leachates
interact with the nanoporous clay deposits to fundamentally control REEs
recovery at scale. This project will explore the micro- and nano-scale
mechanisms that control multiphase transport and sorption at nanoconfined water-
air-clay interfaces, and relationships will be developed to inform upscaled,
environmentally-benign REEs recovery from ion-adsorption clay deposits. The
fundamental knowledge gained can also be translated to help understand similar
processes in environmental remediation, battery science, and separations
science. The research integrates education and outreach efforts to promote
early-age exposure to science through the development of an interactive virtual
reality application, where children take exploratory “rides” through a porous
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the multiphase reactive transport phenomena that
control REEs recovery from unsaturated, unconsolidated nanoporous clays using
seawater as environmentally-benign leachate. A suite of novel micro- and
nanofluidic imaging platforms will be developed that enable, for the first time,
operando visualization of in situ fluid-solid interactions within nanoporous
media. Quantitative treatment of micro- and nano-scale pore-level
visualizations, including wetted reaction surfaces as a function of aqueous
chemistry and the enhancement of reactive transport due to nanoscale
electrokinetic phenomena, will be woven into pore-ensemble parameters, such as
relative permeability and effective reaction kinetics, using reduced-order
models to predict and design environmentally-benign and effective in situ
leaching approaches. Optical and electron micrograph sequences of moving water-
air-clay interfaces will be built into an interactive virtual reality world to
engage school children in STEM learning activities. Through sensory play, the
learning modules will build a basic intuitive understanding of the scientific
principles associated with multiphase reactive transport in nanoconfined porous
media. The application will be downloadable onto mobile phones at no cost, and
application development will engage local K-12 classrooms in iterative feedback.
Science teachers at the K-12 level will participate in a week-long professional
development program focused on multiphase flow through porous media to assist in
integrating the educational modules in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.