* 2145704
* CAREER: Integrating Field Experiments, Mathematical Models, and Inclusive Education To Understand Ecological Consequences of Variation in Host-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Arietta Fleming-Davies, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Dudgeon
* 05/31/2027
* USD 490,536.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, both disease-causing
pathogens and their animal hosts exhibit tremendous variation. For example,
hosts vary in their ability to resist disease, their history of disease exposure
and immunity, and their general physical condition, while pathogens vary in
their abilities to infect hosts, persist in the environment, and spread over
long distances. This variation has important consequences for how diseases
spread in populations, and for the evolution of both pathogen and host species.
This project will investigate sources and consequences of variation in a virus
that infects the Gulf fritillary butterfly (Agraulis vanillae). Field and lab
experiments will be used to investigate three main sources of variation:
pathogen genetic variation, host variation, and environmental variation due to
human impacts such as urbanization and a warming climate. This CAREER project
will be strengthened by education efforts to bring new viewpoints into ecology
through support of inclusive quantitative biology research and teaching. Despite
a widely recognized national need for graduates with the quantitative skills
sought by industry, many undergraduate students struggle with quantitative
content and leave science degree programs in unacceptably high numbers. The
educational components of this work are founded in biology education research on
effective strategies for retaining underrepresented students in science,
including individualized mentoring through research experiences, course-based
programs, and building a sense of belonging in science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is well-poised to take advantage of recent advances in
theory and computational tools for studying host and pathogen variation, in
order to understand how genetic and ecological sources of intraspecific
variation affect host-pathogen population dynamics. Working in an insect-
baculovirus system, this research will produce the following outcomes: 1. Use
field and lab experiments to determine how intraspecific variation in pathogen
life history traits affects outcomes of competition between pathogen strains and
long-term population dynamics of hosts and pathogens; 2. Quantify how host-
pathogen interactions are affected by continuous variation in host
susceptibility to infection and key environmental sources of variation; 3.Apply
the above findings to larger scales and long-term population consequences using
mathematical models that incorporate the above sources of variation into
distributions of host and pathogen traits. The integrated educational component
of this CAREER project will produce the following core outcomes: 1. Establish
the foundation for a long-term collaborative program with pairs of University of
San Diego and University of Puerto Rico undergraduates working together on
projects across both sites; 2. Develop a program for sustained undergraduate-
student-led bilingual outreach in our local San Diego community, working with
local partners and schools; 3. Create, pilot, and refine a course-based program
to recruit and support underrepresented students in quantitative undergraduate
biology research at the University of San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.