* 2145394
* CAREER: Rethinking Toolchain Design for Rust
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Linhai Song, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2027
* USD 213,164.00

As a young programing language, Rust features its safety and performance. The
key innovation of Rust is to rule out memory bugs and concurrency bugs through
strict safety checks during compilation, while keeping the runtime performance
of its compiled programs as good as C programs. Rust's popularity is increasing
significantly these years and has already been adopted to build many safety-
critical software systems. Unfortunately, Rust is known to have a steep learning
curve and its safety checks cannot capture all bugs. This project will address
these limitations by improving Rust's programmability and strengthening its
post-compilation testing. The completion of the project will advance the state
of the art in Rust learning and programming and further secure the ecosystem of
Rust. The project team will also use the work to design new courses on software
security and programming languages and to explore novel approaches to teach new
programming languages. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance
Rust's toolchain by answering two research questions. First, Rust's safety
mechanism is unique, and the related grammar and semantics are different from
traditional programming languages. Thus, programmers can easily write code
violating Rust's safety checks and be rejected by the Rust compiler. How can one
identify and resolve the programming difficulties incurred by the safety checks?
Second, Rust leverages LLVM as its backend, and thus many existing dynamic
techniques invented for C/C++ can be applied to Rust programs to capture bugs
missed by the safety checks. How can one improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the existing techniques when reusing them to Rust programs?
Specifically, the project team will (1) identify programming challenges caused
by the safety checks and resolve the challenges using novel visualization
techniques, (2) improve the effectiveness of existing testing input generation
techniques, (3) accelerate existing dynamic bug-detection and failure-diagnosis
techniques, and (4) build automated bug-fixing techniques for bugs detected by
the safety checks and dynamic bug-detection
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.