* 2146714
* RUI: Complex control in C. elegans using de novo designed protein switches
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Walter Novak, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2025
* USD 466,738.00

A fundamental goal in synthetic biology is to control cellular process via the
targeted degradation of important regulatory proteins. The aim of this project
is to develop and test a specific and tunable system for protein degradation in
a model eukaryotic organism. This project is viewed as an important step towards
the application of this tool in more complex biological systems and ultimately
towards its application in biomedical research and biotechnology. This project
will engage a diverse group of undergraduate student researchers in
interdisciplinary research during the academic year and summer, improving their
creative problem-solving skills, independent thinking, and ability to
communicate with both scientific audiences and the general public. Portions of
this research will be integrated into the Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry
courses at Wabash College, engaging a large number of students in novel
scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods of controlling
essential and pleiotropic proteins in C. elegans suffer from limitations,
including incomplete penetrance, false negatives, and the inability to
differentially control multiple genes with the same system simultaneously. The
project team will pioneer the Latching Orthogonal Cage/Key pRoteins (LOCKR)
method of protein control in C. elegans. LOCKR encompasses a de novo designed
protein “Switch” capable of caging a linear bioactive motif and an inducible
peptide “Key.” The peptide Key unlocks the caged motif in the Switch, eliciting
its bioactive function. The LOCKR system’s de novo origins allow the design of
multiple Switches and Keys as orthogonal pairs to control multiple proteins
simultaneously. A nematode-optimized degronLOCKR Switch (NemDegronLOCKR) will
afford C. elegans researchers a robust protein control method with tissue
specificity and the ability to independently control multiple genes at various
time points in development. This project applies computational design, in vitro
biophysical analysis, and in vivo experiments using CRISPR-Cas9 to fuse
NemDegronLOCKR to genes of interest. The results of this study will be broadly
disseminated by the project team through presentations and publications. C.
elegans strains and DNA constructs will be deposited at the Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center and Addgene, respectively. The LOCKR system is highly tunable,
as virtually any linear motif can be caged. The flexibility of the LOCKR system,
and its ability to control signaling pathways and cellular targeting, will
support synthetic biologists seeking to produce novel lifelike systems.
Demonstration of the utility of the LOCKR system in nematodes lays a firm
foundation for its use in other, even more complex
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.