* 2146669
* Effects of multisensory input on numerical representations of diverse-SES preschoolers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kerry Jordan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2025
* USD 354,015.00

Being mathematically competent in today’s society is critical for success. A
child’s early ability to recognize symbols, read numerals, count, and
discriminate quantities all predict later mathematics achievement. Considering
these predictive qualities of early math achievement, it is crucial to identify
ways of enhancing early student numerical understanding. It is also important to
determine which populations may benefit most from early learning enhancement
methods. This project will investigate whether multisensory numerical input
enhances numerical reasoning performance in preschoolers recruited from diverse
socioeconomic status (SES) backgrounds. Upon kindergarten entry, the numerical
performance of preschoolers from lower SES backgrounds is often lower than that
of higher SES background peers. Strong math proficiency at the start of
kindergarten helps lessen future discrepancies in math achievement among low SES
children, so it is crucial to develop ways of aiding low SES preschool children
in performing more effectively on numeracy tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study addresses the following research questions through a series of computer-
based laboratory experiments: Does providing preschool children with
multisensory, compared to unisensory, information about number improve their
abilities to map symbolic to nonsymbolic numerical representations? Does it help
them to perform basic arithmetic computations like addition and subtraction?
Data analyses will also determine whether any such effects are mediated by SES,
investigating whether multisensory information about number differentially
boosts numerical performance for lower SES preschoolers. The experiments will
further reveal whether performance on multisensory nonsymbolic and symbolic
number tasks is correlated. Results will provide important knowledge about early
mathematics learning in typically developing populations from diverse SES
backgrounds. This research will pave the way for understanding the malleability
of numerical thinking prior to formal, school-based learning, with the ultimate
goal of providing more effective numeracy experiences before kindergarten. In
order to build a STEM-competent society, it is important that all children enter
school ready for math achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.