* 2146254
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): From Cybersecurity to Assured Autonomy
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Aviel Rubin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,497,530.00

Assured autonomy is a new field that merges cybersecurity and artificial
intelligence (AI), two important branches of computer science. The challenges
and opportunities of assured autonomy call for curricular changes and new
education paradigms. This CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) renewal
project at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) will expand to include education in
this emerging field with students at JHU completing the Master of Science in
Security Informatics (MSSI) degree program. They will be engaged in seminars,
courses, and research projects in assured autonomy that cover essential topics
of both AI for cybersecurity and security for AI. Upon graduation, they will be
well-prepared to take on the responsibilities and challenges of cybersecurity-
related missions in a broad range of applications. This project will be a
catalyst for new curriculum and research initiatives at JHU’s Information
Security Institute (ISI), Institute for Assured Autonomy (IAA), and Mathematical
Institute for Data Science. Furthermore, Engineering for Professionals programs
in Cybersecurity and AI, the Computer Science Department, and other departments
will also be impacted. Building on a national education model within ISI/IAA,
this project’s dissemination efforts have strong potential to reach a broad
audience. The proposed education activities, including seminars, courses, and
student projects, will facilitate adoption by peer institutions. In addition,
the project’s outreach activities will engage with current historically black
college or university (HBCU) partners to expand their related education and
research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSSI education pedagogy is based on
integrating courses, labs, research projects, and internships stemming from the
various academic cultures of the several schools at JHU. This project seeks to
fully integrate the MSSI program with the initiatives of JHU in areas of AI and
the Internet-of-things (IoT). The integration will be accomplished through the
newly established Institute for Assured Autonomy that focuses on trustworthy AI-
based systems. It will incorporate training in both AI for security and security
of AI into the SFS program through seminars, courses, research projects, and
mentoring from world-class experts from JHU and related institutions. Real-world
project-based learning will enable the continuous creation and updating of
capstone projects integral to students’ programs of study and provide students
with immersive learning experiences. In addition, integrating student research
and learning can quickly align cybersecurity education with the new capacity and
need for technology advancement, and have an impact beyond AI and assured
autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.