* 2146881
* SHF: Small: A New Approach for Hardware Design of High-Precision Discrete Gaussian Sampling
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Aydin Aysu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,780.00

New cryptographic systems can improve the security level and privacy assurance
of everyday applications. These systems, however, often require new building
blocks that did not exist earlier. High-precision sampling from Gaussian
distributions is one such time-consuming and critical building block that has to
be implemented efficiently with customized hardware solutions. The statistical
accuracy of the resulting solutions must be guaranteed to abide by cryptographic
security requirements. Moreover, the developed solutions must be flexible enough
to support multiple current and potential future applications. Existing hardware
designs cannot meet these conditions. This project will address this problem by
a cross-cutting approach on hardware design, algorithms, statistics, and
cryptography. Successful completion of the proposed activity will be a
significant step towards automated solutions for provably-secure sampler
designs. The project will help workforce development in the area of hardware
security in collaboration with several other universities. The results of the
project will be made open-source and will potentially be made available to other
agencies, e.g., NIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, new sampler hardware
designs will be developed to support lattice-based cryptographic systems such as
those in post-quantum cryptography and homomorphic-encryption applications.
Although sampling from uniform distributions has been thoroughly studied in the
context of cryptography and other applications, there are significantly fewer
works on sampling from non-uniform distributions such as the Gaussian
distribution, which is unique to lattice-based cryptosystems. To that end, the
project will first explore novel algorithmic approaches that simplify the
random-search process used in Gaussian-sampling techniques. The project will
then explore the approximation techniques that optimize the search while
minimizing the impact on statistical deviations. Furthermore, the project will
seek full design-automation solutions that can create optimized sampling
hardware for a given set of parameters. The resulting solutions will be mapped
to reconfigurable hardware and benchmarked against earlier proposals to compare
the overheads and savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.