* 2146577
* CAREER: Dynamic nanophotonic spectral and directional control of thermal emission
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Aaswath Pattabhi Raman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 02/28/2027
* USD 424,311.00

Thermal emission, the electromagnetic waves emitted by all objects, is a
ubiquitous feature of our world. Controlling emitted and absorbed thermal
radiation is of paramount importance for a range of energy technologies and the
sources of heat they rely on. Beyond energy technologies, from sensing to
imaging and detection in dark environments, thermal sources serve also serve as
a foundational technology for our ability to perceive the world around us. This
project seeks to enable the dynamic tuning of both the spectrum and
directionality of thermal emission. The research will illuminate new mechanisms
to tune heat flows from sources using a combination of nanophotonic design and
unique material properties over infrared wavelengths. These findings will enable
new, more compact sources and detectors for infrared imaging and sensing, as
well as improved materials platform to control heat flows for energy and heat
transfer applications. The key research aims are closely integrated with
education and outreach activities that seek to engage students from the high-
school through graduate level through online videos and updated courses, as well
as actively engaging community members in heat-vulnerable communities. These
activities will feed back into the core research aims by identifying key
technical capabilities needed as well as opportunities for new applications of
the research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal emission from conventional
materials and devices is typically broad spectrum, isotropic and static in
nature, with the emitted spectrum and intensity controlled by the emitter’s
temperature. Due to these characteristics, dynamically controlling the spectral
and directional characteristics of the emissivity of a thermal source is a
challenging task, but of fundamental importance for infrared imaging and
sensing, as well as heat transfer and energy applications. Typical approaches
today involve using bulk optical elements, including spectral filters along with
mechanical movement to move or re-orient a source, and alter its spectral
characteristics to meet a target functionality. While recent progress has been
made using photonic and metamaterials strategies to alter emissivity
characteristics, dynamic control of both the spectrum and directionality of
emitted thermal radiation remains an open challenge. This project will
demonstrate gradient epsilon near zero-based thermal nanophotonic devices that
can dynamically tune both their spectral and directional emissivity over long-
wave infrared wavelengths. The PI will characterize graded doped semiconductor
films and characterize their optical properties over infrared wavelengths. These
films will then be configured into junction architectures to dynamically tune
spectral and directional emission over large bandwidths and achieve strong
electrical control of emissivity. Finally, the project will also demonstrate
metasurfaces that can dynamically tune spectral, directional and polarization
characteristics of emitted thermal radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.