* 2146443
* CAREER: Enhancing Deep-Learning-based Code Analyses via Human Intelligence
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Wei Yang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2027
* USD 229,891.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the increasing availability
of the millions of programs in open-source repositories, many techniques have
been proposed to leverage deep-learning models to automatically learn patterns
from large code bases to assist various software engineering tasks (e.g.,
security analysis, bug detection). However the proposed deep-learning models
still face many input programs that are beyond a model’s handling capability due
to many reasons (e.g., evolution of the program code). Because of the lack of
understanding about these inputs, many software-engineering applications in
industrial practice still make decisions based on symbolic-reasoning systems
where decision logic and rules are hard-coded by a human. Human intelligence
(e.g., rules summarized by humans) tends to be simplistic and reductionistic,
while deep-learning models can be opaque and overfitted. If one can somehow
combine the best of the two worlds, many existing challenges will disappear.
Therefore, this proposal seeks to make progress on such a combination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this proposal is to design a general
framework that improves deep-learning models’ handling of input programs by
incorporating human intelligence. Specifically, two main issues are faced by
existing deep-learning models in handling code data: (1) lack of understanding
about inherent nature of code data, and (2) lack of domain-specific knowledge of
software-engineering tasks. To address these fundamental limitations, this
project proposes to design a general, user-driven learning-based framework. In
the short term, this project aims to improve the practicality of intelligent
code-analysis techniques and facilitate the adoption of deep learning techniques
in code analysis. In the long run, this project has the potential to
fundamentally transform the learning-based techniques for code analysis in
software-engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.