* 2146274
* CAREER: CAS: Donor-Amplified Catalytic Approaches to Stereocontrolled Biodegradable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Jerome Robinson, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 04/30/2027
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the America Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Jerome Robinson of Brown
University and his team of researchers are investigating new approaches to make
biodegradable plastics (polymers) from inexpensive and abundant materials.
Polymers have enabled critical advances in nearly every aspect of modern life;
however, the majority end up in landfills and waterways and take generations to
degrade in the environment. The development of sustainable substitutes has been
limited by their higher cost and poorer properties compared to current
environmentally persistent synthetic materials, and requires new approaches to
address this challenge. Dr. Robinson’s team is developing innovative catalysts
to be deployed in the construction of biodegradable polymers and to rigorously
control their molecular structure and composition. The proposed research has
significant broader societal impact, as such approaches could access scalable
and affordable next-generation materials with improved properties and
degradation profiles. Dr. Robinson and his team are also developing programs for
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students that are designed to train and
mentor a diverse STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
workforce of the future. This includes the Rhode Island Sustainable Chemistry
Partnerships (RI SCP) program that will create opportunities to directly
integrate chemistry research into Rhode Island public high school experiences.
Additional educational and outreach programs aim to enhance educational equity
for students throughout the region, including improved access to early-stage
research experiences and career professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Jerome Robinson of Brown University and
his team of researchers are developing donor-amplified catalytic approaches to
stereocontrolled biodegradable polymers. Modulation of dynamic exchange
processes between labile exogeneous donors and catalysts can dramatically
enhance performance in asymmetric catalysis and heterogeneous catalysis, yet
such approaches have received limited attention in the synthesis of
biodegradable polymers. Mechanistically driven experimental and theoretical
studies from the Robinson group are expected to advance the fundamental
understanding of how donor effects can be exploited to tune catalyst performance
in stereospecific ring-opening polymerization (ROP). This is expected to enable
stereocontrolled access to biodegradable polymers, including those derived from
monomers that themselves emanate from inexpensive and abundant feedstocks. This
chemistry should lead to scalable and sustainable alternatives to traditional,
high-volume, and environmentally persistent materials. Dr. Robinson’s research
goals are strongly integrated with educational objectives focused on training
and mentoring a diverse STEM workforce. This includes sustainable classroom and
research partnerships with public high schools in Rhode Island, early-stage
research experiences for high school and undergraduate students, and enhanced
student access to career professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.