* 2146969
* Disability Culture and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Mozhdeh Hamraie, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,144.00

Many disability communities have developed remote techniques for participating
in work and social life. These innovative techniques are part of disability
culture and community. Many people believe that technologies merely help
disabled people do the things that nondisabled people do. However, disabled
people also design their own technologies in order to challenge what is
considered normal. “Disability Culture and Technology” aims to address the
social inequalities that disabled people face by documenting the role of
technology in disability communities. The data resulting from this study will be
made free and available to the public. Publications resulting from this data
will also enable policymakers, employers, and decision-makers to make more
informed choices regarding remote participation. This will make employment and
education opportunities more equitable and diverse. Society will also benefit
from a better understanding of disabled peoples’ contributions and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;“Disability Culture and Technology” will ask how
disabled people use and transform remote access technologies to shape society,
both during and before the COVID-19 pandemic. This NSF Scholars Award gathers
oral histories, images, videos, and other forms of documentation to build an
archive of the ways that disabled people use remote access to form community.
This archive will enable researchers to study how disabled people shape
technology in order to survive the pandemic, and more broadly, to change
society. It will inform how science and technology studies scholars understand
issues such as who designs, uses, and transforms technology. The research and
resulting publications will also inform how disability studies scholars
understand the role of technology in connecting disabled people across long
distances and forming communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.