* 2146363
* CAREER: Critically examining chemistry culture to support adoption of multiculturally inclusive practices
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Courtney Ngai, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 03/31/2027
* USD 152,724.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project aims to investigate the experiences of persons
excluded because of ethnicity or race (PEERs) in STEM and guide change efforts
in the culture of chemistry degree programs. Scholarly literature demonstrates
that programs and resources designed to support diversity, inclusion, and equity
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields have not
achieved equity in outcomes for PEERs. The study builds from the theory that
achieving equitable outcomes in STEM will require transformation at the systemic
level, including values, assumptions, and behaviors. Understanding chemistry
culture and its influence on PEERs’ experiences will help to catalyze systemic
transformation around diversity, equity, and inclusion in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using qualitative methods, the research will
solicit PEERs’ experiences with chemistry culture. Implicit values, behaviors,
and assumptions that influence visible behaviors, structures, and systems in the
discipline will be analyzed. Understanding these experiences will contribute to
a generalized understanding of chemistry culture that can be used to inform
change efforts that advance diversity, equity, and inclusion. Counterstories
will also be developed to elevate individualized accounts that challenge
existing systems and structures in chemistry. Education activities include the
development of a STEM graduate course based on research findings. The course
will support graduate students in critical examination of habitual practices
that reproduce inequity, endeavoring to shift existing behaviors and build
capacity for implementing culturally inclusive and contextually relevant
practices. The impacts of this course will be studied over time to enhance
understanding of effective, equity-focused instructional practices. This award
is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).
This project is also funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
In addition, this project is supported by the Racial Equity in STEM Education
program (EHR Racial Equity), which supports projects that advance racial equity
in STEM education and workforce development through research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.