* 2146072
* CAREER: Building interpretable models of neural population activity through view-invariant representation learning and alignment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Eva Dyer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 95,788.00

What happens in the brain when we move our hand to touch a glass of water,
listen to the sound of rustling leaves, or play a game of chess? In most of our
experiences, perception and sensation are orchestrated through the activity of
large-scale circuits of neurons distributed throughout the brain. While new
advances in neural recording have expanded our ability to measure the activity
of large populations of (hundreds or thousands of) neurons, parsing through
neural recordings to "read out" intent or behavior is still an outstanding
challenge. The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop new machine learning
methods for learning robust mappings between neural activity and complex
behavior. With new approaches that can go from the brain to behavior, it will be
possible to better understand neural computation, compare neural activity
between individuals, and create dynamic models that capture the ever-changing
nature of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be organized into
three aims, each of which focuses on development of methods to tackle key
challenges in building a mapping between the brain and behavior. In Aim 1, the
project will develop new methods for learning representations from neural
population activity, with a focus on building invariances through self-
supervised and contrastive learning methods. In Aim 2, the project will focus on
the problem of learning representations jointly across multiple neural
recordings and using this technology to understand common factors and
differences across individuals. In Aim 3, the project will develop approaches to
extract dynamic latent factors that model the shift in representations over
longer time scales and apply them to study the study of healthy aging and
neurodegenerative disease. This project will develop machine learning frameworks
and theory for learning robust representations from neural recordings and
provide new ways to quantify changes in brain activity across individuals, over
time, aging, or disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.