* 2146516
* CAREER: Organelle Networks Orient Cilia and First-Generation College Students for Success
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Domenico Galati, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2027
* USD 362,575.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
investigate the mechanisms that position cilia across the surface of cells.
Cilia are evolutionarily ancient hair-like appendages that are critical for cell
movement and sensation. Understanding how cilia are positioned is important
because the position of cilia affects how both terrestrial and aquatic organisms
acquire nutrients, sense their environment, and reproduce. This research is
based on the hypothesis that networks of interconnected organelles determine
where cilia form, how cilia sense molecules, and how cilia move fluid. This
research will be conducted by a team of primarily undergraduate student
scientists, who will gain experience in cutting-edge fluorescence microscopy,
image analysis, and genetic manipulation of evolutionarily divergent cells. The
scientific data generated through the proposal will be used to create an
interdisciplinary mathematical modeling curriculum for teaching diffusion within
cilia. Beyond teaching and scientific research, a major goal of this project is
to form a longitudinal mentoring program for aspiring first-generation college
students. During year 1 of the project, a cohort of 9th grade students will be
assembled from a local low-income high school that qualifies for federal college
preparation assistance (GEAR UP). Throughout their high school career, this
cohort will engage in cell biology research to understand how water pollution in
a local river impacts cilia movement. Student scientific training will be
complemented with family engagement, enrichment activities and college
application assistance to increase the likelihood that these students enroll in
STEM undergraduate programs at the completion of the project. American Rescue
Plan funding of this project supports this researcher at a critical stage in his
career.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cilia are microtubule-based structures that
project from the surface of cells that span unicellular organisms, such as
Tetrahymena, through multi-cellular organisms, such as humans. The molecular
architecture of cilia is deeply conserved; in most organisms examined, cilia are
composed of 9 radially symmetric doublet microtubules, called an axoneme,
assembled on top of 9 radially symmetric triplet microtubules, called a basal
body. Despite the strong conservation of cilia molecular architecture, the
physical location of cilia relative to the geometry of the cell is not
conserved. This project utilizes evolutionarily divergent cells to test
hypotheses for how membrane-bound organelles adjacent to basal bodies
participate in the positioning, signaling, and bending properties of cilia. The
research will investigate interactions between membrane-bound organelles and
basal bodies in both the unicellular protist Tetrahymena and cell cultures
derived from mice and humans. This comparative approach aims to identify
conserved mechanisms of cilia positioning using dynamic live-cell fluorescence
microscopy, Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) quantified with
Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy (FLIM), ratiometric calcium microscopy,
pharmacology, and genetic perturbations. Overall, the results from this project
will reveal fundamental mechanisms that impact how cells position cilia relative
to cellular geometry. These results have implications for how cilia are
organized to maximize cellular motility in aquatic environments and the
transduction of signals from the extracellular space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.