* 2146272
* Acquisition of Computing Facilities to support Collaborative Geophysics Research at the University of New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Mousumi Roy, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 94,997.00

Research in modern geophysics increasingly requires access to significant
computational resources which are needed to analyze large datasets using
techniques such as InSAR time-series, as well as active and passive seismic
imaging of the subsurface, and finite element modeling of subsurface processes.
These analysis techniques require thousands of CPU-hours and can involve tens to
hundreds of terabytes of data which are beyond the scale that workstations or
small servers can manage. In addition, it is not practical to use cloud
computing due to the need to move and store very large datasets. This award will
significantly expand the capabilities of the University of New Mexico (UNM) in
each of the research areas mentioned above through the acquisition of dedicated
computational resources for storage and analysis of large geophysical datasets.
The award also includes support for development of a Computational Earth
Sciences summer workshop for undergraduates, led by the PIs and graduate
students. By providing access to critical training in programming and high-
performance computing, this workshop will encourage students from under-
represented groups in STEM to continue a career in Earth sciences research and
other computational fields. This project received co-funding from the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the acquisition of a
shared geophysics computing facility with two primary components: (1) a storage
server with 192 TB capacity that will host geophysical datasets and processing
results, and (2) a cluster of 4 dedicated computing nodes with 32 CPUs and 192
GB RAM each, that will run alongside the storage server. These resources will be
hosted at the UNM Center for Advanced Research Computing (CARC), improving the
ability to rapidly prototype code and store datasets larger than currently
supported by existing CARC resources, while enabling access to larger-scale
processing through CARC when needed. Together, these resources will enable us to
quickly and seamlessly conduct large-scale computational projects that are
presently beyond the reach of this institution. This computational resource will
enable development of high-fidelity, data-driven models to investigate issues of
particular concern to New Mexico, including: (1) the occurrence of injection-
induced earthquakes in the Raton Basin, (2) magma storage and inflation of the
Socorro Magma Body and the Valles Caldera, and (3) assessment of the long-term
sustainability of actively exploited aquifers across the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.