* 2146888
* Online Decision-Making and Control During Human-Human Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Semrau, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 387,877.00

Research on human motor behavior has largely focused on how individuals control
their movement. Yet human survival has depended on our ability to interact with
others, both cooperatively and competitively. Understanding how humans
collaborate or compete in motor tasks is highly relevant across many facets of
society, such as medical rehabilitation, teamwork in the military or sport,
robotics, and human-robot interaction. Despite its ubiquity and importance to
daily life, how humans physically interact with one another remains poorly
understood. This project can make important contributions towards the
development of biologically inspired control systems, aligning with the PIs'
long-term goal of developing more effective biologically inspired robot-guided
neurorehabilitation systems that can seamlessly interact with
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators use the theoretical frameworks of
decision sciences and optimal feedback control to explore how multiple
interacting humans use vision and touch to make rapid decisions and coordinate
their actions. Human pairs will be immersed in a state-of-the-art virtual
reality and robotics suite that allows individuals to sense their partnerâ€™s
actions visually and haptically while they perform either a collaborative or
competitive motor task. In addition to healthy participants, the investigators
also consider a stroke population in order to gain causal insight into how the
nervous system weighs visual and haptic feedback when sensory information
becomes sparse due to brain injury. The blend of experimental work and
computational modeling involving both healthy and clinical populations will
allow a better understanding of the mechanisms that underpin emergent
interactive behavior. The investigators also have a strong commitment to
diversity and inclusion and plan include undergraduates and high school students
in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Perception, Action, and Cognition (PAC) Program, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Disabilities and Rehabilitation
Engineering (DARE) Program, and the Mind, Machine and Motor Nexus (M3X)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.