* 2146781
* Understanding the role of activated sludge in oxygen transfer to improve wastewater treatment sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jianmin Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 419,999.00

Wastewater treatment plants play a critical role in environmental protection. In
the United States, municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) process
billions of gallons of wastewater every day to remove suspended solids, organic
matter, and excess nutrients including nitrogen and phosphorus. Aeration is a
critical unit operation in municipal WWTPs as it provides the required oxygen
for the activated sludge process used in aerobic biological wastewater treatment
to remove organic matter and nutrients. However, aeration requires a significant
amount of energy and accounts for 70-80 % of the total energy used in an
activated sludge wastewater treatment process. The overarching goal of this
project is to advance the development of innovative solutions to reduce the
aeration energy required to operate an activated sludge wastewater treatment
process. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator proposes to carry out
an integrated experimental and modeling program to characterize and unravel the
physicochemical and biological processes and parameters that control oxygen
transfer in the mixed liquor of an activated sludge bioreactor. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of new
fundamental knowledge and innovative solutions that could reduce the energy
consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of municipal WWTs. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and educational activities
including the mentoring of two graduate students at the Missouri University of
Science and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In aerobic biological wastewater
treatment, aeration accounts for approximately 50% of the total process energy
consumption. Preliminary research by the Principal Investigator (PI) of this
project has established that the biological and physicochemical properties of
activated sludge have a significant impact on oxygen transfer during aeration.
Building upon the results of this preliminary work, the PI and his research team
propose to carry out an in-depth investigation of the oxygen transfer process in
the mixed liquor of an activated sludge bioreactor including at the gas-liquid,
liquid-solid, and gas-liquid-solid interfaces. The specific objectives of the
research are to: 1) Evaluate the effects of sludge physical properties (e.g.,
morphology, settleability, viscosity, and hydrophobicity) on oxygen transfer at
the gas-liquid interface; 2) Assess the effects of the sludge physical
properties (listed above) and sludge biological parameters (e.g., microorganism
population and concentration of extracellular polymeric substances) on oxygen
transfer at the liquid-microorganism interface; 3) Evaluate the mechanisms of
enhancement of oxygen transfer by microorganisms at the air-liquid interface;
and 4) Develop and validate dimensionless process parameters that could be used
to characterize the intrinsic oxygen transfer property of the mixed liquor of an
activated sludge bioreactor. The successful completion of this project has the
potential for transformative impact through the generation of fundamental
knowledge and process design tools that could be leveraged to reduce the energy
required to aerate and operate an activated sludge wastewater process. To
implement the education and outreach activities of the project, the PI plans to
leverage the Opportunities for Undergraduate Research Experiences program at the
Missouri University of Science and Technology to provide research training
opportunities to two undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.