* 2146968
* CPS: Breakthrough: Analysis, Identification and Mitigation of Delay Performance Bottlenecks of Network Infrastructure in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Liang Cheng, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 160,425.00

Modern societies are witnessing the prevalence of a wide assortment of
distributed cyber-physical systems (CPS) built upon network infrastructure.
International standards for mission-critical CPS applications, such as
industrial process control systems and avionics, require their network
infrastructure to provide deterministic delay performance. However, the problem
of integrating CPS theoretical concepts with real-world network performance
remains largely unexplored. This project addresses this open problem so that
feedback control CPS in network-challenged spaces can be analyzed formally. The
project result can be applied to many other CPS application domains involving
real-time control and adaptation, such as vehicular control and communication
systems, industrial process control, and network-on-chip systems. Broader
impacts include developing publicly-available open-source software for the
research community and educating a wide spectrum of audience, from high-school
and undergraduate students to academic and industry researchers, by offering
seminars and tutorials and organizing a workshop with strategies to maximize the
participation of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is to establish a systematic approach to the design,
characterization, and refinement of network infrastructure in CPS as a
breakthrough result for designing and implementing CPS with time-critical tasks.
Different from existing studies relying on predefined or presumed device/system
specifications, the new approach balances theoretical analyses with empirical
evaluations by exploring network-calculus-based modeling of networking devices
and traffic sources from measurements. This project also focuses on non-
feedforward networks, in contrast to state-of-the-art methods targeting
feedforward networks, and includes investigation of compositional, algebraic,
and optimization-based approaches to delay performance analysis of non-
feedforward networks and research on identification and mitigation of delay
performance bottlenecks in networked CPS. This project will use PLC
(Programmable Logic Controller)-based industrial automation systems for case
studies, not only demonstrating the usage and capabilities of the systematic
approach but also providing reference implementation of related
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.