* 2146511
* CAREER: Cosmic Ray Composition across Five Decades in Energy (50 TeV to 5 EeV) with the   IceCube Neutrino Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Karen Andeen, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 03/31/2027
* USD 337,653.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more than 100 years we have known that
cosmic rays constantly bombard our atmosphere and affect our daily lives on
Earth. Cosmic rays are thought to be produced in the far reaches of the universe
in some of the most violent observed astrophysical processes. Yet key
information regarding the processes of cosmic ray creation, acceleration, and
propagation through the universe is lacking. However, candidate theoretical
models have been developed that make testable predictions about cosmic ray
parameters that are observable at Earth. To test these models, precise and
accurate experimental measurements of the individual elemental spectra of cosmic
rays are needed from a single observatory across a wide range in energy. This
project seeks to advance knowledge of the energy-dependent cosmic ray
composition in an important energy range that will connect direct methods of
observation with indirect methods. Direct methods include experiments that
measure the cosmic ray particles with a relatively high degree of precision.
Indirect methods include experiments that measure the interactions of cosmic ray
particles with either the atmosphere or ice deep below the South Pole. Indirect
methods are more likely to record many more and much higher energy interactions
than direct methods. These higher energy interactions are of continuing
scientific interest to understand the highest energy astrophysical sources of
the cosmic rays. The current understanding of the energy-dependent cosmic ray
composition has large uncertainties that will be reduced when the direct and
indirect methods can be cross calibrated resulting in a significant advance in
the field. The project will also focus on science education associated with
cosmic particles, especially with historically under-represented groups in and
around Milwaukee WI. In addition, the project will help improve intercultural
competence (ICC) within the Principal Investigator's (PI's) university and
within the scientific collaborations involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will utilize three individual detector elements at the South Pole: IceAct (two
recently deployed prototype air Cherenkov detectors), IceTop (near surface
intra-ice optical sensors), and IceCube (deep ice cubic km array of optical
sensors) with a goal to measure the cosmic ray composition over 5 decades of
energy from ~50 TeV to ~5 EeV. Of particular technical note, this research will
allow for event-by-event mass composition of interacting cosmic rays rather than
treating data with a statistical approach. The proposal outlines three
objectives, each leading to publication, divided into subtasks of research
conducted by the Principal Investigator and a newly supported postdoctoral
researcher. The research involves new simulation and the development of new data
analytic tools and techniques. Objective 1 involves improving beyond a
preliminary level the IceAct / IceCube reconstruction, calibration, and analysis
towards an indirect measurement of the cosmic ray composition over the energy
range that connects and allows comparisons with direct measurements by
experiments that detect and precisely measure the cosmic particles. Objective 2
involves improving the PI's previous work on cosmic ray composition at higher
energies using IceTop / IceCube with an increase of precision. Objective 3 is to
determine the cosmic ray composition over the broad energy range using two
methods: Combining the results of Objectives 1 and 2 and a combined global
analysis of IceAct / IceTop / IceCube data and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.