* 2146420
* CAREER: Making Smart Hospital Rooms Useful
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Jason Wiese, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 02/28/2027
* USD 299,636.00

Integrating smart home technology into hospital patient rooms should make
hospitals more efficient, improve patient recovery and rehabilitation, and
enhance the experience of being in the space for patients, their visitors, and
employees. Yet, research on smart homes cannot achieve this vision: it does not
investigate how the technology can support patient recovery, nor does it address
the complex challenges that can arise when multiple people use a smart space as
a workplace and a living space at the same time. Thus, hospital administrators
and designers need guidance on what value this technology can provide in their
hospital. This project explores how the design of smart hospitals can support
(1) patient autonomy and recovery, and (2) the complex, interacting workflows of
hospital employees from physicians to custodial staff. The team of researchers
will study this by examining how patients, their visitors, and hospital
employees currently use hospital rooms that are already equipped with smart home
technology and will use those insights to guide the development of new software
to improve the usefulness of smart patient rooms. For patients and their
families this project will result in rooms that are more comfortable and easier
to use and control; in particular, many patients have physical impairments that
may amplify the value of these technologies. For hospital employees, it will
lead to an improved work environment that better supports them in caring for
patients and completing work tasks. For researchers and designers, this will
lead to a new understanding of smart spaces beyond smart
homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct extensive qualitative
work including observations, interviews, and log data analysis in a user-
centered process to study how the diverse set of stakeholders at this
rehabilitation hospital interact with the technology that is deployed in the
smart patient rooms, how they are affected by that technology, and how the
technology can better support stakeholder needs. This work will also research
how patients with physical impairments interact with smart devices as they
adjust to their changed, and changing, abilities. The team will analyze this
formative work with thematic analysis to develop descriptive models of the
stakeholder roles, types of interactions, and value facilitated by the
technology. Based on these models, the team will develop and evaluate new
software to improve the usefulness of the patient rooms to stakeholders,
including the potential to incorporate automation functions into hospital
patient rooms and opportunities for the technology integrated into the rooms to
better facilitate patient rehabilitation. The work also includes a series of
workshops and research engagement activities to provide both research training
and develop research capacity at the intersection of human-computer interaction,
sensing and artificial intelligence, and
accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.