* 2146156
* CAREER: Towards attack-resilient cyber-physical smart grids: moving target defense for data integrity attack detection, identification and mitigation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Hongyu Wu, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to provide a theoretical foundation and design
guiding principles that will unlock the full potential of moving target defense
(MTD) approaches and significantly enhance the resiliency of cyber-physical
power grids under cyber data attacks. The project will transform existing bulk
transmission system operations that rely on limited cyber-layer security
mechanisms to proactive defense-in-depth approaches in both the cyber and
physical layers using widely-deployed smart devices. The intellectual merits of
the project include developing novel optimization, graph theory, low-rank matrix
theory, and machine learning-based methods for optimal planning and operation of
moving target defense devices, rapid detection, accurate identification, and
robust mitigation of cyber data integrity attacks. The broader impacts of the
project include promoting public awareness and understanding of smart grid
cybersecurity, contributing to power engineering education, and preparing a
diverse learning community, including middle and high school students, with
requisite knowledge and skillsets to tackle future power grid security
challenges. The successful completion of this project will provide power system
operators with new tools to enhance situational awareness and better defend the
power grid against cyber data attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTD is an emerging
concept originally introduced for computer and communication networks. Existing
MTD approaches are limited to the cyber layer of a cyber-physical system.
However, if field devices or internal communication networks are physically
compromised, adverse consequences are trigged within the physical layer.
Therefore, the cyber-layer MTD alone is inadequate for securing real-world power
grids with significant attack surfaces. The goal of this CAREER project is to
develop and validate physical-layer MTD approaches to detect, identify, and
mitigate data integrity attacks by strong adversaries with state-of-the-art
machine learning capabilities. The proposed MTD approaches feature three major
technical innovations: 1) A minimum spanning tree-enabled planning scheme that
maximizes MTD detection effectiveness while considering system economic and
reliability metrics; 2) A novel alternating current optimal power flow
operational framework, constrained by scalable voltage stability approaches, to
ensure the MTD hiddenness and detection performance; and 3) A low-rank matrix
decomposition method assisted by MTD approaches that radically improves the
attack identification speed and measurement recovery
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.