* 2146146
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service:  Preparing an Interdisciplinary Next-Gen Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Gi Yun, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2027
* USD 843,567.00

As cyberspace increases in complexity, it is becoming increasingly important to
develop a cybersecurity workforce ready to address the challenges of this
complex and multi-faceted environment. A skilled cybersecurity workforce is
crucial to developing a secure cyberspace and maintaining the Nation's global
competitiveness, thus ensuring the United States' economic vitality. With
funding from the NSF CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service program this project
at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) aims to educate students with the
critical knowledge and skills needed to develop, operate, administer, maintain,
and defend an increasingly dynamic cyberspace. Towards this end the project will
build on synergistic collaboration among multiple disciplines affiliated with
the UNR Cybersecurity Center. A key project outcome is the development of the
next generation of cybersecurity professionals who can bring an
interdisciplinary approach that integrates attention to technical, political,
legal, and behavioral issues into a practical, secure, and dependable
cyberspace. The project will draw on students from a host of diverse
backgrounds, with particular emphasis on recruiting and retaining groups who are
underrepresented in the cybersecurity workforce such as women, first-
generation/low-income students, and veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing
in scholars from multiple disciplines, this project will explore unique ways to
engage students in interdisciplinary cybersecurity education, to sustain long-
term research and education partnerships, and to motivate students to protect
cyberspace through public service. Students will not only engage in UNR's formal
cybersecurity curriculum, but also participate in research experiences and gain
hands-on skills development through their involvement with the Nevada Cyber
Range, Nevada Cyber Club, cyber competitions, a capstone research project, and
UNR's Office of IT and Cyber Infrastructure team. To expand outreach activities
and lay the foundation for recruiting the next generation of students, SFS
scholars will also be required to participate in middle/high school visits with
the project faculty team, engage with school cyber clubs, and create workshops
for their younger peers. The project will promote the participation of students
who are underrepresented in the cybersecurity workforce by partnering with UNR's
First-Generation Student Services Center, Women into Computer Science and
Engineering (WiCSE) student organization, and the National Center for Women
&amp; Information Technology (NCWIT). Furthermore, this project will focus on
recruiting veterans by partnering with UNR's Veteran Services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or continuing
scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber
Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation,
scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a Federal,
state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration as their
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.