* 2146552
* CAREER: How plant genotype and environmental factors jointly influence the structure of microbial communities and plant health
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Posy Busby, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 182,493.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how host organisms
and their resident microbial communities interact is a central challenge in
biology, with broad implications ranging from agriculture to human health. A
primary question is what factors and mechanisms shape the composition of
microbial communities. A related issue is whether and how the structure of
microbial communities affects the host. This project addresses these two
questions by focusing on how distinct environmental factors, in combination with
host genetic variation, shape the composition and functional influence of
microbial communities. The work will take advantage of an established, highly
accessible plant-fungal symbiosis in Populus, in which leaf endophytes are known
to confer disease protection. A complementary educational program will enrich
and broaden the research through student-led work investigating seasonal
variation in the drivers of endophyte community structure in common gardens and
in greenhouse experiments. Overall, this CAREER project will deepen our
understanding of how environment and genotype affect endophyte communities and
disease protection in plants, while promoting diversity in a STEM field and
contributing to conservation and crop production in the face of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between plants and their associated
microbial communities are known to be sensitive to the environment, but the
underlying drivers of this variation are poorly understood. This CAREER project
tests mechanistic hypotheses for how plant genotypes interact with distinct,
abiotic and biotic components of the environment to give rise to variation in
associated microbial communities. This work will be conducted in the cottonwood
model system (Populus trichocarpa), in which host genetics, leaf fungi, and
distinct environmental factors can be precisely controlled and quantified. The
first objective tests how distinct environmental factors and plant genotype
jointly influence the composition of fungal leaf endophyte communities. The
second objective is to understand how endophyte community structure affects
plants, specifically testing the hypothesis that increasing phylogenetic
diversity in an endophyte community provides the host plant with a higher degree
of disease protection. The third objective connects the prior two objectives by
testing how a particular plant trait (the level of cuticular wax) influences
endophyte community structure, thereby indirectly affecting disease
susceptibility. By elucidating the environmental sensitivity of host control
over beneficial fungi, the results of this CAREER project will inform global
efforts to conserve plant biodiversity and to sustainably grow crops for a
growing human population. The educational components of the project will provide
research opportunities to a diverse group of high school, undergraduate and
graduate students, and a postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.