* 2146691
* EAGER: Embodiment of Human Values Profiles in the Control of Autonomous Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kathryn Johnson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This Mind, Machine, and Motor Nexus (M3X) EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project advances a novel vision for trustworthy interaction
between autonomous vehicles and their human drivers and passengers. Although
autonomous vehicles are being developed to increase human safety, failures with
such vehicles are inevitable, especially when timely handover of control to a
human driver is infeasible due to human fatigue, distraction, or slow reaction
times relative to the computational speed of the autonomous vehicle. This
project seeks to design autonomous vehicle controllers that mimic the crash
behaviors of responsible human drivers in a way that ensures "ethically
graceful" failures - failure modes that are likely to meet human standards of
ethical scrutiny. This project will promote the progress of science and advance
the national health by developing trustworthy controllers for autonomous
vehicles that mimic the real-time driving and crash behaviors of responsible
human drivers. By doing so, the project will advance the state of the art in
autonomous vehicle control while also developing a framework for vehicle
controller design that promises to increase human trust in the autonomous
vehicles of the future. The project also will develop resources to inspire
involvement of underrepresented groups in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this work is to develop a new framework for autonomous vehicle
controller design that will mimic the crash behaviors and decisions of
responsible human drivers and thus exhibit "ethically graceful" failure modes.
Two studies are researched. The first seeks to predict human driving behavior
using surveys capable to identify psychological measures of "benevolent" and
"power" Value Profiles in a large cohort of human subjects. Subjects will also
engage in both virtual and physical simulations of crash scenarios. The goal of
Study 1 is to characterize differences in crash behavior of people expressing
benevolent and power Value Profiles. The second study researches a novel
approach to translating the different Value Profiles into real-time controllers
for the autonomous vehicles. The research l takes a novel approach that is quite
different from existing deontological and consequentialist approaches to the
design of ethical AI systems for AV control. By fitting the parameters of a low-
level, real-time control model to data collected from drivers responding to
crash scenarios in both virtual and physical simulations, the PI team will
capture the moment-by-moment variations in human sensorimotor control that are
more likely to dominate responses during crash scenarios than are high-level
conscious decisions. If successful, this work may endow future autonomous
vehicles with trustworthy controllers with failure modes that are likely to meet
human standards of ethical scrutiny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.