* 2146052
* CAREER: Community Ecology of Bird Migration - Co-Occurring Migrations and Interspecific Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Emily Cohen, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2027
* USD 607,558.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The migratory journeys of wildlife
are shaped in similar ways by the changing seasons, often resulting in many
different species moving together through the same areas. During migration these
co-occurring species may compete for food, share information or prey on one
another. Although these interactions likely influence the success of migration,
they remain poorly understood because researchers have almost always focused on
one species at a time. Thus, prior studies have been mostly blind to the
community of species that travel together. This project will address
interactions among co-migrating bird species to test the notion that a wider
view on animal migration is needed â€“ one that considers migrating animals as
communities engaged in networks of interactions. Through the natural wonder of
multi-species bird migrations, the project will also engage the public in
science through interactions with wildlife and will provide opportunities for
secondary science teachers to do authentic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will take advantage of recent advances in radar ecology and tracking
technology, along with long-term datasets from traditional migration monitoring
stations, to test theory-based predictions about community assembly processes
for nocturnally migrating birds at stopovers, where access to habitat for
refueling has important consequences for migration success. The project will
test the hypothesis that community structure of nocturnally migrating birds at
stopover site is a function of two assembly processes, filtering of migrants
from passage flight and searching and settling among habitats. Drivers of the
filtering process will be assessed by combining community structure metrics from
long-term banding stations with radar-derived measures of migratory passage. The
influence of interspecific interactions during searching and settling on
movement and use of space at stopovers will be measured with fine-scale tracking
of individual birds. The banding and tracking data will also be used to address
the influence of community assembly processes on refueling rates and stopover
duration, costs that could scale-up to shape migratory routes, phenology, and
success. Consistent with calls for the scientific community to expand engagement
with science in ways that support dialogue, shift beliefs, and build trust and
relationships, this project will bring together an all-female team of science
education professionals to conduct an applied evaluative study of public
engagement at bird banding stations. The team will also collaborate with
secondary science teachers to develop distance learning lessons that address
questions about bird migration and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.