* 2146016
* CAREER: Unveiling the Nanohertz GW Discovery Landscape by Broadening Participation In Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Stephen Taylor, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2026
* USD 177,837.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). For almost a century, one of Einsteinâ€™s predictions
from his General Theory of Relativity went undetected- the production of
gravitational waves (GWs). Yet we now live in a world where GW detections by
ground-based instruments are fairly regular. However, these instruments see only
a sliver of the full spectrum of GWs. By contrast, Pulsar Timing Array (PTA)
experiments operate at much lower GW frequencies than ground-based instruments,
and use the precision long-term monitoring of millisecond pulsars in our galaxy
to tease out the subtle imprint of GW-induced timing delays. Recent results from
NANOGrav and other collaborations hint at the era of PTA GW detection looming
tantalizingly close. As PTA datasets grow ever larger in data volume and the
number of monitored pulsars, searches and scientific analyses will become
increasingly difficult. The programs in this award will forge a path to the
next-generation of PTA data analysis, and in so doing break down the walls of
domain expertise to empower other scientific communities and new students to
capitalize on the exciting future of PTA discovery. The PI, funded students, and
collaborators, will develop novel approaches to PTA GW searches that compress
the timing data and lead to speed-ups of several orders of magnitude over
current pipelines. The team will explore when PTAs will be able to characterize
the astrophysical and cosmological landscape of GWs at these frequencies, map
the nanohertz GW sky, and constrain departures of gravity from General
Relativity. The integrated educational aspects of this award will deploy these
new research breakthroughs to improve participation in PTA science of
underrepresented minority students, boost the GW-research footprint of Middle
Tennessee, and leverage the existing Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge Program to advance
nanohertz GW pedagogy. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research component of this
award is split into two key areas of transformative advancement in PTA data
analysis: (i) spectral characterization of a GW background signal to unveil the
dynamics of binary supermassive black-hole systems, and tease out sub-dominant
cosmological backgrounds; and (ii) probing the pattern of pulsar-timing cross-
correlations to map the angular distribution of GW power at nanohertz
frequencies and constrain GW-encoded departures from General Relativity. In both
areas, the PI, students, and collaborators will develop future-proof techniques
that overcome challenges of increasing data volume by compressing the timing
data into sufficient statistics. For spectral characterization this corresponds
to representing the low-frequency behavior of the timing data as Bayesian
periodograms and posterior distributions of Fourier coefficients. For cross-
correlation analyses this corresponds to measurements of pairwise pulsar
correlations as a function of GW frequency. By harnessing the modularity and
speed of these techniques, the team will explore when PTAs will be able to
characterize the dynamics of supermassive binary black-hole systems that are
encoded in the GW strain spectrum. Beyond this, the team will assess the
prospects for component separation of a measured GW background into a dominant
astrophysical signal and a weaker cosmological signal. Likewise, the team will
develop maximum-likelihood statistics that mine the pattern of PTA cross-
correlations to map the nanohertz GW sky at different frequencies, and constrain
the presence of beyond-GR GW polarization signatures. Interwoven with these
research breakthroughs will be an annual REU opportunity to broaden
participation in PTA discoveries, drawing from the wealth of talent in the
Middle Tennessee area. Additionally, the PI will launch a summer institute for
PTA data analysis, out of which will spawn a year-round data club that will
employ the research techniques developed through this award to empower student
learning and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.