* 2146212
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Expanding and Strengthening the National Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Dmitry Ponomarev, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2027
* USD 888,631.00

A key facet of securing the Nation’s cyberinfrastructure is to ensure a skilled
and sustainable cybersecurity workforce. In 2020, over 350,000 cybersecurity
positions remained unfilled in the United States. These unfilled positions
highlight an enormous gap in the Nation’s information infrastructure defense. To
help address this need, Binghamton University’s (BU) CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) project will recruit and train talented students for entry
into the government workforce and long-term success in cybersecurity careers.
The project team will leverage BU's cybersecurity research and education
strengths to advance the Nation’s cyberdefense preparedness. An important goal
of the project is to improve the diversity of the cybersecurity workforce
through targeted recruitment of women, students from minority groups that are
underrepresented in the cybersecurity field, first-generation college students,
and economically disadvantaged students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide scholarships to 24 students over five years and be guided by three
objectives. First is to recruit and train SFS scholars into highly skilled
cybersecurity professionals. Second is to partner with government organizations
for internships and recruitment of SFS scholars. Third is to advance
cybersecurity education through research. Accomplishing these objectives rests
on the wide-ranging cybersecurity curriculum that Binghamton University offers,
from in-depth training in cybersecurity theory and practice to broader training
in information assurance, privacy, risk management, and policy management. SFS
scholars will undergo rigorous training through cybersecurity courses,
personalized academic and research advising, cybersecurity conferences/seminars,
participation in a "Capture the Flag" club and competitions, and community/K-12
outreach activities. Scholars will also be trained in critical skills needed to
succeed in their careers, including ethics, communication, networking, writing,
presentation, critical thinking, leadership, and teamwork. Each implementation
stage of this project will include formative and summative evaluations
coordinated by an external evaluation specialist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program,
which funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in
cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a
superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients
are required to work in cybersecurity for a Federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.