* 2146771
* NSF-DFG Echem: Operando Electronic Structure Determination of Iron and its Time-Dependent Dynamics in FexNi100-x(OH)y Electrooxidation Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Janik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 404,960.00

This project aims to identify the structure of iron within iron-nickel hydroxide
catalyst materials. These materials are highly active electrocatalysts for key
reactions important to next-generation energy conversion and storage, including
water electrolysis to produce hydrogen and battery electrodes. Understanding the
chemistry of the iron species underpins the overall goal of designing and
synthesizing non-precious metal electrocatalysts to support our future energy
economy. These electrocatalyst materials will also likely play a role in other
future electrochemical technologies, including chemical conversion and
upcycling, biomass conversion, water treatment, and resource recovery. As such,
this project, and its pursuit of understanding how iron structure changes in the
electrochemical environment, is critical to support national energy security, as
well as to advance society toward clean energy technologies. Discoveries made
will support a wide range of research activities focused on similar non-precious
metal oxides and hydroxides, advancing not only the science of iron-nickel
hydroxides but of other similar materials and of synchrotron-based spectroscopy
techniques aimed at probing catalyst materials in their operating environments.
This U.S.-German collaboration will also strengthen international scientific
relationships and contribute to the development of a diverse, globally
competitive science and engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research goal of this proposal is to experimentally probe Fe
electronic structure under alkaline electrooxidation conditions by combining
materials expertise with the x-ray spectroscopy instrumentation and expertise.
Collaboratively conducted operando experiments will allow the team to
unequivocally describe electronic state(s) of Fe and to understand the time
dependency and hysteresis of Fe structural changes in FexNi100-x(OH)y
nanocatalysts. The electrocatalytic reaction of focus will be the alkaline
oxygen evolution reaction (OER). This project will further scientific
understanding of the chemical and electronic structure of the active site for
the OER in these catalysts, as well as advance fundamental understanding of Fe
in the operando electrooxidative environment. The project will study a series of
FexNi100-x(OH)y films and subsequently nanoparticle FexNi100-x(OH)y catalysts
with soft x-ray absorption spectroscopy, x-ray emission spectroscopy, and
resonant inelastic x-ray scattering. The project will focus on the iron L-edge
and the oxygen K-edge of selected materials, and will include development of an
operando cell for spectroscopy experiments, as well as detailed electrochemical
analysis and in vacuo characterization of the catalyst
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the “NSF-DFG
Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)"
opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the National Science
Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.