* 2146591
* EAGER: Magnetically Induced Catalysts for Active and Selective CO2 Reduction under Mild Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Olin Mefford, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Catalysis plays an essential role in facilitating fast and energy-efficient
manufacturing of fuels and chemicals from raw feedstocks. Most fuels and
chemicals are still derived from fossil fuel resources. However, significant
research progress has been made in recent years exploring alternative, renewable
and/or sustainable chemical processes, based on electrocatalysis,
photocatalysis, and other electrically powered technologies such as microwave-
and plasma-assisted catalysis. Following this trend, the project explores the
feasibility of magnetically inductive catalysts for carbon dioxide (CO2)
reduction to carbon monoxide (CO) under mild, energy-efficient reaction
conditions. In addition to mitigating carbon emissions - in the form of CO2 from
combustion sources such as power plants - the CO product can be used to
manufacture a wide range of organic chemicals and hydrocarbon fuels via
established downstream processes. The project extends prior catalysis research
related to magnetic inductive heating through a convergent approach integrating
nanoparticle technology developed for biomedical applications with both advanced
experimental and theoretical methods of heterogeneous catalysis research. The
NSF EAGER (EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research) funding mechanism is
ideal for this study aimed at assessing the feasibility of novel technology that
is risky, but potentially transformative in maintaining U.S. leadership in clean
energy technology. Beyond the technical aspects, the project includes
educational and outreach initiatives contributing to the education of K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, with significant emphasis on broadening
participation of individuals from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the inductive magnetic hysteresis caused by
response of ferromagnetic materials to an alternating magnetic field. Since the
heat is generated directly at the catalyst surface, it can be efficiently
delivered to the catalytic species. Because of this, reactor feeds may not need
to be heated, allowing operation at milder conditions than typically employed in
thermal catalysis. While electricity must still be supplied to generate the
magnetic field, the more efficient heat transfer creates an opportunity to
significantly increase catalytic reactor efficiency by designing materials that
are optimized for energy delivery and catalytic performance. The project
integrates simulations and experiments to design, characterize, and evaluate
magnetically inductive nanoparticles for the reverse water gas shift (RWGS)
reaction. The project includes collaboration with Johnson Matthey to assess
translational potential; for example, to facilitate fast light-off for
automotive exhaust catalysts. The project also explores opportunities for
creating a range of magnetite (Fe3O4) nanoparticles doped with other metals to
tune catalyst reactivity and selectivity while maintaining efficient energy
transfer. To that end, the project will include a modeling component that
predicts magnetic properties and their relationship to catalyst performance. In
addition, the alternating magnetic field associated with the inductive heating
creates opportunities for dynamic catalysis. Potential risks associated with the
technology will also be addressed, including catalyst composition and structure
limitations (e.g., magnetic properties as a function of particle size and
composition), temperature limitations (e.g., phase stability under reaction
conditions), and oxidative stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.