* 2146462
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: High-skilled Workforce Development for the Aviation and Aerospace Cybersecurity Domains
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Radu Babiceanu, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,385,922.00

Aviation and aerospace cybersecurity is of critical importance to the Nation. As
a key component of the overall U.S. transportation infrastructure, it protects
people and contributes to American prosperity and leadership. This project
promotes workforce development in this vital sector by building on undergraduate
and graduate cybersecurity programs at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
(ERAU), where both ERAU campuses (Daytona Beach, FL and Prescott, AZ) have a
history of collaborative education and research activities within the aviation
and aerospace cybersecurity domain. Known locally as "Cyber Eagles," the project
will advance the collaboration ecosystem across education programs and research
centers to prepare students for productive cybersecurity careers and leadership
roles in federal and state agencies. The program will recruit diverse scholars
and create a supportive environment through effective mentorship, a well-
developed curriculum, student involvement activities, and research experiences.
These project components will help establish a pathway that enables students to
participate in an environment where they can excel and enter a rewarding career
in government aviation and aerospace administration
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a high-skilled
workforce to cover the Nation’s needs in the area of aviation and aerospace
cybersecurity, focusing on the safety-criticality aspects of airborne systems
and the protection of associated hardware and software assets. The project will
fund 20 scholarships to students over a five-year period. Student scholars will
benefit from the strong ties that ERAU has with Federal and state aviation and
transportation administration agencies and the aviation and aerospace industry.
Scholars will have the opportunity to meet and learn from top cybersecurity
engineers and managers from government and industry through aviation and
aerospace-themed projects, events, and symposia hosted by ERAU. Furthermore, the
project will take advantage of on-site expertise at ERAU in all computation and
communication services related to flight operations, including airborne hardware
and software, avionics equipment, and network and communication data links among
aircraft, ground stations, radar systems, and satellite systems. This expertise
places the scholarship students in a unique position to contribute to
cybersecurity protection during the design, development, and operation stages of
systems specific for the aviation and aerospace
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
Federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.