* 2146498
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Cyber Defender Program
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Huiming Anna Yu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,338,098.00

This proposal is for the renewal of the Cyber Defender Scholarship Program
offered at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (NC
A&amp;T), the nation's largest HBCU (Historically Black College and University).
The Cyber Defender Scholarship Program at NC A&amp;T is committed to producing
high-quality cybersecurity professionals, increasing the diversity of the
cybersecurity workforce, and increasing the diversity of elite cybersecurity
researchers and leaders with Ph.D. degrees. The project team is committed to
outreach activities that will inspire more students, especially members of
minority groups who are underrepresented in the cybersecurity field to pursue
careers in that area. This project will strengthen the Center for Cyber Defense
research programs at NC A&amp;T and the partnership between NC A&amp;T and
government agencies and private corporations. It will improve the Cybersecurity
program at NC A&amp;T through curriculum innovation, experiential learning
experiences, and student mentoring. The proposed program also contributes to the
knowledge of best practices for recruitment, mentorship, and career development
of underrepresented minorities for the cybersecurity workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will support twenty-four Scholarship
for Service (SFS) scholars (20 M.S. students and 4 Ph.D. students) at NC A&amp;T
and is designed to provide students with a solid foundation of cybersecurity
knowledge. SFS scholars will have the opportunity to solve real-world
cybersecurity problems and participate in research and experiential learning
experiences so that upon graduation, they are well-prepared to meet the
challenges of protecting the security of Americans and defending our nation's
critical infrastructures. The current research initiatives and active funding
from government agencies and private corporations at NC A&amp;T provide a rich
environment where students can work on cutting-edge cybersecurity challenges.
The project team also provides student career development, including resume
review, interview skill preparation, mentorship from NSF SFS alumni, and
networking between students and government partners. These activities are
designed to help SFS scholars be successfully placed in government internships
and jobs, as well as help the retention of SFS scholars in the federal workforce
beyond their initial obligation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.