* 2146369
* CAREER: Probabilistic inference in the primate visual system
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Robbe Goris, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2027
* USD 406,347.00

This project investigates the functional relation between sensory and prefrontal
cortex during perceptual inference (i.e., inferring properties of the sensory
environment) and perceptual introspection (i.e., evaluating the quality of this
inference). Key to both tasks is that they require consideration of perceptual
uncertainty. When perceptual uncertainty is high (i.e., when sensory
measurements are ambiguous), perceptual inferences tend to be guided by prior
experience, and confidence in perceptually guided decisions tends to be low. How
neural circuits assess the reliability of sensory signals and use this
assessment for perceptual inference and perceptual introspection is not well
understood. The proposed research will advance our understanding in two ways.
First, by simultaneously recording neural activity in early visual cortex and
down-stream association cortex from animals performing perceptual inference and
introspection tasks. Second, by using these empirical observations to evaluate
theoretical proposals of how different brain regions work together to produce
perception and cognition in the face of uncertainty. The data that will be
collected and the data-analysis tools that will be developed will be made
available to the neuroscience community. This project will also have a broader
impact by providing a select group of junior and senior students from
underrepresented backgrounds with a paid summer research internship in
computational and systems neuroscience at UT Austin, and by engaging middle- and
high-school students of central Texas in neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the neural implementation of probabilistic perceptual
inference, using primate V1 and its downstream targets in the prefrontal cortex
(area FEF) as the model system. The proposal employs behavioral tasks in which
non-human primates communicate stimulus orientation judgements (and their
confidence in this decision) with saccadic eye movements. The task paradigms
distinguish the neural correlates of perceptual inference and perceptual
confidence from those of action planning. Neural population activity will be
recorded with multiple jointly inserted multi-electrode arrays. The proposal
leverages functional models of neural coding to study the nature, strength, and
dynamic evolution of the relation between V1 and FEF population activity. The
experiments involve manipulations of stimulus features, sensory uncertainty, and
prior probability. As such, the project aims to uncover canonical principles of
neural coding that are instantiated in many brain regions and modalities. The
data collected will be valuable for the development of models of large-scale
distributed computation that seek to bridge circuit structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.