* 2146312
* D-ISN/​Collaborative Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Discovery, Analysis, and Disruption of Wildlife Trafficking Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gohar Petrossian, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2025
* USD 122,327.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project aims to
address the illegal trade in wild animals. Wildlife trafficking is one of the
most common illicit activities globally and poses a substantial human cost along
with detrimental social and economic impacts, including increased crime,
violence, and environmental destruction. The COVID-19 pandemic, likely the
result of a virus that spread to humans from a wildlife market, demonstrates
that wildlife trafficking can have serious public health and biosafety
implications. This project seeks to catalyze technological innovations by
creating tools that empower domain experts to continuously discover and obtain
actionable insights by exploring the wealth of data related to illicit networks
that spread over multiple sources. The project will advance our Nation's ability
to counter wildlife trafficking activities through novel approaches for data
discovery, analytics, and modeling. The project will also promote the progress
of research in criminal activities that have an online footprint. Data collected
in the course of the project will be made publicly available through a dataset
search engine, making it possible for researchers to enrich data-driven analyses
through the dynamic discovery and linkage of previously unknown data, and
allowing them to answer important questions. The project team's collaboration
with non-governmental organizations and discussions with law enforcement
agencies will facilitate an interactive process that can fine-tune disruption
techniques and suggest pragmatic real-world implementation strategies and policy
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses an interdisciplinary
approach – combining methods and tools from computer science and engineering as
well as wildlife criminology to advance the state of the art and build
fundamental knowledge in methods for the discovery and exploration of data
related to illicit activities with an online footprint, as well as enhance
wildlife trafficking research. Specifically, this project contributes new
algorithms that provide capabilities to: 1) discover and automatically collect
data related to wildlife trafficking from multiple platforms at an unprecedented
scale; and 2) use these data to build computational models and study wildlife
trafficking patterns and networks at the global level. Through the use of
analytical techniques such as crime mapping, quantitative data analysis, and
social network analysis, this project will address research questions related to
the scale and the nature of illicit wildlife trade, network structures of online
wildlife trafficking, and empirically-driven disruption models that can be used
to best tackle them. The algorithms are adaptable to different domains and data,
support the discovery of both unstructured data and structured datasets, and
will serve as the basis for usable tools that empower domain experts to
continuously discover and monitor relevant data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.