* 2146668
* The genomics of metabolic change in human and non-human primate brain evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Courtney Babbitt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 05/31/2025
* USD 473,296.00

Humans have large brains for our bodies compared to other mammals and to our
closest living relatives, the nonhuman primates. Brain tissue requires a lot of
energy, and a good portion of human metabolic energy is devoted to our brains.
This research project contributes to our understanding of how we can afford to
grow and maintain our large brains. Specifically, this project focuses on the
metabolism of two key types of brain cells and investigates how their pathways
for energy use are similar and different between humans and nonhuman primates.
This project uses cutting-edge techniques that allow the growing of cell types
in a dish, without involving living animals in the work. The project
investigators run a working group of multiple university departments that bring
together advanced students to share code, and as part of the current project
lead an on-campus workshop aimed at introducing middle and high school women
from underserved communities to concepts in analyzing and interpreting large
datasets from genetic analysis. This workshop is part of a national initiative
that brings girls onto college and university campuses for an intensive multi-
year summer program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
examine the evolution of metabolism in the primate brain at the cellular level.
Investigators use cutting edge methods to transform cells from humans and
nonhuman primates into neurons and astrocytes. The results of this study are
used to test hypotheses that 1) relative to other primates, astrocytes show
significantly different changes in brain metabolism in humans and chimpanzees,
and 2) the specific metabolic pathways that are changing in humans and
chimpanzees are not the same. Astrocytes play key roles in multiple aspects of
the brainâ€™s environment and are modified by neurodegenerative disease. The
results of this research, focused on comparisons of brain cell metabolic
pathways, provides context for understanding dramatic shifts in metabolic
processes that have occurred in the human brain, and enhance our understanding
of how these critical metabolic changes have shaped the human
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.