* 2146686
* Collaborative Research: Adolescent Development, Legal Comprehension, and Decision-Making Among Justice-Involved Youth
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Deborah Koetzle, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2025
* USD 150,392.00

Reforming the juvenile justice system along developmental principles is an
urgent priority for many states and local jurisdictions. Over 700,000
adolescents have contact with the juvenile justice system every year, with a
majority referred to community supervision via juvenile probation. Adolescents
on probation encounter systems of rules, obligations, and conditions that place
them in daily jeopardy of non-compliance and failure. Youth who are non-
compliant are more likely to have continued involvement in the juvenile justice
system, institutional placement, and chronic involvement with the criminal
justice system as adults. There is emerging evidence to suggest that non-
compliance rates are higher when adolescents have an incomplete understanding of
the rules and conditions imposed on them. The current study has two aims. The
first is to explore, more fully, the relationship between comprehension and
compliance and whether it differs based on individual perceptions and
experiences. The second is to test whether comprehension can be enhanced and
whether improved comprehension improves outcomes with regards to court orders
and probation conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study examines the
developmental conditions under which adolescent understanding of the rules and
conditions of their probation orders is associated with short-term and long-term
positive and negative probation outcomes. It does this through an experimental
test of the “condition comprehension interview” in a sample of adolescents on
probation (N = 200). The interview was adapted from teach-back interventions in
medicine and nursing to strengthen treatment adherence. It aims to strengthen
three aspects of adolescent understanding that are expected to influence
adolescent behavioral outcomes: the specificity of their knowledge about
probation rules and conditions, reasoning about rewards and consequences for
compliance and non-compliance, and appreciation for the relevance of their rules
and conditions for their long-term goals and ambitions. The research will test
the hypothesis that adolescent comprehension of their probation rules and
conditions in these three dimensions will make legal decisions in their day-to-
day lives that are aligned with their rules and conditions. Along with the
direct effects of condition comprehension, the study will explore the roles of
three dimensions of adolescent development that are hypothesized to influence
the salience of their understanding on probation outcomes: legal socialization
and legal cynicism, socio-emotional development, and identity development.
Outcomes of the study include 3-month and 12-month legal outcomes reported in
probation case files, parental report of adolescent behavioral outcomes during
the first three months of their probation term, and adolescent daily self-report
of their compliance and rule following conducted within the first 3 months of
their probation term. Overall, this study will provide practical guidance and
strategies to juvenile justice agencies to strengthen adolescent behavioral
outcomes, will help these agencies tune their approaches according to the
developmental needs of adolescents they serve, and extend theories of legal
comprehension and legal decision making to the field of juvenile justice with a
particular emphasis on the post-adjudication phase of justice
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.