* 2146729
* Mesoscale Eddies in the Brazilian Continental Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Cesar Barbedo Rocha, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 333,004.00

The South Atlantic is unique in that it transports heat equatorward instead of
poleward, and recent studies suggest that the South Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation (MOC) undergoes strong short-term variability, likely
due to mesoscale eddies. Nevertheless, the Brazilian continental margin,
upstream of the Brazil-Malvinas Confluence, lacks an in-depth characterization
of mesoscale eddies. This project will develop a detailed characterization of
the structure and variability of eddies in this region using a synergistic
observational approach. The project will inform efforts to model carbon
sequestration and redistribution, which requires an accurate representation of
mesoscale eddies, by providing an observational benchmark. It will support an
early career PI and broaden the physical oceanography curriculum at the
University of Connecticut (UConn). A doctoral student will be trained, and the
PI and graduate student will share the science of ocean eddies with high
schoolers in the UConn Pre-College Summer Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to characterize the synoptic horizontal and vertical structure of
eddies, build eddy composites and estimate their anomalous heat and
salt/freshwater contents, for the Brazilian continental margin region between
about 20 to 35 degrees S. Data from altimetric products (along-track and mapped
absolute dynamic topography and sea-level anomalies as well as eddy-tracking
trajectories), Argo floats (profiles and trajectories), and high-resolution
XBT/CTD transects will be used. These approaches will be utilized to
differentiate between local and remote eddies in the Brazil Current region, test
the hypothesis that remote eddies contribute significantly to the mesoscale
variability in the Brazil Current region, and produce a detailed look into the
mesoscale variability of the Brazilian continental margin. Specifically, the
project will (a) characterize the statistics of eddy characteristics and their
seasonal and interannual variability, (b) study in detail representative
individual eddies, (c) build two-dimensional and three-dimensional eddy
composites and (d) quantify the anomalous heat and salt/freshwater content of
eddies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.