* 2146510
* CAREER: Exocyclic Imine Ligands for Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kensha Clark, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2027
* USD 590,000.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical Synthesis
program of the Division of Chemistry, Kensha Marie Clark of the Chemistry
Department at the University of Memphis will engage in the synthesis of
bimetallic and multi-metallic complexes bridged by redox-active, exocyclic imine
ligands. In addition, the electronic and magnetic properties of these compounds
will be studied. Electrons should readily flow through these species.
Consequently, they will be deployed for construction of molecular wires and
magnetically ordered materials, which have a range of applications in energy
transfer, electronic devices, and logic gates for advanced computing. An
educational plan targets the retention of University of Memphis chemistry and
other science majors by providing support for undergraduate students during
matriculation in the general chemistry sequence and during their transition into
organic chemistry. These activities include a series of bootcamps that are
designed to provide the students with a first research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new electronic
materials by exploiting the electronic properties imparted by bridging ligands
that are derived from π-conjugated exocyclic α-diimines. The project capitalizes
on redox non-innocence in transition metal complexes for the purpose of: (1)
predicting electronic and magnetic behavior, (2) exploring ligand facilitated
intermetallic interactions, and (3) designing of new functional molecules. The
advantage of these systems stems from the energetic closeness of the frontier
orbitals of conjugated α-diimines and d-orbitals of transition metals, a
prerequisite for the incoherent hopping mechanism of electron transfer between
the transition metal donor and the bridge. The ligands, which contain pyracene
and pyrene moieties, have predictable electronic behavior that is to be utilized
to enforce electron-hopping between metal centers and to control magnetic
ordering in molecular complexes. Molecular wires engineered with built-in
directionality and rationally designed magnetic molecules are being targeted for
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.