* 2146882
* BIORETS: Research Experiences for Teachers in the Biology of Plants, Animals, Microorganisms, and their Environments
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Yan Lu, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2025
* USD 525,569.00

The overall goal of this BIORETS program at Western Michigan University is to
provide middle and high school science teachers in Southwest Michigan with
authentic research experience and transformative curricular improvement and
professional development opportunities. This BIORETS site offers an intensive
seven-week summer experience for 12 teachers per year in June to August.
Teachers will conduct authentic research revolving around a unifying theme: how
biological organisms interact with other organisms and their environments. The
summer research experience will be complemented with faculty research seminars,
professional development workshops, demonstrations of hands-on laboratory
teaching modules, lunch time discussions on research and curricular development,
written curricular materials, poster presentations on research and curricular
development, and after-summer classroom visits. An external evaluation team will
assess program progress, determine program impacts on teacher participants and
their students, and provide feedback for improvement. The broader impacts of
this BIORETS program include: (1) Broaden participation of under-represented
groups in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM); (2) Advance
discovery and understanding in the biology of plants, animals, microorganisms
and their environments; (3) Enhance infrastructure for research and education;
(4) Disseminate curricular materials created during the BIORETS session to a
wide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BIORETS program will provide a
supportive atmosphere for teacher participants to perform captivating,
authentic, and independent summer research. The hands-on research experience and
complementary faculty research seminars are expected to deepen teachers’
research literacy and their knowledge in biological sciences. In addition,
teachers will experience teamwork and experiments that lead to the generation of
new research ideas and approaches. Teachers’ summer research projects are
organized into six topics: (1) plant-environment interactions, (2) animal-
environment interactions, (3) microbe-environment interactions, (4) plant-
microbe interactions, (5) animal-microbe interactions, and (6) plant-animal
interactions. Such projects are designed to help teachers to gain a holistic
understanding of the multifaceted interactions among living organisms and their
environments, and to identify their own contributions to the overall research
theme. Components of these projects have been found to be implementable in
college laboratory classrooms; therefore, the teachers will not only leave with
deeper understanding of the research topic and the scientific method but also
with a set of practical teaching modules to transfer to their own classrooms.
Faculty mentors, graduate students, and lab coordinators at Western Michigan
University will work closely with teacher participants to translate their
research experiences into curricular changes. Such changes are expected to
enrich teachers’ classroom teaching practices, inspire a larger number of middle
and high school students, including under-represented minority students, to
consider higher education and careers in STEM, especially in biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.