* 2146555
* CAREER: Rotational Cooling of Radioactive Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Andrew Jayich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2027
* USD 280,253.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;We know that in the beginning of the Universe there were
interactions, necessary for our existence, that violated time symmetry. But, we
have yet to discover what these processes were. A few heavy radioactive elements
hold promise to uncover the nature of these interactions because of enhanced
sensitivity to time symmetry violating physics. Radium is one such element, and
when incorporated into a molecule the sensitivity to time symmetry violation is
further amplified. An experiment would measure the energy of molecular states in
two different configurations: when the radium nucleus is aligned with the
moleculeâ€™s electric field, and when the nucleus is anti-aligned with the
electric field. The energy difference between the two configurations constrains
time symmetry violating interactions. Because of their radioactivity radium and
radium-based molecules have so far been little-studied. The PI and his students
will build on recent advances with the radium ion to provide a complete picture
of the ion's important low-energy electronic levels. Further, the team will
study the rotational structure of radium-based molecules, and work towards
controlling these radioactive molecules with the finest precision possible.
Additionally, the PI and his students will lead sessions to improve Wikipedia
science articles (freely accessible), with a focus on the field of atomic
physics. These efforts will provide valuable training and learning opportunities
for graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this
project the PI and his students aim to measure basic properties of the radium
ion, and study and control the rotational structure of the molecular ion RaH+.
They will measure the radium ion's 7P_1/2, 6D_3/2, and 6D_5/2 state lifetimes.
The 7P_1/2 and 6D_3/2 lifetimes have yet to be measured, and there only exists a
lower bound on the 6D_5/2 state. These measurements will provide a complete
picture of the important low-lying excited states of Ra+, which is important for
advanced work with this ion. In addition to studying the radium ion, the team
will use Ra+ to produce and cool trapped RaH+ molecular ions. With an optical
frequency comb the team will drive stimulated Raman transitions between
rotational states of the molecule to study the rotational structure. They will
be able to build upon the rotational measurements by controllably driving
transitions between rotational states to populate a target rotational state of
RaH+. The advances in rotational spectroscopy and control will open the door to
high precision spectroscopy of heavy radioactive molecules which are appealing
for constraining time symmetry violation that is important for understanding
baryogenesis and the strong CP problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.