* 2146191
* CAREER: Towards Harnessing the Motility of Microorganisms: Fast Algorithms, Data-Driven Models, and 3D Interactive Visual Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Minghao Rostami, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2027
* USD 95,834.00

Due to their small size, microorganisms perceive a fluid as much “stickier” than
do fish or humans. Such small creatures must adopt a different strategy for
efficient swimming. Many of them propel themselves in the fluid by wiggling
micro-structures such as cilia and flagella. The remarkable efficiency of
microorganisms at moving and navigating through a surrounding fluid has inspired
recent construction of microfluidic devices for mixing and transport, and micro-
machines for drug delivery and manipulation of cells. Since theoretical analyses
and experimentation are challenging in this setting, mathematical modeling and
numerical simulation have become indispensable in these developments. This
project aims to create improved computational and visualization tools for
advancing understanding of the motility of microorganisms and our capability to
harness this process. The project will develop an interactive three-dimensional
visual computing system to serve as (1) a research tool for studying the
hydrodynamics of swimming microorganisms, (2) an engineering tool for testing
and improving the design of artificial, bio-inspired micro-swimmers, and (3) an
educational tool for introducing students of all levels to this field. The
project will also provide direct training and research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and high school
teachers. The project includes plans to develop virtual reality games based on
microswimmers to be exhibited at the Museum of Science &amp; Technology as well
as public libraries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research objectives in this project
include the development of an efficient, multigrid-like method for manipulating
the large, dense matrices arising from the simulation of interacting micro-
swimmers, a data-driven, reduced order model for tracking fluid particles, an
efficient numerical method for optimizing the design of bio-inspired swimmers
given a task, and a three-dimensional interactive visual computing system for
real-time fluid visualization and manipulation. Multigrid methods exploit the
geometry of the swimmers and are therefore expected to be more efficient than
current numerical approaches. An artificial neural network will be leveraged as
a data-driven, reduced order model for the change in a fluid particle’s
position. This approach is intended to simulate a fluid particle's trajectory
very efficiently, since it does not require calculating fluid-structure
interactions, an important aspect in real-time and/or multi-query scenarios. The
planned numerical optimization method takes advantage of both the reliability of
a genetic algorithm at finding global optima and the efficiency of a gradient-
based method when a good initial guess is given. The interactive visual
computing system is intended to serve as a virtual laboratory for analysis of
the effects of parameter changes. This project is jointly funded by the
Computational Mathematics and the Mathematical Biology Programs of the Division
of Mathematical Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.