* 2146993
* Modeling the cognitive challenge of accented speech
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Kristin Van Engen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2025
* USD 433,242.00

In a globalized world, accents are a persistent hindrance to clear
communication. Everyone has an accent, of course, but not all accents are alike,
even when we speak the same language. “English” in St. Louis, for example, is
not the same as “English” in Singapore or Glasgow. Relatively little is known
about how we adjust our perceptions to each other's accents or what kind of
effort that requires. In order to understand how such communication works, this
project investigates why some speakers are more difficult to understand than
others and how listeners adjust to unfamiliar accents. The research team will
partner with the St. Louis Science Center, the local university, and other
community groups to help others learn about accents and the rich world of
linguistic diversity. Through its experiments and its educational outreach, the
project ultimately aims to promote tolerance and better communication among
speakers and listeners of all different
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on accent perception has typically
relied on measuring how many words a listener can correctly identify. However,
some listeners may have to work much harder than others to understand an
accented speaker. They may achieve the same outcome, but the processing involved
may be very different. This project shifts the focus of accent research to the
measurement of cognitive processing during listening, employing a combination of
experimental methods from the listening effort literature and the field of
behavioral economics. To identify the features of accented speech that most
contribute to listening effort, the proposal also relates acoustic-phonetic
analyses of the speech to experimental outcomes. Finally, it uses eye-tracking
to test the hypothesis that listeners relax their linguistic categories to
process unfamiliar accents. This also has important scientific implications for
automatic speech recognition, language teaching and language proficiency
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.