* 2146104
* CAREER: Integrative Systematics: Taxonomy and Evolution of Megalomyrmex Ants and Their Venom
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Rachelle M Adams, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,129,243.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work investigates the
changes and function of ant venom and species diversification over time.
Megalomyrmex consists of 45 ant species with a range of lifestyles, where some
are predators and others maintain more beneficial associations with other
insects. These mutualist ant species protect their associates from predatory
threat using venom weaponry. In contrast, several Megalomyrmex species are
social parasites (i.e., one social insect exploiting another social insect) and
use their venom to dominate these other species. In this case, Megalomyrmex ants
consume young ants and food from their partnering species. Megalomyrmex is
exceptional among venomous organisms because of the breadth of interactions
mediated by venom. By studying the composition of venom, novel natural products,
some of which can be used in agricultural or medicinal practices, could be
discovered. This research brings together public engagement and a research-
integrated education plan that includes the development of a non-biology majors’
undergraduate course—blending research and outreach foci, while creating broad
access to scientific thinking. These projects will involve training and
mentoring of postdocs, PhD students, and undergraduate student researchers.
Trainees will develop projects aligned with proposed aims and present results at
scientific meetings and in scientific publications. An undergraduate summer
internship program associated with Ohio Ant workshops will be established.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of venomous species and venom complexity can
provide wide-ranging insights into evolutionary ecology because changes in venom
composition catalyze both speciation and coevolution. The proposed research
leverages current venom evolution theory to explore comparative questions
relating to ant venom alkaloids. The challenge is that, despite multiple
parallel origins, we are in the early stages of understanding how eco-
evolutionary processes relate to venom and lineage diversification. This is in-
part because of the necessity for cross-cutting approaches using comparative
phylogenetics, functional assays, and behavioral and chemical ecology.
Megalomyrmex is an ideal model to address questions about ant lineage
diversification and how venom evolves because species engage in various trophic
interactions with other organisms. In this project, researchers will: (1)
determine venom and lifestyle (i.e., predator, trophic mutualist, parasite)
evolution in Megalomyrmex ants using comparative phylogenetics, while uncovering
ecological relationships between host and parasite ant species pairs using
cophylogenetic inference; (2) clarify how ecological lifestyles predict venom-
related traits (e.g., use, venom drop size, toxicity) and contribute to venom
evolution, by testing venom complexity hypotheses; (3) delimit cryptic species
and revise Megalomyrmex while training taxonomists using a modern integrative
taxonomic approach; and (4) broaden engagement in science and nature by
demonstrating the ecological relationships of symbioses, while instructing a new
general education course, Symbiotic systems: Serendipity or selfishness. This
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) will include comparative
phylogenetics, integrative taxonomy, and natural history
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.