* 2146280
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cyber Defense of Intelligent Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Darrin Hanna, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,185,187.00

The complexity and capabilities of autonomous systems and automation, ranging
from e-voting to unmanned flight, are increasing. In addition, artificial
intelligence (AI) plays a significant and growing role in the operation of such
critical systems. Protecting these intelligent systems and using AI for
cybersecurity and cyber-defense systems requires a workforce with
multidisciplinary training and experience. The national demand for such
cybersecurity professionals far exceeds the supply; and the demand is
particularly critical in government. Moreover, pathways to government positions
are less clear to new professionals than more visible opportunities in the
commercial sector. This project will provide scholarships to undergraduate and
graduate students studying cybersecurity at Oakland University (OU). Recruitment
of women and minority students, who are currently underrepresented in the
cybersecurity workforce, will be prioritized. OU has a concentration of faculty
with expertise in autonomous systems and AI as part of its mission in serving
employers in southeastern Michigan, most of whom have a national, if not global,
reach. This project will provide students with a visible, competitive pathway to
exciting, rewarding careers in serving the United States government in
cybersecurity and cyber-defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OU’s cybersecurity program
offers undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to engage in a
curriculum with hands-on activities and multidisciplinary courses in information
technology, computer science, engineering, management, and ethics. Courses are
aligned with the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
Workforce Framework. OU’s Center for Cybersecurity brings together seventeen
faculty from six departments covering computer science, engineering,
mathematics, political science, sociology, social work, and criminal justice.
The Center provides an immersive cyber-defense ecosystem for students, including
research experiences, projects, clubs, organizations, camps, and a long history
of outreach to K-12 students and teachers. Students will complete a project with
a faculty and government mentor with activities including security policies,
system vulnerabilities and countermeasures, legal and social issues, artificial
intelligence in mobile security and wireless security, protecting machine
learning algorithms, and security in big data. The program will also include a
multi-level advising and mentorship program specifically for cybersecurity in
government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
Federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.