* 2146233
* SHF: Small: Practical Dynamic Program Reasoning Across Language Boundaries
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Haipeng Cai, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 501,768.00

Given the different and complementary strengths of various programming
languages, it is well justified to combine multiple languages in developing a
software system, which has become a norm in today's software practice. In fact,
the vast majority (over 80%) of modern software systems are multi-language
software. Meanwhile, software failures are known to be costly, and a common
methodology for preventing these failures and reducing the cost is to reason
about run-time behaviors of software (i.e., dynamic program reasoning). However,
extant software-quality assurance support based on dynamic program reasoning
still focuses on, and is limited to, software developed in single languages,
largely dismissing what happens at and across language boundaries. As a result,
cross-language behaviors are left unattended and holistic quality assurance of
multi-language systems is critically lacking. This project aims to advance the
state of knowledge about software-quality assurance by enabling practical
dynamic program reasoning across language boundaries. The research will result
in a new foundation of dynamic analysis and a series of application tools to
diagnose cross-language correctness and security issues, which will help produce
multi-language systems of improved quality. Moreover, this project will have an
industrial impact realized through collaborations with and result disseminations
via industrial partners, and will broaden the participation in computing of
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the
project are divided into three thrusts. First, multi-language code-construction
mechanisms and their effects on the resulting softwareâ€™s behavior and quality
will be characterized. This will produce new knowledge about how modern multi-
language software is constructed in terms of language selection and
interoperation. Then, in the second thrust, practically scalable and cost-
effective analyses for holistic cross-language dependence reasoning will be
developed, as informed by the knowledge and insights gained from the
characterization study. The key principle is to model and reason about cross-
language code dependencies in a way that not only overcomes semantics
disparities caused by language heterogeneity but also readily accommodates
new/additional languages. The third thrust will build on the cross-language
dependence reasoning to develop practically efficient and precise cross-language
information flow reasoning, which will then provide immediate support for
diagnosing program faults regarding functionality bugs and security
vulnerabilities across language boundaries. This project will validate the
generated new knowledge and techniques through extensive evaluation against
real-world, complex multi-language systems in terms of scalability, cost-
effectiveness, and capabilities in practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.