* 2146439
* CAREER: Bottom-Up Localized Online Learning with Spintronic Neuromorphic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Joseph Friedman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2027
* USD 110,236.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence (AI) and
neural networks have leveraged inspiration from the human brain to enable
machine-learning systems that deeply impact society. The capability of an AI
system to continually learn after system deployment is particularly promising,
as this online learning provides the potential to develop new functionalities
and adapt to changing environments. However, conventional machine-learning
algorithms require the application of an enormous quantity of mathematical
operations to large data sets, requiring complex hardware and large energy
consumption that hinders the development of AI systems with post-deployment
online learning. This project therefore proposes taking further inspiration from
neurobiology, with energy-efficient online learning algorithms that emerge from
local synapse activity. This localized learning approach will significantly
advance the development of online learning systems, impacting a wide range of
autonomy applications such as self-driving cars and health-monitoring devices.
This project will also broaden participation in computing through K-12
educational outreach, undergraduate research, graduate education, and the
involvement of the local and international communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
enable energy-efficient online learning, this project will apply a bottom-up
approach to the design of neuromorphic networks. Rather than the conventional
top-down approach in which supervised learning algorithms (such as
backpropagation) are implemented in computationally-expensive circuits, this
bottom-up approach will interconnect artificial neurons and synapses such that
energy-efficient unsupervised learning algorithms emerge from localized synaptic
updating rules. This project will focus on spintronic neuromorphic components
with analog and hysteretic behaviors, leveraging the remarkable recent progress
in foundry fabrication capabilities. In particular, the learning algorithms that
emerge from this bottom-up approach will be mathematically characterized,
permitting device-circuit-algorithm co-design of spintronic neuromorphic
learning networks. These spintronic neuromorphic networks will be experimentally
demonstrated to generate effective learning algorithms from localized learning
rules, and targets for device and system optimization will be developed to
provide a roadmap for translation to practical AI systems. Altogether, this
project will deepen knowledge of spintronic physics, increase scientific
understanding of the mechanisms through which learning is achieved by neural
systems, and open a pathway for revolutionary AI systems with online
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.