* 2146359
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Building the Next Generation Cybersecurity Engineering Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Xukai Zou, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,127,150.00

Cybersecurity threats are the most significant challenge to information
technology infrastructure in the digital age. The ransomware attack on Colonial
Pipeline in Spring 2021 is just one example that highlights the urgent need for
a well-trained cybersecurity workforce. The CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service
(SFS) project at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) will
provide diverse students with an educational experience that combines an
interdisciplinary academic curriculum with real-world cybersecurity research and
internship experiences. In addition, the project will promote diversity in the
cybersecurity workforce by leveraging a variety of ongoing initiatives and
interest groups at the university, and by partnering with a local community
college in recruitment efforts targeting groups who remain underrepresented in
the cybersecurity field. The combination of vital academic preparation with
applied cybersecurity engineering experience will produce next-generation
cybersecurity engineers uniquely situated to strengthen the U.S. government
workforce's ability to respond to national security needs and protect its
critical infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two years, IUPUI
has built two new innovative degree programs based on existing strengths in
computer and information technology and engineering, leading to a B.S. in
Cybersecurity and a M.S. in Cybersecurity and Trusted Systems. Both programs are
the first in the Indianapolis metropolitan region. The SFS project at IUPUI will
provide 22 diverse students pursuing the B.S., M.S., or an accelerated B.S./M.S.
program with access to a broad curriculum in cybersecurity, synergistic co-
curricular activities, cohort-based mentorship, and internship experiences. The
program will engage in active recruitment and outreach that promotes diversity
through an array of ongoing initiatives at IUPUI, including: 1) an NSF REU Site
on Enhancing Undergraduate Experiences in Mobile Cloud and Data Security; 2) an
NSF S-STEM Urban STEM Collaboratory project; 3) an NSF Broadening Participation
in Computing (BPC) initiative called STARS Computing Corps; 4) other existing
cybersecurity research and education projects; 5) a collaboration with Purdue
University’s Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and
Security (CERIAS) and Indiana University’s Center for Applied Cybersecurity
Research (CACR); and 6) an existing partnerships with Ivy Tech Community College
of Indiana. The program will also collaborate with IUPUI’s Office of the Vice-
Chancellor for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion; the Black Student Union, the
IU-Minority Serving Institutions STEM Initiative; and the Center of Excellence
for Women in Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.