* 2146617
* SBE-UKRI: "Looked but failed to see" errors in human vision.
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Jeremy Wolfe, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2025
* USD 548,325.00

It often happens that we fail to notice something that is in plain view.
Sometimes this can even be something that we are actively looking for, like
typos in our writing. These “looked but failed to see” (LBFTS) errors can be
potentially dangerous, as when a radiologist fails to see signs of cancer in a
lung x-ray or a driver fails to see someone crossing the road. The aim of this
project is to understand the source of these LBFTS errors and to investigate
possible ways to reduce them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a variety of
different causes that might lead someone to fail to report something that is
clearly visible when pointed out. For example, some LBFTS errors can be thought
of as a version of bad luck: You can't process everything, so only some stimuli
get processed adequately. The experiments in Aim 1 investigate whether LBFTS
errors in some tasks are random or whether there are attributes of the missed
stimuli that make them less likely to be found. A second possibility, explored
in Aim 2, is that there are perceptual biases within the functional visual field
or useful field of view, defined as the region around the point where you are
looking, within which you could find your target (even if you don’t). For
example, if you are reading English, while you are looking at one word, you are
biased to the next words to the right rather than to the words directly above or
below where you are fixating. When reading Arabic or Hebrew, you would be biased
to words on the left of your fixation point. The two principal investigators on
this project have different ideas about where the biases in the functional
visual field might come from and they exploit an "adversarial collaboration" in
order to resolve these differences. Finally, Aim 3 is devoted to LBFTS errors
that occur when doing one task but still "keeping an eye out" for other stimuli
(e.g. when a doctor is examining a chest x-ray, it may show more than just the
fractured rib about which the patient is complaining, such as a suspicious sign
of cancer). The investigators will try to develop ways to help observers do
their primary task while staying attuned to the possible occurrence of important
but non-related events. If the sources of LBFTS errors can be identified and
reduced, it could have a major impact on important societal arenas, such as
medical image perception and traffic accidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.