* 2146056
* CAREER: Simultaneous and Independent Control of Nanostructured Objects Through the Use of Coupled External Electric Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Kaiyan Yu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/28/2027
* USD 596,608.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will support
research that will enable the large-scale manipulation of nano-sized objects by
using a shared external electric field, and, as such, it will have strong
potential to impact important applications in the development of new materials,
drug-delivery and medical devices, and electronics. Nanomanipulation enables the
flexible maneuvering and precise positioning of nanostructures in both
prototyping and assembling nanoscale devices. However, current nanomanipulation
techniques are not well-suited for independently manipulating large numbers of
nanoscale objects precisely and reliably. Overcoming existing barriers will
allow the efficient manufacture of inexpensive functional nanodevices. This
award will generate the fundamental knowledge, methodologies, and tools for
large-volume manipulation of a broad class of micro- and nano-scale objects, by
focusing on using coupled external electric fields to perform nanomanipulation
in three-dimensional microfluidic environments. Additionally, this research will
lead to efficient and inexpensive neuromorphic nanowire networks that mimic the
behaviors exhibited by biological neurons. These advances could revolutionize
neuromorphic computing as applied to next-generation artificial intelligence
hardware, making the nation more competitive in the field of artificial
intelligence. The research will be integrated with education at the K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and lifelong learning levels. The outreach activities
will prime the STEM pipeline and inspire women and underrepresented minorities
towards STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to move and control large
numbers of micro- and nano-scale objects has important industrial and biomedical
applications. However, automation has been mostly restricted to moving a limited
number of objects in small workspace volumes. This research aims to discover
motion-control frameworks that serve to simultaneously, but independently,
manipulate many nano-sized objects under coupled external electric fields. The
research objectives are to (1) design an adaptive robust ensemble control for
great quantities of agents in a complex three-dimensional microfluidic
environment under common electric fields; (2) analyze the controllability and
manipulability of the system to identify the most effective electrode pattern
and plan efficient trajectories of individual objects; and (3) investigate
control schemes that enable functional nanodevice assembly with applications to
next-generation neuromorphic computing. In the long term, this research will
support engineering tools for automated microscale and nanoscale bio-factories
through the manipulation of large volumes of objects, which will have
significant impacts on target-oriented drug delivery and precision medicine
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.