* 2146871
* I-Corps: Bubble printing of colloidal nanoparticles for commercial display and other applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Yuebing Zheng, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this I-Corps project is developing
commercial high-resolution display panels at a low cost for futuristic
applications such as augmented reality/virtual reality displays and flexible
displays. Current manufacturing techniques have a limited resolution on the
pixel size of the display, which restricts consumer displays screens of 8K
resolution and higher to display sizes of 32 inches or more. Introducing similar
resolution in smaller but high-performance displays increases the cost, which
limits the potential customer base. Using the proposed technology, the cost may
be controlled due to the manufacturing ability of small pixels at similar
throughput. Apart from displays, other industry domains that benefit from high-
resolution manufacturing equipment are printed and flexible electronics,
biosensors, and solar cell manufacturing. For example, higher resolution in
solar cells increases the charge retention capacity and may convert light to
heat at a greater efficiency, resulting in an improved range of solar products.
Once commercialized, the technology is expected to create scientific advances in
lithography at the industry level and increase partnerships between industry and
academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a laser-based manufacturing technique called “Bubble Printing.” A laser-
absorbing material is coated on the substrate and is excited with a low-powered
laser beam. The resultant optical heating results in the formation of a
microbubble in the solution above the substrate, at the solution-substrate
interface. The microbubble attracts the ink and colloidal particles in the
solution to the heated spot and the ink/particles are attached firmly to the
substrate due to attractive Van der Waals forces. Upon moving the laser beam,
the heated spot continuously shifts, allowing the continuous printing of quantum
dots. By tuning the power and speed of the laser beam, the bubble size and the
resultant printing resolution may be precisely controlled. This technology has
been demonstrated on glass and flexible substrates, with different particles
such as quantum dots (for displays), nanoalloys (for catalysis), biomolecules
(for sensing), colloidal particles (for 3D nanomanufacturing), and metallic inks
(for SERS and electrically conductive lines) at the academic level. The proposed
activity would result in the development of commercial bubble printer to achieve
industrial standards in display patterning resolution and uniformity, along with
scoping other entry points in related industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.