* 2146581
* CAREER: Physical and Evolutionary Constraints on Adaptive Immunity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Shenshen Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2027
* USD 227,367.00

One remarkable feature of complex life is the ability to survive invasions of
threatening microorganisms – a vast and changing variety of them. This relies on
the possession of an adaptive immune system that learns from past encounters for
future protection. Fast advancing data acquisition techniques have revealed that
naturally occurring immune responses are limited in speed, efficacy and capacity
to adapt to new challenges, but the origin of which remains poorly understood.
This research project will investigate organizing principles behind the
emergence of an effective immune response in the presence of functional
constraints. By accounting for features unique to native microenvironments, this
project will provide a predictive framework for how physical extraction of
molecular information at cell-cell interfaces shape the evolutionary driving
forces of adaptive immunity, advancing our understanding of molecular
recognition in living organisms. In this project, the Principal Investigator
(PI) will combine theory and experimental data to explain and predict how
antibody repertoires respond to related antigens, providing key insights for
developing universal vaccines against rapidly evolving pathogens. The proposed
research activities will be closely integrated with education and outreach
efforts to provide opportunities for exploring the physics of living systems. A
core element is an active engagement of young students with quantitative
approaches that span multiple traditional fields. Through a partnership with the
UCLA Center X Science Project, the PI will develop interactive online learning
modules to engage high-school students and teachers in under served school
districts with computational modeling of complex systems. To provide first-hand
research experience in her lab, the PI will continue to mentor and recruit
underrepresented college students through the Science Exchange program at UCLA.
To create a sense of community for young scientists, the PI will host biophysics
researchers at various stages of their career to speak at the Center for
Biological Physics Seminar series. The PI will engage the public via a workshop
at the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics and a booth at the Exploring
Your Universe event on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major advances of
experimental techniques in the past decade has revealed two sources of
constraints -- physical and evolutionary – on rapid emergence of an effective
immune response in organisms of varying complexity. But until recently we still
lack a quantitative framework to determine the functional impact of these
constraints and the extent to which cells can control and harness them for
adaptation. In this project, the PI will couple theoretical and computational
modeling with analysis of biophysical and mutagenesis data to elucidate the
limit and potential of immune adaptation to complex antigenic environments. Two
focuses are (i) developing first-principles predictions for why immune cells use
active processes to physically extract antigen from other cell surface; and (ii)
extending theoretical frameworks from statistical physics to characterize
evolutionary pathways and adaptive capacity of immune repertoires under diverse
and dynamic selection pressure. Theoretical predictions will be tested by
collaborating groups probing physical and evolutionary constraints,
respectively. Through development of a scale-bridging model framework, this
study will provide a first demonstration of the role played by intracellular
force generation in modulating natural selection of cell populations, laying the
ground for a comprehensive understating of evolution of molecular recognition.
Over the course of this project, the PI will construct and validate new measures
for detecting the rich structure of epistatic landscapes and explore its
evolutionary consequences, in order to bridge the gap between theory and
experiment of evolutionary dynamics on rugged fitness landscapes. This
understanding will in turn guide the design of mutagenesis and directed
evolution experiment. Our study of adaptation to diverse and changing
environments will derive general principles that apply broadly to biological
search for adaptable solutions in genotype, phenotype, and real
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.