* 2146449
* CAREER: Robust and Adaptive Streaming Analytics for Sensorized Farms: Internet-of-Small-Things to the Rescue
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Somali Chaterji, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2027
* USD 207,414.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today’s increasingly sensorized
agricultural farms are composed of sensors and drones generating copious volumes
of data. Two trends in computation have catalyzed the “Internet-of-Small-
Things”, or IoST, in relation to digital and sustainable agriculture. First, the
availability of inexpensive sensors that can withstand the rigors of
agriculture. Second, the development of approximation algorithms for on-device
computation of data analytics algorithms. In parallel, some demanding algorithms
can be opportunistically offloaded to edge devices or to the cloud. There is an
increasing trend to leverage the data from these “small” sensor nodes to actuate
dependable, prompt, and resilient actions. Dependable means the algorithms need
to deal with missing or corrupted data, network disruption, and node failures.
Prompt refers to low-latency decisions, which are at par with the needs of the
farmers or digital agriculture providers. The proposed project, Sirius, brings
together IoST with machine learning (ML), and creates a compute fabric that is
adaptive to the cyber and the physical conditions, and provides prompt
actuation, resilient to noisy sensor nodes and communication
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sirius will achieve, for the first time, in the
context of Cyber Physical Systems for digital agriculture: (1) On-device
computation that will adapt to the computation capabilities of heterogeneous
devices, to the network conditions, and to the contention on the devices due to
co-located applications. (2) Approximate computation for heavyweight streaming
analytics using a network of inherently unreliable sensor nodes. (3) Leverage
the continuum of sensors, edge devices, and cloud to opportunistically adapt the
computation to match the user requirements. This will then be extended to the
recent server-less computing architectures and to drone swarms for mobile
surveillance, sensing, and actuation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this
research will have significant societal impacts in the area of sustainable
agriculture. It will also propel education and investigation in multiple
disciplines. This will range from data science for on-device analytics and
actuation, innovative networking applications, approximating computer vision
algorithms, and energy-efficient drone surveillance for agricultural
applications. Further, this work will use gaming platforms and new data science
courses to be offered in HBCUs and over interactive online platforms. This CPS
CAREER proposal will also grow the infrastructure of US data scientists, in
particular undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underrepresented minorities, and build strong cross-disciplinary expertise in
machine learning, computer vision, and digital agriculture. Finally, the
datasets that Sirius will create will be carefully curated and used in CPS-
themed camps. The project will also leverage the strong industry linkages to
facilitate translation of discoveries to usable
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.