* 2146496
* CAREER: Enabling Perception-Driven Optimization for Online Videos
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Junchen Jiang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2027
* USD 226,984.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, video streaming is no
longer just about entertainment but essential to our daily life. For example,
high-resolution live videos are used for daily (remote) learning, and videos
streamed from road-side sensors are constantly analyzed to make our cities and
roads safer. These changes lead to a higher need for network bandwidth to reach
desired Quality of Experience (QoE). This is challenging, because to serve all
these demands, today’s video delivery systems must either lower video quality or
upgrade the network infrastructure (which can be slow and expensive). This
project develops Perception-Driven Optimization (PDO), a new paradigm that
improves user experience for today’s online videos without using more bandwidth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight is that in terms of how video quality
impacts QoE, significant heterogeneities exist across videos, human users, and
video analytic models, which are hard to capture by today’s offline QoE models.
PDO takes a data-driven approach to automate online QoE modeling, by leveraging
the large number of video sessions available to today’s video delivery systems.
This research entails three thrusts: (a) for live video services, how to
automate QoE modeling in live content with a minimal number of online sessions;
(b) for on-demand videos, how to build per-user QoE models without impacting
user experience; and (c) for video-analytics services, how to profile video
quality’s impact on video-analytics mode. PDO also integrates online QoE
modeling with today’s video-delivery systems to better adapt to changes in
network conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project works with industry
partners in online video services and edge video analytics, and local
initiatives to deploy PDO and improve online video QoE, especially for users who
suffer quality issues, and scale edge analytics to more sensor videos. It also
creates new ways to tie system/networking education with everyday use of the
Internet, such as new educational tools that visualize how network performance
affects user-perceived video quality and video-based intelligent applications.
The project also engages with students through Leadership Alliance which targets
underrepresented populations, and the developed educational tools will be used
for compileHer, a program that targets high school female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software and research artifacts implemented
as part of this project are released on a public website:
https://people.cs.uchicago.edu/~junchenj/perception_driven_optimization. The
site is regularly maintained and includes released data, source code, and
reproduction instructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.