* 2146187
* Aeronomy Research Using Ionospheric Modifications
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Hysell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 490,643.00

Understanding the variability in the upper atmosphere is important because it
will help us better understand the space weather effects in that region. The
HAARP facility can generate artificial heating in the atmosphere to enable the
study of the variability of the atmosphere, the energetic electron distribution,
and how the HF radio wave propagation would be affected. The project will lead
to discovery and advance our understanding of space weather effects. The
National Research Council emphasized the potential of ionospheric modification
techniques (artificial heating) for mainstream aeronomy research. The “Arctic
Research in the National Interest” also highlighted the strategic and
technological significance of HAARP facility and argued in favor of an expanded
role in basic research. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in
the project. There will be a summer school and a topical symposium annually.
These activities in the past have proven to be excellent in student recruitment
and retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use ionospheric
modification methods at the HAARP facility in Alaska to investigate four
scientific topics: 1) the diurnal and day-to-day variability of the neutral
atmosphere, 2) the energetic electron distribution and controlling factors, 3)
the detection of upper-hybrid waves, and 4) the HF radio wave propagation and
scintillation through a program of experimental and theoretical research. Using
novel experimental modalities, this work will measure neutral winds that are
difficult to measure by other means, employ a novel method to infer the
suprathermal electron distribution, and apply ionospheric modification for
general space weather studies. The team will field and operate several
diagnostic instruments to detect the effects and will run heating campaigns at
HAARP semiannually. The diagnostic instruments will be available to other HAARP
investigators for use to increase the scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.