* 2146497
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cybersecurity Workforce Preparation in the Age of Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Balasubramaniam Ramesh, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,119,210.00

This project aims to address the growing need for a highly-skilled national
cybersecurity workforce capable of responding to rapidly evolving challenges in
the age of artificial intelligence (AI). With funding from the NSF CyberCorps(R)
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, Georgia State University (GSU) will
produce graduates capable of assuming a variety of cybersecurity roles in the
U.S. government. Moreover, the project will increase the diversity of the
Federal cybersecurity workforce, leveraging GSU's position as a minority-serving
institution (MSI). The SFS project will emphasize recruiting and graduating
highly qualified candidates from groups that have remained underrepresented in
the cybersecurity field, including those with military-affiliations, first-
generation college attendees, and low-income students. This project's unique and
innovative focus will impact the Nation's competitiveness and the U.S.
government by producing highly skilled cybersecurity professionals who can
develop and deploy trustworthy cybersystems to address grand challenges facing
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GSU has established a strong curriculum in
cybersecurity and privacy that balances technical rigor and hands-on
experiences, offering students the opportunity to study various topics in
cybersecurity and privacy. The project focuses on training and preparing a
workforce with integrated cybersecurity, privacy, AI, and machine learning
competencies to apply AI expertise to cybersecurity and build robust and
trustworthy AI systems. Students will be prepared with the knowledge and
practical skills to apply AI expertise and understand AI's safety, security,
privacy, reliability, fairness, and ethical implications. Over a five-year
period the project will provide scholarships to 25 students studying issues at
the intersection of cybersecurity and AI. The SFS students will participate in
an intensive academic program in cybersecurity, privacy, and trustworthy AI,
including coursework and research in cutting-edge areas to sharpen the students'
ability for creative thinking, making them better cybersecurity professionals.
In addition to completing rigorous, required coursework, the SFS scholars will
engage in experiential learning through opportunities for individual and group
research projects and other extracurricular activities, which will provided
deeply technical as well as interdisciplinary learning experiences and
leadership development tailored to each student's preparation and
aspiration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps(R)
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
Federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.