* 2146067
* D-ISN: Evolution of Global Illicit Kidney Trade Networks: Identification, Reconstruction, and Disruption
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Monica Gentili, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,015,941.00

The objective of this Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN)
project is to understand the complex dynamics of global illicit kidney trade
networks. Kidney trafficking is significantly understudied compared to other
types of trafficking networks, despite the rising concern about this type of
crime in recent years. Prior evidence, however, suggests that combating kidney
trafficking in one country will inevitably raise organ trafficking in other
countries. In this sense, understanding the course of kidney trafficking network
evolution is particularly important for effective control of illegal transplants
worldwide. Thus, the end goal of the project is to provide a general framework
for modeling the evolution of transnational kidney trade networks, which, in
turn, enables the exploration of effective disruption
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a multidisciplinary set of
methods that include novel estimation procedures based on inverse optimization,
dynamic link prediction models for handling unobserved activity in the networks,
and stochastic simulation models to address the numerous sources of uncertainty
and to allow the testing of potential intervention strategies for disruption of
future network evolution. These methods will be informed by data obtained from
various sources including open and dark web, online news articles across
countries, as well as world statistics that are publicly available from
international organizations. The analytical framework that integrates these
methods will be used to: 1) predict the evolution of future transnational kidney
tracking networks; 2) identify common patterns and mechanisms of actions of such
networks; and 3) investigate optimal strategies to disrupt the growth of such
networks. The collaboration with organ trafficking and transplant tourism
experts will allow the project team to fine-tune the research outputs for real-
world implementation of recommended strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.