* 2146647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intervention Effects in the Acquisition of Passives
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Minqi Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 15,001.00

In passive sentences such as 'The mouse was chased by the cat', the undergoer of
an action is expressed as the subject of the sentence (here, 'the mouse').
Previous studies have found that in many languages children’s learning of
passives occurs late in the language acquisition process, but not all types of
passives are acquired equally late. 'Long' passives – those in which the agent
is expressed ('the cat' above) – are more difficult for young children to
understand and less frequently produced than 'short' passives – those in which
the agent is left implicit (as in, ‘The mouse was chased’). This dissertation
investigates why passives, especially long passives, are difficult for children.
Following theoretically-based predictions, we will test whether children's
difficulty is reduced when the two nouns are more distinct (e.g., one is
singular and the other plural). Our experimental results will provide a
developmental timeline that speech-language professionals can use as a reference
to determine whether a child is delayed in the acquisition of passives and/or
whether s/he suffers from a language disorder. Understanding why passives are
difficult can aid the development of better materials to treat children with
language delays as well as people suffering from agrammatic aphasia, who also
have difficulties with passives. This project also provides opportunities for
undergraduate students to partake in experimental research and data analysis,
thereby training the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation examines 3- to 6-year-old children's acquisition of passives via 3
behavioral experiments and statistical analysis of a large body (corpus) of
previously collected data. The corpus study describes and compares children's
production of passives with passives in their caretakers' speech, using data
from CHILDES (MacWhinney 2000) to understand the role of language input in the
process of passive acquisition. The behavioral experiments focus on children's
comprehension of passives. Experiment 1 aims to compare children's understanding
of active sentences, long passives, and short passives in a picture-selection
task. Experiments 2 and 3 use the same technique to investigate the role of two
properties of nouns that are potential factors in the acquisition of passives.
This research provides a more comprehensive study of passive acquisition than is
available in the existing literature, improving our understanding of how
children learn language, and it helps to adjudicate between competing theories
of grammar that make opposing predictions about the outcome of the passive
comprehension experiments, yielding insight into how human language
works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.