* 2146597
* Engineering and Evaluating the End-Group Assisted Electrodeposition of Conformal Polymer Electrolytes for Ultrathin-Film Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Keith Brown, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2025
* USD 551,296.00

Lithium-ion batteries are the primary power source for many devices from
personal electronics to electric vehicles. While the energy stored in such
batteries has steadily increased, a remaining limitation is their inability to
safely charge in minutes or sustain a high-power output. The main bottleneck for
this sluggishness is the slow movement of the lithium ions across the battery,
which is mediated by either a liquid or polymeric electrolyte. Bringing the
positive and negative electrodes much closer to each other would dramatically
increase the speed at which batteries can operate. However, to avoid short
circuits between these electrodes, ultra-thin solid electrolytes are needed that
can be fabricated at extremely small scales in a uniform fashion without
defects. This research project aims to address this technological need and
engineering knowledge gap by developing polymer structures and manufacturing
methodologies that enable the uniform fabrication of ultrathin polymer
electrolytes capable of fast ion movement while maintaining electronic
insulation and safety. Specifically, this research explores electrodeposition as
an intrinsically surface-confined process for the uniform coating of complex
electrode architectures with polymer electrolytes. To evaluate these ultrathin
polymer films on battery-relevant scales, this research program further develops
high-throughput multi-scale assays that use light and color to rapidly measure
the electronic and ionic properties of the polymeric films. Additionally, this
grant will introduce nanomanufacturing research projects in microbatteries to an
undergraduate summer research program at BU, combining the traditionally
disconnected fields of nanofabrication and energy storage. This research will
also include the development of a new lab on ion-diffusion in solid materials
for an undergraduate Materials Science course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental understanding of new manufacturing processes to enable
interdigitated thin-film batteries with both high energy density and high-power
density. The project addresses the lack of synthesis and processing methods of
ultrathin, conformal, and defect-free polymer electrolytes on three-dimensional
(3-D) electrode architectures. To overcome this barrier, this research program
seeks to establish a fundamental understanding of the electrodeposition
mechanism of polymer electrolytes with electrochemically crosslinkable end-
groups. The rationale of this method is to decouple the capability for self-
limiting electrodeposition, governed by the electrochemically reactive end-
group, from film properties such as ionic conductivity that are determined by
the film composition and molecular architecture. First, a systematic study will
be conducted on the oxidative electrodeposition of poly(ethylene oxide) with
phenolic end-groups on planar and three-dimensional porous electrodes to reveal
the impact of the electrochemical conditions, as well as the molecular
architecture of the polymer and the phenolic end-group, on the film growth and
properties. These tasks will test the hypothesis that successful self-limiting
electrodeposition of electronically insulating polymers requires a fast
crosslinking rate and concurrent decrease of solubility upon end-group
oxidation. Thus, this research will yield multiscale molecular design rules and
processing windows that result in the conformal electrodeposition of polymeric
electrolytes, creating foundational knowledge needed to overcome an engineering
challenge for interdigitated thin-film batteries, as well as other functional
polymer coatings. In a second track of the research program, the analytical
challenge of the multi-dimensional parameter space posed by the interplay
between solution composition, deposition conditions, and resulting film
properties will be addressed by developing high-throughput optical screening
methods to spatially resolve the key metrics of coverage, electronic
resistivity, and ionic conductivity at submicron resolution over battery-
relevant areas. These techniques will establish foundational structure-
processing-property relationships for self-limiting polymer electrolyte
electrodeposition from the molecular to the device level, and their
comprehensive evaluation will build the basis of a new suite of multiscale
electrochemical analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.