* 2146997
* Entropy in Mean Curvature Flow and Minimal Hypersurfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lu Wang, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 364,395.00

Mean curvature flow is a process that evolves hypersurfaces in an ambient space
so that the area of the hypersurfaces decreases in the steepest direction. A
minimal hypersurface is a hypersurface that locally minimizes the area, and it
is a stationary solution to mean curvature flow. In addition to being beautiful
subjects in themselves, mean curvature flow and minimal hypersurfaces arise as
simplified models for various physical processes that involve surface tension,
and they could be applied to questions in other scientific fields, such as
materials science and computer vision. The project aims to exploit suitable
notions of entropy to study global features of mean curvature flow and minimal
hypersurfaces. Significant educational activities that are integrated into the
project include: mentoring undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs on
some questions in the project; recruiting women and other underrepresented
groups; teaching mini-courses to attract young students to the field; and
organizing seminars, workshops and research programs promoting young
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three parts. The first concerns
quantitative understanding of resolutions of conical singularities of mean
curvature flow and its application to the higher homotopy group of the space of
closed hypersurfaces in Euclidean space of low entropy. The second is to develop
a Morse theory for self-expanding solutions to mean curvature flow. The last is
to study geometric and topological properties of minimal hypersurfaces in sphere
and hyperbolic space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.