* 2146828
* CIF: Small: Group Testing for Epidemics Control
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 02/28/2025
* USD 514,000.00

This project develops testing and intervention (quarantine) methods in the
presence of a pandemic. COVID-19 has revealed the key role of epidemiological
models and testing in the fight against disease spreading. For any new virus or
variant of the existing ones, society will always need to be able to
expeditiously deploy strategies that allow efficient testing of populations and
empower targeted interventions. Group testing is a method that has recently
attracted attention for efficient testing, as it allows to identify the infected
individuals in a population with many fewer tests than the ones needed to test
everyone individually. A main new observation in this project is that viral
diseases like SARS-CoV-2 are governed by community spread, and taking into
account (even partial) knowledge of the community structure in an epidemics
model (e.g., the distribution of students in classes of a school) can make such
testing much more efficient and effective.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results
indicate that it is possible to estimate the infection spread and evaluate the
impact of interventions using a much smaller number of tests than traditional
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, the goal of the project is to
leverage community structure and epidemic dynamics to enable real-time
estimation of infection and intervention with the following attributes: (i) it
is robust to model uncertainties; (ii) it offers provable theoretical
performance guarantees and (iii) it achieves low complexity of operation. To do
so, the proposal combines tools from coding theory and control, and proceeds in
two steps. First, assuming complete and perfect knowledge of the true underlying
dynamical model, it derives test designs and intervention strategies, as well as
fundamental bounds on the number of tests and amount of intervention, for both a
static and state-estimation problem formulation. Building on this first step,
the proposal then considers approximations to the dynamic models either because
the exact dynamics are not perfectly known, or for complexity-reduction reasons.
In particular, the proposal develops approximations on the evolution of marginal
probabilities for popular epidemic models, derives and analyzes discretized
models, explores the effect of parameter uncertainty and investigate
decomposable community models; in all cases, the goal is to understand how these
approximations provably affect the associated fundamental bounds, test designs,
and intervention strategies to contain the disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.