* 2146277
* CAREER: Bridging the Global Gap on Understanding Downburst Impacts on Buildings: Field Data-Modeling Research and Education for More Resilient Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Amal Elawady, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2027
* USD 708,644.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award will advance understanding of thunderstorm downburst
wind characteristics and the consequent downburst-induced loading on buildings.
Downburst wind events are one of the main causes for high wind intensity
associated with thunderstorms, which account for significant civil
infrastructure damage and fatalities on a yearly basis in the United States and
worldwide. There is a major gap in knowledge, considering that the nature of
downburst impact on buildings is different and more complex than for straight-
line wind and hurricanes. Field measurements are needed to inform large-scale
physical simulations and numerical modeling to assess the vulnerability of
buildings subjected to downbursts and help close this knowledge gap. In
addition, design recommendations to mitigate the impact of downburst events on
buildings are currently not available. This award will leverage available
national and international downburst field measurements through integrated
research and educational collaborations with the University of Genoa (UniGe) in
Italy and the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign to determine a target
range of parameters to inform physical-based simulations of downburst actions on
buildings using the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Wall of Wind (WOW) facility at
Florida International University. The multi-disciplinary, meteorology, wind and
structural engineering, and multi-institution research and educational
collaboration comprising this project will offer unique research opportunities
for students to engage in state-of-the art STEM studies at an international
institution. The research outcomes will enable climate-responsive collaboration
and fundamentally transformative concepts to mitigate the impact of downburst-
driven hazards on civil infrastructure. This award will contribute to the NSF
role in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three integrated research and
education aims: (1) bridge the gap between meteorology and wind engineering
paradigms to inform experimental simulation methods at the NHERI WOW facility to
produce realistic downburst flow and to assess the uncertainty in the resulting
flow field, (2) analyze and understand the downburst aerodynamic loading on
buildings and possible aeroelastic effects using large-scale testing at the
NHERI WOW facility, and (3) integrate downburst flow characteristics and
aerodynamic and aeroelastic loading research into interconnected educational
activities to prepare the next generation of researchers and teachers in the
field of windstorm hazards. The virtual exchange through the Collaborative
Online International Learning (COIL) module with the UniGe will provide an
international educational experience for underrepresented minorities in the STEM
field. The internship exchange program with the UniGe will provide mentored
international research experiences for U.S. graduate students. These experiences
will expose students to a collaborative research environment and will promote
the development of diverse and globally competent STEM professionals. The
research outcomes will offer unique datasets that will be made available in the
NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org) for use in future research
programs. Ultimately, the research findings can improve windstorm design
standards to enhance the resiliency of future
construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.