* 2146754
* RINGS: Internet of Things Resilience through Spectrum-Agile Circuits, Learning-Based Communications and Thermal Hardware Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Yunsi Fei, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 642,207.00

As the Internet of Things (IoT) continues to grow at a fast pace, the increasing
number of wireless devices in the frequency spectrum up to 6 GHz creates a
compelling need to securely adapt IoT communications based on availability in
the wireless spectrum environment. Autonomous coordination of wireless
transmissions to avoid congestions becomes particularly important when numerous
IoT devices with stringent power consumption restrictions communicate with an
edge device connected to the cloud; collecting information with relatively low
data rates such as biomedical signals, detected gases/chemicals levels,
temperature, humidity, or vibration data. Such low-power IoT device applications
include medical and health care, smart homes, transportation, manufacturing,
agriculture, and environmental monitoring. It is imperative to design IoT
networks with resilience features deeply embedded across layers from the
integrated circuit level to the wireless system level. When IoT devices are
employed with sensors in increasingly crowded environments to transmit sensed
information, it is essential to increase their awareness of incumbent spectrum
users and avoid interference. An overarching goal of this project is to create
spectrum-agile IoT networks with low-power adaptive radio frequency (RF)
circuits at the sensor nodes, and with coordinated optimization and enhanced
security at the edge device. The synergies between the circuits, computing, and
wireless networking components of this research are anticipated to create a
paradigm for resilient next-generation IoT networks with energy-efficient secure
communication between sensor nodes and edge devices. Research and education will
be integrated by incorporating the obtained knowledge into graduate and
undergraduate education. In addition, high school interns will be engaged
through the Center for STEM Education at Northeastern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails the research and
development of a coordinated cross-layer design methodology for agile
communication between edge devices and IoT sensor nodes. This is achieved by
distributing spectrum sensing and real-time reconfiguration as follows: fast
coarse spectrum sensing and reconfiguration in the sub-6 GHz frequency range on
the analog/RF circuit level within low-power IoT devices, fine carrier sensing
and network level optimizations on the edge device, and enhancement of high-
level authentication and anomaly detection with the computing capabilities on
the edge device; all aided by wirelessly transmitted information from
temperature sensors used as activity detectors embedded in the IoT device
transceiver. This cross-layer approach aims at enabling adaptive edge networks
by providing the device-level ability to quickly respond to disruptive
interference events by changing the transmit and receive frequencies at the IoT
nodes, while performing intelligent real-time machine learning (ML) functions
for coordinated communication within the network on the edge device with a
software-defined radio (SDR) and field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Security
will be enhanced at the wireless system level through ML-based RF
fingerprinting, while robustness will be enhanced through federated learning
techniques. At the hardware level, security will be enhanced through monitoring
of power dissipation via embedded temperature sensors. The cross-cutting
approach is not only expected to increase the component-level trust that can be
established when new IoT devices are introduced into the network, but also to
improve run-time reliability by capturing abnormal operations due to malicious
intrusions or hardware faults based on the wirelessly transmitted on-chip
temperature profiles from the IoT devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.