* 2146512
* CAREER: Prevalence, magnitude, and importance of gut microbial detoxification services in insect herbivory
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Alison Ravenscraft, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2027
* USD 658,078.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects eat plants. This is both a
basic process in nature and a major problem in agriculture, resulting in crop
losses and costly pesticide treatments. Plants defend themselves by producing
natural chemicals that are toxic to insects, but insects have many ways to
overcome these toxins. In addition to insects’ own abilities, which are well
studied, recent evidence suggests that bacteria living in the insect gut can
help to break down plant toxins. When and how this happens, and its overall
contribution to plant damage by insects, are poorly understood. The goal of this
research is to identify which bacteria break down toxins from two common crop
families (the tomato family and the cabbage family) and measure how much these
bacteria help insects eat these plants. Understanding the different ways insects
disable plant toxins will help us design more effective, targeted insect control
strategies. Ultimately this could reduce crop losses and lessen the need for
broad-spectrum pesticides. This project will also provide hands-on research
experience for undergraduates at a Hispanic-serving institution, reaching a
total of 120 students in the classroom and 30 students in the laboratory.
Students will rear insects, infect them with different bacteria, measure the
effects on the insects’ health and plant consumption, and present their results
in public and scientific venues. This will train both future members of our
society and the next generation of STEM researchers in scientific
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
predict the magnitude of detoxification assistance provided to insects by their
gut microbiota, testing the hypothesis that host plant generalists will benefit
more from microbial facilitation than specialists. Using beetles, grasshoppers
and caterpillars feeding on Solanaceous and Brassicaceous plants, this research
will: (1) Determine the abundance of allelochemical-degrading bacteria within
wild insects’ gut microbiota. Researchers will characterize gut microbial
composition via 16S amplicon sequencing and simultaneously isolate live gut
bacteria from the same insect individuals. The ability of these bacteria to
degrade allelochemicals will be measured via culture-based assays. (2) Measure
the magnitude of microbial detoxification in vivo. Researchers will inoculate
generalist and specialist insects with toxin-degrading or non-degrading isolates
and allow the insects to feed on plants. Concentrations of allelochemicals
excreted in insect frass will be measured to determine how much microbial
degradation occurred. (3) Quantify the impact of gut microbial facilitation on
insect fitness and plant consumption. Generalist and specialist insects will be
reared on their host plants, inoculated with an isolate that does or does not
degrade one of the plant’s major toxins. Researchers will compare the insects’
growth rate, development time to adulthood, survival, and total leaf area
consumed. This work will quantify the overall importance – or lack thereof – of
gut microbiota in insect herbivory and launch a career-long investigation of the
role of gut microbiota in the plant-insect chemical arms race, a process that
has generated much of Earth’s terrestrial
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded by the
Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and by the Population and Community Ecology Program in the
Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.