* 2146950
* How does seasonal migration influence genetic migration? Testing the evolutionary consequences of a widespread life history adaptation in a species assemblage of boreal birds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Benjamin Winger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 770,868.00

One of the most important processes in animal ecology and evolution is
dispersal, the movement of individuals from the places where they are born to
the places where they first reproduce. Dispersal is important for evolution
because it influences how much populations found in different places exchange
genes (gene flow), and therefore whether they will evolve into different species
or stay connected as one. However, dispersal is difficult to study and poorly
understood owing to the difficulty of tracking small animals. Migratory birds,
for example, undergo staggering round trip migrations each year, but it remains
unclear how these migratory movements influence the movement of genes between
populations. This research uses genomic tools and migration tracking tags to
investigate the dynamics of gene flow in migratory birds. In so doing, the
research will shed light on how and why long-distance migration evolved. The
project will develop a multimedia public exhibit at a natural history museum
that explores the biology of migration and the threats facing migratory birds.
The researchers will also convene a workshop to address how migratory bird
deaths from building collisions can be mitigated and how data from bird building
collisions can be used for scientific and conservation purposes. Finally, the
proposed research will facilitate experiential learning opportunities for
students to track migratory birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
interrogate the relationship between seasonal migration—a widespread life
history adaptation for seasonal environments—and genetic migration—the movement
of genes that underlies population differentiation. Seasonal migration has long
been thought to influence dispersal and therefore gene flow, but whether long-
distance seasonal migration promotes versus constrains gene flow remains poorly
understood. This proposal uses a novel comparative framework coupled with
population genomics to test competing hypotheses on the influence of seasonal
migration on gene flow. Using whole genome sequencing, the researchers will
measure intraspecific genomic differentiation across the breeding ranges of each
of 32 co-distributed bird species that breed in North American boreal forest.
These species vary in their winter locations and thus their migration
distances—distances that will be measured by tracking individuals with light-
level geolocators. The researchers will then use phylogenetic comparative
methods to assess the relationship between genetic differentiation, migration
distance and other key traits. The project will advance understanding of how
variation in life history influences species’ evolutionary trajectories of
population genetic differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.