* 2146058
* Same, same, or different? Mechanisms of Parental Care Between Sexes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Eva Fischer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 01/31/2026
* USD 644,612.00

Sex differences are a common feature of animal behavior. Yet, the mechanisms
underlying these behavioral differences have proven difficult to understand
because brains and genes are nearly identical between males and females, and
behavior typical of one sex may occasionally be performed by the opposite sex.
The goal of this project is to understand how hormones, neural activity, and
gene expression interact to give rise to sex differences and reversals in
behavior. Parental behavioral is a promising starting point, as many species
exhibit sex differences in parental care, as well as the potential for sex-
reversed care. The project capitalized on naturally occurring parental
flexibility in a Neotropical poison frog, Dendrobates tinctorius. Males are the
primary care givers in this system, with females only occasionally taking over,
providing an important complement to existing work in mammals where parental
care is female biased and limited by reliance on lactation. Outcomes of the
project will provide new understanding of how behavioral sex differences are
coded in the brain, how these differences lead to distinct behavioral patterns,
and the conditions under which they can be altered or reversed. The project will
train researchers at all stages, with a focus on recruitment of trainees from
groups underrepresented in STEM. Additionally, poison frogs are fascinating,
charismatic creatures that facilitate teaching of diverse audiences, including
K-12 students and teachers through the “Froggers School Program” and the general
public through community engagement events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
question at the intersection of evolution, behavior, and neurobiology is how
novel behaviors arise and are incorporated into existing neural systems. Cross-
sexual transfer, the emergence of traits initially exhibited only in one sex in
the opposite sex, has been proposed as a major, underappreciated force in the
evolution of behavior. Yet, the mechanisms that facilitate integration into
opposite sex physiological, neural, and molecular systems are largely unknown.
Solving this puzzle is intimately tied to understanding how behavior is coded
across levels of organization – from genes, to gene networks, to cell types, to
neural circuits, to physiology, to behavior. Leveraging naturally occurring
parental care in Dendrobates tinctorius poison frogs, this project tests the
central hypothesis that mechanistic interactions across levels of organization
shape behavioral flexibility and evolution between sexes. Specifically, the
project links hormone and neural activity patterns to individual variation and
sex differences in behavior, asks whether shared versus distinct genes and cell
types are associated with parental care in males and females, and causally tests
these hypotheses by tracing the effects of hormone manipulations across levels
of organization. Synthesis of data across multiple levels of organization is a
key feature of this work. Additionally, the project will contribute to training
of diverse researchers and community engagement. Project outcomes will provide
inroads to understanding how behavioral sex differences are coded in the brain,
the conditions under which they can be altered or reversed, and how underlying
mechanisms are environmentally, developmentally, and evolutionarily tuned to
coordinate complex behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.