* 2146758
* The 40th National Association of Black Geoscientists Annual Technical Conference: Looking Forward To The Future
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,500.00

HBCUs have limited capacity nationally to produce geoscientists. Of 103 HBCUs
nationally, there are 23 that offer degree programs relevant to Earth and
Geosciences and consequently, of interest to the National Association of Black
Geoscientists (NABG). Most of these (20) are environmental science programs at
BS, MS, or PHD level, but they also include geology BS (1), geosciences MS (1),
and atmospheric sciences (BS, MS, PHD). Faculty in these HBCU programs, in
particular, are underrepresented at STEM and Geosciences-oriented national
conferences. A primary aim of this conference is to engage faculty in these
programs to enhance their awareness of NABG and aid their participation in the
organization as it strives to create a more inclusive 21st Century geosciences
workforce. The project will provide support for key faculty in these programs to
attend the conference, develop a network of professional NABG members with whom
they may interact going forward, and become active members in a vibrant
minority-serving STEM organization. The objective of the workshop is to
determine how NABG might better serve HBCU faculty and the many students-of-
color they serve nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks financial
support from NSF for approximately 200 student participants and up to 30 faculty
from historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) to attend the 40th
Annual Technical Conference of NABG, 9-10 September 2021 on a virtual platform.
For this year, the PI is actively recruiting faculty participants from the
geoscience oriented degree programs (e.g. environmental and atmospheric
sciences) at HBCUs. Faculty in these institutions and programs are historically
under-represented at the NABG annual conference. The objective is to expand the
disciplinary representation of NABG to include more people of color interested
in environmental issues through engaging faculty at HBCUs. Expanding NABG
membership with faculty in environmental sciences and atmospheric sciences at
HBCUs will also significantly enhance visibility of NABG within the national
cohort of 1890 Land Grant Institutions, and thus, enhance the stability and
long-term viability of the organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.