* 2146654
* Collaborative Research: ASSESSING THE SYSTEMATICS AND DIVERSITY OF HAEMOSPORIDA IN AFRICAN LIZARDS
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Aaron Bauer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 05/31/2025
* USD 388,229.00

Studying the diversity of symbionts offers a unique window to observe ecological
and evolutionary dynamics between interdependent organisms. Further, like a
canary in a coal mine, host switching by symbionts may reveal emerging risk
factors leading to infectious diseases in hosts. On the other hand, extinction
of symbionts inform can inform us about the impacts of environmental change.
Information on symbionts diversity is limited, however, since they are
relatively understudied organisms. This project investigates lizards and their
haemosporidian symbionts in sub-Saharan Africa. Haemosporida is a diverse group
of vector-borne protozoan symbionts found in terrestrial vertebrates in almost
all world ecosystems. Although some species have been studied because of their
link to malaria in birds and humans, haemosporidian symbionts in African lizards
are poorly known. This project provides training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local assemblages of African
lizards include sets of taxa differing in degree of ecological and phylogenetic
distinctiveness. Unlike birds, lizards do not disperse broadly, and local
assemblages are less diverse. These characteristics reduce bias in host species
censuses, allowing us to test hypotheses about the factors driving host/symbiont
biodiversity. Thus, this study aims to (1) advance our understanding of
Haemosporida species delimitation by formalizing an approach that integrates
morphological, molecular, and ecological data, (2) generate new knowledge on the
processes driving haemosporidian species diversity by studying newly detected
Haemosporida species in host clades across their distribution in distinct
biomes, (3) enrich biodiversity sciences by developing standards for symbiont-
host data integration, and (4) generate knowledge on the regional herpetofauna
with new specimens and metadata. This study will provide new insights into
regional evolutionary and ecological processes by considering Haemosporida as
true elements of biodiversity rather than as traits or pathogens of their
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.