* 2146873
* Collaborative Research: SHF: SMALL: Compile-Parallelize-Schedule-Retarget-Repeat (EASER) Paradigm for Dealing with Extreme Heterogeneity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Bin Ren, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Heterogeneity in computing refers to having a variety of devices present within
one computing system or even within one node of a cluster. A number of
technological trends are making a high degree of heterogeneity inevitable in
High Performance Computing (HPC), leading to research along many directions. The
traditional scheduling problem, which refers to taking a set of programs to be
executed and mapping them to the available resources, becomes more complicated
in the presence of such heterogeneity, as the schedulers need to interact with
the compiler also. The goal of this project is to consider new paradigms for
application execution in view of these developments and conduct research in
developing predictions of execution times, compilation, parallelization, and
scheduling. Traditionally, deciding (likely manually) how an application is to
be parallelized, compilation, and cluster-level scheduling are done sequentially
and independently. The investigators posit that their isolated treatment is not
going to be acceptable when one tries to optimize for multi-tenant heterogeneous
clusters. Instead, the investigators envision a requirement that can be referred
to as EASER -- compilE-pArallelize-Schedule-rEtarget-Repeat. To elaborate on the
vision, in the EASER paradigm the compiler first maps the core functions to a
specific device, generating predictions of execution time that are input to the
parallelization approach selection module, and together they produce a final
executable. Subsequently, this binary is presented to the scheduler, which
assesses the job queue and might suggest alternative configuration(s)/device(s).
If so, a retargeting module is to be invoked, leading to a potential repetition
of the above steps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops, supports, and
evaluates the EASER framework in the context of a cluster that executes emerging
machine learning (ML) workloads. Research is proposed in the following areas: 1)
Compiler-Driven Performance Prediction -- It includes a novel strategy that
comprises a general model for predicting SIMD/VLIW performance and an operator
classification based approach to developing a memory hierarchy performance
model. 2) Integrated Job Scheduling and Parallelization Strategy Selection --
Building on the performance prediction models, these two (conventionally
independent) modules are integrated, by including parameterized and incremental
parallelization strategy selection methods and aggressively reducing the search
space in scheduling methods. 3) Retargeting Compiler -- By classifying
optimizations as either architecture-dependent or independent, a retargeting
compiler for ML workloads will be developed. This project will also make several
contributions to education and human resource development. Both investigators
will be introducing course(s) (material) at the intersection of computer systems
and machine learning, bringing attention to ML-related workloads in computer
systems education. A majority of funds at each University will be used to
support Ph.D. students in their research, who will be trained to work across
traditional (sub-) areas. Both investigators are strongly committed to
increasing diversity in computing fields and have a strong record of supervising
members of underrepresented groups in their research programs. Building on their
Universities' existing connections, they will be further working on improving
diversity at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.