* 2146427
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Developing the Cybersecurity Workforce in West Tennessee, Mississippi, and Arkansas
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Myounggyu Won, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,261,161.00

This project seeks to address the growing national demand for cybersecurity
professionals, especially in the public sector, by recruiting, educating, and
training a diverse group of scholars from the University of Memphis (UofM) and
its surrounding community colleges. It leverages the strengths of the
cybersecurity education and research programs and highly diverse student
populations at the UofM to prepare qualified students to enter the cybersecurity
workforce in the public sector. Recruitment efforts will especially focus on
underrepresented students, such as women, minorities, and veterans. This project
aims to increase awareness of cybersecurity opportunities and career paths in
government organizations, especially for West Tennessee, Mississippi, and
Arkansas students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will recruit four cohorts
of scholars from the Departments of Computer Science, Business Information
Technology, Engineering, Criminal Justice, and other departments at the UofM.
Five goals will guide the execution of the project. First is to advance
cybersecurity knowledge of SFS scholars through well-established undergraduate
and graduate cybersecurity programs at the UofM. Second is to enhance hands-on
cybersecurity skills of SFS scholars through innovative cybersecurity projects
and professional development workshops. The third goal is to develop problem-
solving capabilities of SFS scholars through participation in faculty-guided
cybersecurity research. Fourth is to improve competitive advantages of SFS
scholars in the cybersecurity job market through monthly CyberCorps seminars and
student activities. The fifth goal is to increase the diversity of SFS scholars
through collaboration with minority, women’s, and veterans’ organizations at the
UofM, partnerships with local community colleges, and community outreach
activities. Furthermore, this project will establish a sustainable scholarship
management program to handle recruitment, mentoring, assessment, and retention.
Finally, both formative and summative evaluations will be conducted to measure
the success of achieving the project goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a Federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.