* 2146328
* CAREER: Isoform-Dependent Redox Regulation of Actin
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Elena Grintsevich, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2026
* USD 353,982.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actin is an essential
cytoskeletal protein in eukaryotic cells that undergoes reversible monomer-to-
polymer transitions. This results in a diverse array of functional
configurations, ranging from actin involvement in muscle contraction to synaptic
plasticity. To support such variety of functions, actin polymers are
continuously disassembled to monomers and reassembled to polymers in a tightly
regulated manner. This research is focused on regulation of actin dynamics by a
novel reduction/oxidation (redox) mechanism. This mechanism is orchestrated by
MICAL enzymes (Molecule Interacting with Cas L) that promote disassembly of
actin polymers via targeted oxidation of two conserved amino acids in its
sequence which, in turn, can be reversed by Methionine sulfoxide reductases
(MsrB/SelR). In its polymer form, actin serves not only as a substrate of Mical
but also an activator of a hydrogen peroxide production by these enzymes which
potentially can lead to a broader redox signaling in health and disease.
Essential cellular processes such as cell division, muscle, heart, and neuronal
development require activity of MICAL, however, molecular level understanding of
how actin structures in different cell types are impacted by Mical/MsrB redox
mechanism is limited and will be addressed by this research. Acquired knowledge
will contribute to a more complete understanding of fundamental actin-dependent
cellular processes. The Broader Impacts of this work comprise a tight
integration of research and education. This project will have a positive impact
on development of a competitive STEM workforce, full participation of women,
first generation students, and underrepresented minorities in STEM, improved
STEM educator development at the level of local increased public scientific
literacy via development of a free web resource. American Rescue Plan funding
provides support for this investigator at a critical stage in her
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The actin cytoskeleton is indispensable for
viability of eukaryotic cell. In mammals, a variety of actin-based structures
are built from six different isoforms that are expressed in a cell type-specific
manner. How these cytoskeletal structures are differentially regulated based on
their actin isoform composition is an open fundamental question. The goal of
this project is to understand how dynamics of actin isoforms are differentially
regulated by a novel mechanism orchestrated by Mical and MsrB enzymes which
involves site-specific oxidation/reduction of two methionines in actin’s
sequence. The central hypothesis to be tested is that upon Mical-induced
oxidation, actin dynamics, stability, interactions, and activation of Mical-
mediated hydrogen peroxide production are actin isoform-dependent. This will be
addressed by combining synthetic biology, biochemistry, biophysics, and TIRF
imaging, and will allow defining the key features of actin that determine it
susceptibility to Mical-induced disassembly and MrsB-driven reassembly. This
knowledge will be broadly applicable and allow for prediction of the biological
consequences of Mical activation based on the local actin isoform composition.
The acquired knowledge will contribute to in-depth understanding of how the
Mical/MsrB redox mechanism functions in different cells, tissues, and
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.