* 2146076
* D-ISN: An AI-augmented Framework to Detect, Disrupt, and Dismantle Opioid Trafficking Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Kenneth Loparo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,016,000.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project aims to
design and develop an artificial intelligence (AI)-augmented framework to
detect, disrupt, and dismantle opioid trafficking networks, thereby enhancing
public safety, health and welfare. Opioid trafficking is a serious national
crisis that has been enabled by the use of modern technologies. Illicit drug
markets hosted in darknet and popular social media platforms have emerged as
important mediums for trading opioids, and opioid trafficking has also co-
mingled with other trafficking networks such as virtual product trade. This
project employs a holistic, systems-focused framework to better understand the
dynamics and operations of these trafficking networks and will facilitate
proactive response strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AI-augmented framework
developed in this project will enable systematic aggregation and analysis of the
large volume of data generated from both illicit drug markets hosted in darknet
and social media platforms. Specially, this project has four research
objectives: (1) develop novel deep graph learning techniques to comprehensively
model multi-source, multi-modal data with evolution over time for online opioid
trafficker detection; (2) uncover the organizational structures (e.g., drug
cartel, key players) of opioid trafficking networks through a new dual learning
model; (3) develop novel interpretable trade flow reasoning to predict opioid
trade routes and understand operational patterns; and (4) develop a novel
adaptive reinforcement learning paradigm to enable expert-in-the-loop (e.g.,
healthcare/industry partners, government and law enforcement agencies) to
facilitate an interactive process for opioid trafficking network interdiction.
The research will advance scientific theory through a convergent approach that
deploys computer and data sciences, engineering, public health, and social
science to address the national opioid crisis. The outcomes of this project will
be made publicly accessible and broadly distributed. The project will integrate
research with education through novel curriculum development, student mentoring
activities, and participation of underrepresented groups to train future
generations in interdisciplinary research methodologies for opioid
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.