* 2146695
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  Regret in Games:  When It Is Not (Only) Your Fault
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Guillaume Frechette, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,540.00

This project lies at the interface of economics and psychology. It will examine
how feelings of regret and blame shape human behavior in situations where people
interact strategically so that each person’s welfare also depends on the actions
of others. It poses that people regret their actions when they feel responsible
for a bad outcome. On the other hand, they blame other people when they believe
them to be responsible for the bad outcome. This project will examine how this
tension between regret and blame affects behavior and economic outcomes. The
project will (i) emphasize the importance of accounting for emotions in economic
models, (ii) enhance our understanding of environments where reduced cooperation
and inefficient outcomes may arise due to division of responsibility, and (iii)
produce a previously nonexistent type of data that other researchers in
economics and psychology can use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work will
examine regret in games. It will propose a theory where strategically-
interacting agents make choices taking into account both material payoffs and
the regret that their choices may generate. This theory accounts for how the
magnitude of a player’s (anticipated) regret (for her action in a game and her
resulting payoff) is affected by the division of responsibility between the
players for the outcome of the game. This is the first work to consider a
strategic form of regret, since earlier works have analyzed regret as if in a
single-agent context with the opponents’ actions treated as the state of the
world. The intuition is as follows. In a decision-theoretic context an outcome
is exclusively a result of the decision-maker’s (DM) choice and ”luck” (the at
first unknown state of the world). Feelings of regret can naturally arise given
the power the DM has over the outcome. On the other hand, the outcome of a game
is the result of the strategic interaction of multiple agents. Thus, it is
postulated that a player may not (expect to) experience feelings of regret to
the same degree, as she may feel less responsible for the combined result of all
the players’ actions. Specifically, it is posed that a player’s regret tends to
arise when her chosen action is proven sub-optimal after the other players’
actions are revealed. However, her regret is mitigated if it is also revealed
that the other players could have chosen differently (making everyone better
off), as part of the blame is attributed to them. The project will examine both
theoretically and experimentally how such regret and blame considerations affect
economic outcomes and whether accounting for these consideration leads to
theoretical predictions closer to experimental findings. The project will have
three main benefits. First, it will contribute to our understanding of the
circumstances under which attribution of responsibility and blame can affect
outcomes of strategic interactions. It will also help us understand whether this
effect will be welfare enhancing or damaging, and gauge the magnitude of the
effect. Second, it will inform theoretical work by emphasizing the gains from
modifications to models of choice when those are applied in games. Last, it will
produce experimental data on regret and blame in games that other researchers
can use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.