* 2146130
* CAREER: Unravel the Effect of Cerebral Folding on Human Brain Organoids Using an on-Chip System
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Yu Huang, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2027
* USD 489,526.00

Neurological diseases remain among the largest causes of death and disability,
but realistic brain models to test new therapies are still lacking. In this
project, a novel miniaturized brain model will be developed to mimic brain
folding. The model will be employed to study the interaction between viral
infection and brain shape. The results of this work will lead to an improved
understanding of how diseases impact brain function and structure. Further, this
project aims to increase diversity and inclusion in STEM by recruiting
underrepresented students to participate in the research in partnership with
Utah State Universityâ€™s Engineering Undergraduate Research Program and Native
American Summer Mentorship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this CAREER project is to unravel the impact of cerebral folding on brain
function and disorders. The approaches used will focus on developing a novel
brain organoid-on-chip platform, studying the pathophysiology of cerebral
folding, and applying it to a high-throughput neuroviral infection model with
the aid of machine learning. Through this platform, the project aims to identify
gyrification-dependent neurophysiology, including cortical layering and neural
plasticity. The contribution of gyrification reduction in the electrophysiology
loss caused by ZIKV infection, and vice versa, the impact of gyrification levels
on ZIKV infection and invasion in organoids will be determined. Scientifically,
this project will contribute to bridging vital gaps regarding how
gyrification/folding is impacted by diseases and shapes long-term brain
physiology. The derived knowledge will also benefit the biomedical science
community in the understanding of brain morphogenesis, neural development,
neurophysiology, and virus infection. The established on-chip platform, machine-
learning algorithms, and engineering principles will benefit the engineering
community by providing new strategies for fabricating brain organoids and
generating efficient neurological disease models. The outcome will also
facilitate the translation of brain organoids into a realistic, efficient model
for neurological diseases and drug screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.