* 2146866
* CAGEE: Computational analysis of gene expression evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Matthew Hahn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2025
* USD 892,463.00

Biological advances have revealed that many traits are controlled by the amount
of a gene produced in each cell, not just the sequence of each gene and protein.
Genes can differ in these expression levels between different tissues within the
same organism or between species in the same tissue. Understanding how these
levels change—and how they control the appearance and function of organisms—is a
key challenge for current research. This project will develop new methods for
understanding gene expression changes between tissues and species, as well as
how these changes are coordinated. The research applies new statistical
approaches to produce open-source software for carrying out the analyses. The
software will allow all scientists to be able to use these new tools on multiple
platforms, contributing to the national cyberinfrastructure. This work also will
improve and accelerate research with multiple societal benefits, including
enabling new biological discoveries. This project will support the training of a
postdoctoral researcher, graduate students, and undergraduates from groups that
are underrepresented in science and technology careers. A classroom lesson plan
and computer lab on understanding evolutionary trees will be developed and
distributed to partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in gene
expression have been shown to be responsible for many differences between
species, and recent technological advances mean that such data are easy to
collect, even in non-model organisms. By measuring expression levels of the same
gene in multiple species, we can begin to understand the history of changes in
gene expression across organisms. By measuring expression in thousands of genes,
we can further understand the mechanisms and modes by which gene expression
evolves. This research develops a new software package (CAGEE) for studying gene
expression evolution across a phylogenetic tree. The statistical approach
developed here also makes it possible to study multiple tissues or sexes in a
single framework, allowing us to make statistically rigorous inferences about
differences in the rates of evolution among samples. Integrating these tools
into a single software package available on multiple platforms enables these
methods to be applied by a wide group of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.