* 2146751
* RAPID: Impact of COVID-19 Disruptions on Education and Child Well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Moses Thompson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,070.00

COVID-19 disrupted in-person education for many schools for an entire academic
year. In addition, children missed opportunities to participate in non-
traditional education initiatives outside of the classroom, an impact amplified
for vulnerable students and families. This project evaluates school gardens pre-
and post-COVID-19 as sites for supporting resilience of low-income minority
communities at under-resourced schools. Previous research by the investigators
has shown that school gardens produce positive social and academic outcomes.
This project uses a quasi-experimental research design using to evaluate the
emotional, behavioral, cognitive, and interpersonal well-being of children aged
seven to fourteen. Resilience measures include assessing a child’s sense of
purpose, authenticity, equanimity, self-reliance, and perseverance. These data
are compared to resilience measures acquired from school garden programs that
were in place for several years prior to pre-COVID-19. This project advances
existing socio-spatial theory in geographical science by highlighting the
positive, mediating effects of nature in the relationship between society and
space for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vast research literature spanning the
social sciences illustrates that resilience is foundational to academic success
and a productive and satisfying life. Resilience is often eroded by poverty
through the shame, confusion, and anger that drive acting-out behaviors that can
lead to troubled children and compromised adult lives. School gardens offer
environments that support resilience in a child’s ability to recognize their
unique capacity and respond to life events positively. This study contributes
new data on the impact that environmental disruptions in general have on child
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.