* 2146282
* CAREER: Bricks &amp; Blox Building Academy:  Developing Spatial Skills &amp; Engineering Identity through Embodied Play
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Ruth Wertz, Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2023
* USD 387,203.00

A well-known pathway into engineering is through sustained embodied play with
building toys which have been historically associated with boyhood. While much
previous literature has made associations between play with building toys and
spatial cognition, other social-emotional cues experienced in the play
environment that influence early engineering identity formation and self-concept
have remained largely unexplored. This CAREER research project was developed to
explore the recent and rapid growth of building toys designed “for girls” that
have relied on the premise that girls would be more interested in playing with
these toys, and that they would bring similar benefits in cognitive and
psychomotor development. By examining embodied play from both a phenomenographic
lens to understand the variations in how children experience play with building
toys, and an ethnographic lens to identify discernible play interactions that
can be cataloged and counted, this project is positioned to make empirical
connections between narrative contexts, factors of interest and access, and
desired developmental outcomes that vary across different identities and groups.
This project will integrate research and educational outcomes through community
partnerships with local organizations focused on informal learning environments,
where learning through play is most feasible and accessible. Specific outcomes
will include professional development opportunities for educators, school
administrators, and program directors to help facilitate programs that support
the development of spatial cognition and early engineering identity formation
that is accessible to all students. The research team will utilize a multi-
phased mixed-method research design to create and evaluate empirically-based
recommendations and curricular materials designed for informal learning spaces.
We will disseminate findings and resources broadly to scholarly communities, as
well as to parents, practitioners, and toy companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project will utilize a two-phase mixed-method research design to study
embodied play interactions and play experiences with building toys of 3rd-5th
graders (girls and boys). The research methodology will use a concurrent design
in Phase 1 with phenomenographic content analysis to understand how participants
experience play differently and ethnographic video analysis to identify and
catalog discernible verbal (indirect) and nonverbal (direct) embodied play
interactions with building toys. In Phase 2, a sequential design will be used to
quantify codified data and perform statistical correlations and comparison tests
that define relationships to spatial ability, engineering identity, and
demographic factors. The research activities will be organized and executed to
interrogate three central hypotheses: i) girls will show higher levels of
interest in playing with building toys when there are embedded narrative
contexts that appeal to them, ii) girls who express interest in building toys
also have regular access to them, and iii) girls and boys with similar levels of
interest in and access to building toys will achieve similar benefits through
their play experiences and interactions with them. Related educational
activities will include the introduction of an afterschool program targeting
spatial skill development with our Community Partners, which will also serve as
the research context for large-group informal learning observations during Phase
2. Workshops will be developed and facilitated for pre-service and in-service
teachers that present findings from this research to inform classroom practices
that actively support the development of spatial skills for elementary school
children, including at least one Train-the-Trainer workshop for directors of
informal learning spaces. This study will inform efforts to broaden girls’
participation in engineering by (1) defining empirical relationships between
embodied play interactions with building toys and the development of spatial
skills, which are fundamental to many engineering disciplines; (2) describing
the ways in which embodied play experiences with building toys shape, and are
shaped by early engineering identity formation; and (3) defining how aspects of
interest in and access to building toys are related to toy narrative, family
environment, and demographic factors (i.e., age, sex, race, SES, urban/rural).
The project is supported by a strong research team with two well-known community
partners that are representatives of national organizations who can help
facilitate the mindful and strategic dissemination of this work through vast
notational networks of community organizations and
NGOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.