* 2146065
* CAREER: Manufacturing Cofacially Aligned Nanolayered Architectures through Electrostatic Levitation: Fundamental Research with Integrated Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Ying Zhong, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2027
* USD 0.00

Nanomaterials have changed the world through numerous innovative solutions to
energy, electronics, biomedicine, environment and so forth. With a substantially
reduced size, the so-called “near-field interaction” (from immediate proximity)
between nanolayers become nontrivial, causing unwanted adhesion and disordered
agglomeration, a hurdle to harness the full advantage of their unique
properties. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
research to investigate the use of electrostatic levitation to overcome the
near-field net attraction between nanolayers and to manufacture three-
dimensional cofacially aligned nanolayers (3D-CAN) in a scalable manner. 3D-CAN
architectures can produce many unmatched properties with broad applications for
thermal insulation, signal tuning, catalysis, energy saving, and sensing, etc.,
with an opportunity to benefit the society with efficient manufacturing
solutions, detection systems for healthcare, environment protection, and space
exploration, etc. The research and education activities will be integrated
through various mechanisms, such as integrating research with new certificate-
offering coursework, hosting STEM Days and workshops for community college
students, offering a SWE-Teas Research Expo to female undergraduates in
collaboration with the Society of Women Engineers, as well as providing the Fun
with Electronics events for K-8 minority students, all aiming at fostering a
more diverse, domestic engineering workforce in US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate research goal of this CAREER award is to understand and program the
near-field interaction between nanolayers for the manufacturing of scalable
3D-CAN architectures. The team will apply corona discharging to induce quasi-
permanent charges into nanolayers to actively program the electrostatic
interaction between each nanolayer and further analyze and employ electrostatic
levitation to produce 3D-CAN architectures. First, the near-field interaction
mechanisms between nanolayers before and after corona-induced charging will be
investigated using a surface force apparatus and by atomic force microscopy to
establish force-distance profiles. Then, fundamentals in fabricating 3D-CAN at a
lab scale will be studied by designing the charge distribution in multi-layer
architectures of both ceramic and polymer nanofilms. In addition, manufacturing
3D-CAN, in a production scale, will be explored using an enzyme-assisted roll-
to-roll method with power-of-two stacking of nanofilms. Further, the mechanical
robustness of electrostatic-levitation enabled 3D-CAN and its capability of
extreme thermal insulation will be evaluated with an environmental atomic force
microscope and a modified transient plane source, respectively. Research
outcomes are expected to expand the understanding, and thus, the capability of
controlling near-field interactions between nanomaterials, which will provide a
novel solution for efficiently manufacturing of large-scale 3D-CAN and
potentially to many other ordered nano-architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.