* 2146409
* Mesoscale Photomechanical Coupling in Photoactive Liquid Crystal Elastomers
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Ruobing Bai, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2025
* USD 339,246.00

This award will support fundamental research to investigate the coupling between
light, mechanics, and chemistry in photoactive liquid crystal elastomers. This
research will bridge the length scales between a nanoscale molecule and a
macroscale material. Photoactive liquid crystal elastomers are rubbery materials
composed of liquid crystal molecules that undergo large deformation in response
to light. However, compared to an individual photoactive molecule, existing
macroscopic photoactive materials do not perform as well. This research will
combine theoretical and experimental approaches to fill the gap in understanding
between single molecule behavior and macroscopic performance. This project will
benefit the economic and societal needs by enabling new opportunities to harvest
energy from light. Potential new applications include light-driven robotic
systems for extreme environments. In addition, the project will have broader
impacts in the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students.
They will be engaged in research training in the PIâ€™s lab and a new course on
soft active materials. Several well-organized outreach activities will also be
supported. These include high school summer camps and science field trips with a
strong focus on engaging underrepresented populations in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to understand the
fundamental mechanics of mesoscale photomechanical coupling, by building a
micromechanical theoretical framework and a multiphysics experimental platform
for photoactive liquid crystal elastomers subjected to both light illumination
and mechanical load. The micromechanical theory will extract information from
the single-molecule photoreaction and the statistical physics of many
interacting liquid crystal molecules and integrate it into a continuum mechanics
model. To assess the theoretical model, samples of photoactive liquid crystal
elastomer will be fabricated with different compositions in experiments, where
their macroscopic behaviors subjected to prescribed light illumination,
temperature, and mechanical stress will be characterized. The fundamental
mechanisms related to these factors will be investigated to optimize the light-
driven work output by the material and develop new ways of photomechanical
actuation through tuning the mesoscale molecular alignment of liquid crystal
molecules. The macroscopic deformation and work output will be further enhanced
by harnessing material phase transformation and mechanical
instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.