* 2146109
* CAREER: Morphology, performance, and ecology of the endangered salt marsh harvest mouse and co-occurring wetland rodents
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Diego Sustaita, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2027
* USD 97,407.00

Understanding why a species is endangered is critical to planning for its
recovery. Combining work in the field and in the laboratory, this study
investigates the endangered salt marsh harvest mouse, endemic to the San
Francisco Bay estuary, and how it is physically adapted to its wetland
environment. Occupying habitats that experience natural and controlled flooding
on daily and seasonal bases, individuals of this species are subjected to
continual environmental challenges that impact their behavior. Yet little is
known about how they manage to forage, survive, and reproduce. Furthermore,
these endangered mice often share these habitats with other rodents, and it is
not clear how or whether they avoid competing with them. To advance our
understanding of the ecological and evolutionary challenges of this endangered
species, and other related species, this project investigates how individuals
perform basic functions of biting, climbing, and swimming as they relate to
foraging and moving through their habitats. Because these functions are
influenced by anatomy, differences in important aspects of their body form are
analyzed, such as tail and limb lengths, foot pad size and shape, and head width
and depth. The relationships between performance and body form provide insights
into how and why physical differences among species have evolved. Understanding
variation in form and function is imperative for predicting long-term success of
salt marsh harvest mouse in response to habitat management practices and sea
level rise associated with climate change. A new field course centered on the
ecology of the Suisun Marsh, California, will be implemented to teach students
marketable field and quantitative skills, to contribute data to the research
project, and to instill an understanding and appreciation for the ecological
roles of rare and endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study integrates
morphology, biomechanics, ecology, and genetics to examine the ecological
implications of differences in morphology and performance among the endangered
salt marsh harvest mouse and other co-occurring wetland rodents. The proposed
morphological and kinematic analyses of feeding- and locomotor-related behavior,
performed in the laboratory, will provide insights into how salt marsh harvest
mice and other wetland rodents navigate potentially conflicting demands of their
diverse substrates and how they partition resources. The lab-based performance
studies are complemented by work in the field that address the adaptive value of
the traits: long-term mark-recapture studies, quantification of microhabitat
characteristics, and genetic analyses. Integrating basic science and wildlife
management objectives, this work has the potential to inform wildlife management
policies by (1) identifying limitations to the salt marsh harvest mouse’s
physical abilities to use microhabitat and food resources and (2) illuminating
the adaptive consequences of different wetland management regimes. California
State University San Marcos (CSUSM) is a Hispanic Serving Institution with a
strong tradition of involving underrepresented students in all levels of
academic research. Each of the study dimensions (morphology, performance,
ecology, and genetics) encompasses the scope of a master’s thesis project, and
funding will be provided for several graduate students. Moreover, CSUSM
undergraduate students will be educated on the study’s foundational material in
the newly proposed field ecology course. Beyond research and education, this
project has the capacity to reach hundreds more, both inside and outside of the
scientific community, through conference presentations, scientific publications,
media interactions, and community STEM outreach activities highlighting the
importance of native fauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.