* 2146093
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Preparing Cross-disciplinary Cybersecurity and Policy Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Marcus Maloof, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2027
* USD 2,132,417.00

This renewal continues the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) project at
Georgetown University. The funding will support approximately 33 students who
work in technology or policy or at the intersection of the two areas. Students
will be drawn from various degree programs at Georgetown, including Computer
Science, Security Students, and Cybersecurity Risk Management. The project aims
to recruit students who would otherwise work in the private sector into Federal
government positions that require a high level of analytical thinking and
decision making. These roles are essential for oversight, research, analysis,
and planning. The project team will continue to build off prior success in
attracting students to government service who are from groups that are
underrepresented in the cybersecurity field. For example, more than half of the
student cohorts to date have been female. In addition, the principal
investigators have attracted applications from high school students who are
members of groups whose participation in the field lags behind their proportion
in the overall population, by developing and offering a STEM track for students
in Georgetown’s Summer College Immersion Program (SCIP) and funding participant
support. SCIP is a three-week college preparation program designed for rising
high school seniors from the Cristo Rey Network and KIPP Foundation school
systems which predominately serve underprivileged
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students complement their high-quality
education with applied experiences in the Washington DC area in the Georgetown
SFS project. Students participate in internships at government agencies and meet
with cybersecurity and governmental leaders at local events. The project's
activities also include significant peer-mentoring, helping to form cross-agency
professional networks. Students benefit from working with faculty who have
expertise in cybersecurity that spans deep technical areas ranging from
artificial intelligence to legal and policy issues surrounding cyber operations
and personal privacy. The project also expands awareness of governmental
positions for all Georgetown students by working with the Cawley Career Center
to bring in governmental speakers and recruiters. These combined efforts will
help create a generation of policymakers and managers who can help develop and
expand the nation’s cybersecurity challenges by educating cross-disciplinary
cybersecurity leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.