* 2146834
* Falling Under the Lens of Suspicion: Identifying Behavioral Factors that Generate Suspicion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nicholas Duran, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2025
* USD 379,679.00

In every false conviction case, there came a point in the investigation when an
innocent person became a suspect. Despite the countless accounts of how this
presumed guilt can start a chain reaction of confirmation bias that taints all
stages of the criminal justice process, little is known about what triggers
suspicion about the innocent person in the first place. Drawing from existing
and to-be-created databases, the overarching goal of this project is to identify
and understand what demographic, behavioral, and linguistic factors initially
spark suspicion and trigger dangerous confirmation bias processes leading to
false convictions. We focus on one of the earliest moments in which a person
might become a suspect: when they call 911. A key hypothesis is that when
witnesses’ behaviors violate expectations, people “morally typecast” the witness
as less capable of being a victim and more capable of being a perpetrator.
Increasing basic understanding on how these expectations are formed, how they
are violated, and how they interact with witnesses’ gender and race, is a
critical step towards predicting whether callers are ultimately charged with the
crime they are reporting. Moreover, understanding how these processes emerge
will be critical in developing state-of-the-art curriculum to educate police
about their expectations’ accuracy and consequences, and to educate attorneys on
defending clients they believe to be innocent. Given the serious consequences
that false convictions have on both innocent individuals and the public trust in
the criminal justice system at large, the project’s focus has broad societal
impact by systematically investigating the source of detectives’ misguided
“hunches” that have anecdotally led to false convictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs a variety of data-driven methods to
identify predictors of suspicion and being charged with the crime one is
reporting. First, we will create a large corpus of real 911 calls to analyze
linguistic and acoustic behavioral aspects of reporting a violent crime to see
if laypeople and law enforcements’ expectations are accurate. We will recruit
lay people, police officers, 911 operators, and trauma clinicians to listen to
these calls and report their impressions of the caller to identify what aspects
of reporting a violent crime generates suspicion and predicts actually becoming
a suspect in the crime. We will identify psychological explanations for these
effects as well as factors that might moderate these effects, such the caller’s
race and gender. Across studies, we will use indirect, data-driven ways of
assessing what makes people suspicious without imposing the researchers’
hypotheses on the design, such as using natural language processing machine-
learning models. We will also test downstream consequences of witnesses’ emotion
expression in a 911 call for the likelihood of being falsely convicted at trial
for the crime they reported. Finally, we will quantitatively code cases of known
innocence (exoneree case files) for what sparked suspicion about the innocent
person, focusing on mentions of their behavior seeming
“unusual”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.