* 2146519
* Investigating the Rotation of Stator Units of the Bacterial Flagellar Motor
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Aravinthan D Samuel, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 11/30/2024
* USD 885,433.00

One of the most remarkable biological machines is the rotary motor that enables
bacteria to swim. This machine is being studied in the bacterium Escherichia
coli, about which more is known than any other free-living thing. E.coli lives
in your gut. Its cells are about 1 micrometer in diameter by 2 micrometers long
-- 10,000 will fit side by side across the width of your finger. Each cell is
propelled by about 4 long thin helical filaments, each driven at its base by a
rotary motor. The filaments coalesce into a bundle behind the cell along its
long axis and push it forward, nearly 20 body lengths per second. Recent work by
electron microscopy (by cryo EM) suggests that the force-generating units
(stator units) that drive flagellar rotation are themselves rotary engines about
7 times smaller in diameter than the rotor of the flagellar motor, and thus
should spin about 7 times faster. This hypothesis will be tested by pulsed
fluorescence bleaching, as explained below. Motility is known to enhance
bacterial virulence. However, the main thrust of this work is not to explore its
medical relevance but rather to understand the fundamental science which has the
potential to provide a blueprint for bio-inspired design and inspire
undergraduate students to enter this rapidly growing field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stator units are assembled from 5 copies of the protein
MotA and 2 copies of the protein MotB, which span the cell membrane. A MotA
pentamer is thought to surround and rotate about a MotB dimer, powered by
protons flowing from the outside to the inside of the cell. One end of MotB is
attached to the rigid framework of the cell wall (the peptidoglycan layer) while
the opposite end of MotA engages the protein FliG at the surface of the
flagellar rotor. In this project, investigators will test this proposition by
fusing a rigid fluorescent probe to the alpha-helical chains of MotA and
bleaching it with a short but intense pulse of polarized light. Subsequent
rotation of such markers will be followed by a weaker polarized probe beam. The
effectiveness of this method has already been shown in experiments that
demonstrated that the inner and outer components of the flagellar motor rotate
as a unit. The results of this work should provide fundamental understanding of
the mechanism of force generation of the stator units that power the flagellar
motor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.