* 2146114
* CAREER: Unraveling the impact of decoupling the carbon metabolism of microbial cell factories on bioproduction
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Arul Mozhy Varman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2027
* USD 447,888.00

The need for cells to grow and thrive often limits the yield and rate of
synthesis of a desired product. The cell balances the flows of energy and
material, usually carbon, between these two activities. This limitation arises
because cells tend to use a single carbon and energy source at a time. Modifying
metabolism to utilize two sources at the same time could alleviate the
limitation. Directing each source solely to either growth or product formation
could abolish the current limitations. Applying computational approaches will
facilitate achievement of these modifications. Designing a flexible biorefinery
utilizing renewable feedstocks other than carbon dioxide and sugars is the goal.
The project will also provide opportunities for underrepresented undergraduate
students. Students from tribal schools, Navajo Technical University and Tohono
O'odham Community College, will be involved in this project. Participating in
the Girls Make-A-Thon will inspire young women to study in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that decoupling carbon metabolism into
compartments, wherein carbon flux through each compartment has its origin from a
different carbon substrate, will lead to increased product titer, rate, and
yield is the central hypothesis underlying this project. A metabolism decoupling
toolbox based on genome scale modeling will be developed to aid in the
identification of compartments within metabolic networks. The above hypothesis
will be explored for two scenarios. In one case, two carbon substrates will be
converted into two products in a single cell of the cyanobacterium Synechococcus
sp. PCC 11901. The other case will use Corynebacterium glutamicum to valorize
lignin while maintaining itself by metabolizing glucose. In addition,
13C-pathway analysis will be used to explore the metabolism of the engineered
strains and to further understand the carbon contribution of the two carbon
substrates towards bioproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.