* 2146398
* CAREER: Unifying short and long read RNA-seq analysis of alternative splicing using network flow models
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* David Knowles, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2027
* USD 393,791.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternative splicing (AS), i.e.
variation in the regions of A precursor messenger RNA removed, is a crucial
cellular process in higher organisms. It has been found to be key for cellular
responses to external stimuli from immune response in mammals to climate
adaptation in plants, and it has been implicated in common diseases, from
autoimmune (e.g. multiple sclerosis) to neurodegenerative (e.g., Alzheimer’s
disease). Despite its importance, the tools to study AS have been limited by
technological (short read) and conceptual problems. The former problem is now
being addressed by the increasing availability and affordability of long read
sequencing. However, the latter problem remains unaddressed. Long reads have
been used to identify which alternatively spliced isoforms are present in cells,
but not to statistically identify changes in AS or the specific splicing events
involved. This research project is an attempt to fundamentally transform how AS
is analyzed, into a unified framework making joint use of all available data
(both long and short reads). Software tools will be developed under the FAIR
(Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) criteria including open source
sharing of code and package distribution. An annual three-day codeathon based at
New York Genome Center (NYGC) specifically targeting women and underrepresented
minorities (recruited from Barnard College and Hunter College respectively) will
be organized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a new conceptual
framework for AS analysis that 1) unifies local and isoform-level
quantification, 2) accounts for uncertainty to enable powerful statistical
testing, 3) enables exploratory data analysis of large-scale datasets, and 4)
can jointly leverage short and/or long read RNA-seq data. This framework will
use network flow algorithms to connect local splicing events with isoform usage
rates, develop well-calibrated statistical tests, and convex dimensionality
reduction techniques accounting for varying noise levels. These tools will be
developed in the context of impactful real world applications
(neurodevelopmental gene regulation, neurodegenerative disease progression, and
spliceosomal mutant cancer) in close collaboration with colleagues at the NYGC,
the non-profit research institute where the PI is co-affiliated. Results from
the project will be posted at
https://daklab.github.io/the_splice_must_flow/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.