* 2146421
* CAREER: "Adapt, Learn, Collaborate" — Closing the Pervasive Edge AI Loop with Liquid Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Xiang Chen, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2027
* USD 224,542.00

With the maturity of massive edge computing technologies, people are
increasingly looking forward to the edge deployment of artificial intelligence
(AI) and hope to realize a “pervasive edge AI” ecosystem that could provide
timely AI services from various edge devices and perform edge learning for
sustainable service customization. However, given the vast heterogeneity in edge
devices, a series of challenges also emerge: (1) How to efficiently generate
adaptive AI models to accommodate vast edge system heterogeneity? (2) How to
overcome the AI model heterogeneity across edge learning collaboration at the
same time? (3) How to unify heterogeneous edge computing systems and provide
scalable edge AI support? This project addresses these fundamental challenges
with three major research thrusts: Thrust 1 thoroughly investigates the hardware
resource consumption of different deep neural network (DNN) operator structures
and designs a novel neural architecture search (NAS) method to address the edge
heterogeneity down to the architecture level. It significantly improves the
effectiveness and efficiency of edge AI model generation and adaptation. Thrust
2 advances the federated learning technique’s capability with heterogeneous AI
models, by revealing the underlying structure-information correlation problem.
And therefore, it enables extreme heterogeneous edge collaboration with optimal
convergence and communication performance. Thrust 3 renovates the full-stack
edge AI system support with hardware abstraction and software virtualization to
enhance the system scalability and ease of development for pervasive edge AI
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With these thrusts completed, this project
could achieve a joint innovation with deep learning, computing system, edge
collaboration techniques, and related edge AI applications. Regarding its
significant advantages of flexibility and feasibility, we name this framework as
“Liquid Intelligence”. With the success of this project, a pervasive and
continuous edge AI ecosystem could be targeted, boosting the next wave of AI
applications, edge computing, as well as other technologies. It will also
contribute to many societal challenges, such as smart cities, healthcare
informatics, industrial infrastructures, etc. The education plan enhances
existing curricula and pedagogy by integrating interdisciplinary modules on
embedded systems, mobile computing, and machine learning with newly developed
teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.