* 2146168
* CAREER: Post-translationally Lipidated Biopolymers As Multiphasic All-Aqueous Emulsions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Davoud Mozhdehi, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2027
* USD 226,777.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Emulsions are suspensions of two immiscible
liquids, which are ubiquitously utilized across many industries for diverse
applications. The research goal of this CAREER project is to synthesize
biomaterial-based water-in-water emulsions using a process inspired by natural
cell biology. Cells create such emulsions by leveraging phase separation of
their intracellular proteins and have developed capabilities to tailor the
properties of these emulsions by modifying the phase separating proteins using a
diverse palette of chemical reactions. Our understanding of how these
modifications stabilize or tailor the water-water interfaces remains incomplete,
which increases our reliance on traditional oil-based emulsions. To address this
challenge and advance the field of biomaterial design, this research uses a
combination of genetic and chemical manipulation to synthesize and study phase-
separating proteins with customizable modification patterns. The size and
stability of resulting emulsions will be characterized and will be correlated to
the modification patterns. The knowledge gained from these studies will be used
to create water-in-water emulsions that can be precisely controlled to have
user-defined characteristics. Due to their biocompatibility, such new water-in-
water emulsions have great potential to replace traditional oil-based emulsions
in food processing, cosmetics, biosensing, and delivery of pharmaceuticals. This
project will provide the materials science community with innovative and easy-
to-use platforms for scalable synthesis of biomaterials and help accelerate the
ability to manufacture the next generation of structurally complex, functionally
tunable biomaterials for multiple industrial and healthcare applications. This
will strengthen the U.S.'s leadership in the global bioeconomy.
&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities supported through this project will train the
next generation of scientists and engineers in bio-enabled technologies. A major
educational activity is the student creation of biodegradable and eco-friendly
materials for fabric and textile applications. Applications of this work can
address the highly polluting and environmentally damaging current practices in
textile manufacturing. This educational activity will be used in outreach to
attract and engage high school students to this merger of science and design. In
addition, this project will inform the redesign of an undergraduate and graduate
laboratory course that will involve students in real-world discovery and will
train students in the regulatory framework used in the biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will exploit the bio-enabled process of post-
translational modification (PTM) to advance the goal of rationally designing
hybrid biomaterials with functionality that exceeds the capabilities of natural
biopolymers. The study will decrypt the material-design principles of phase-
separating lipidated proteins (PLPs) to create water-in-water emulsions with
user-defined formation, fluid properties, and internal structure. The study will
investigate the overarching hypothesis that the physicochemical interplay
between the protein, lipid, and lipidation site domains regulates the strength
and half-life of adhesive and cohesive interactions that control the formation,
viscoelasticity, and hierarchical organization of PLP condensates. Three
research objectives will elucidate the molecular and thermodynamically grounded
descriptions of how lipidation PTM alters the interfacial and rheological
characteristics of model protein condensates: (1) correlate the thermodynamic
stability of PLP emulsions to the physicochemistry of lipid and phase-separating
proteins, (2) ascertain the effect of lipidation site sequence on the dynamics
of cohesive interactions and colloidal properties of biphasic PLP emulsions, and
(3) determine the molecular factors that regulate the strength of adhesive
microscopic interactions and macroscopic miscibility of multiphasic PLP
emulsions. Methods to achieve these objectives include bio-/semi-synthesis of
PLPs to create libraries with systematically varied lipid, protein, and
lipidation sites; determination of phase boundaries using light scattering
techniques; and characterization of dynamic material properties of PLP droplets
using microscopy and phase-separated states using rheology. Multidimensional
nuclear magnetic resonance techniques will be used to investigate the defining
structural and dynamic elements of PLPs to enable the rational design of the
next generation of condensates with tailorable structural and material
properties. The education plan integrates these research efforts into a
multitiered approach to (1) increase the public's awareness of bio-enabled
materials and technologies as solutions to societally relevant problems, (2)
recruit underrepresented minorities from nontraditional backgrounds to
biomaterials research, and (3) enhance biomaterials education at the
undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.