* 2146568
* CAREER: Re-configurable, Source-Language-Agnostic Decompilation for Binary Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ruoyu Wang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 204,354.00

Software security is crucial in modern times. With or without people’s
awareness, from personal computers to smart phones, from critical infrastructure
to cyber-physical systems, software is powering tens of billions of devices and
systems. These systems are commonly attacked by an adversarial type of software,
malware, which is developed and deployed by cyber criminals. Unfortunately, the
inaccessibility of source code of software severely hampers the effort of making
software and systems more secure from two aspects: (a) Not having access to
source code of common software makes it harder for software auditors to discover
and mitigate software defects and backdoors; (b) Not having access to source
code of malware makes it harder for security analysts to understand and defeat
cyber threats in a timely manner. Despite years of research, modern tools and
techniques in the field are insufficient in recovering readable source code from
software artifacts. Therefore, developing new technologies and tools to
effectively recover source code from software will greatly improve the security
of modern software, which will in turn benefit the security of the entire
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decompilation refers to the process of recovering
source code from software that is already compiled into machine code. This
research project consists of three major research thrusts with the final goal of
developing a set of new techniques to support a purpose-specific and source-
language-agnostic binary decompiler. First, recognizing different tasks in
security analysis may have different end goals (e.g., the readability of a
single function versus the understandability of program-level data flows), this
project will systematically study common security-specific purposes for
decompilation. For each purpose, this project will develop specific
decompilation and optimization techniques. Second, this research project will
generate new theories and methods to transform monolithic binary decompilation
practices into modular, pluggable, and configurable techniques and steps.
Finally, the crux of this project will be studying the automated generation of
compiler-specific models and techniques for transforming binaries compiled in
high-level languages (e.g., Visual Basic 6, C++, Go, and Rust) into high-quality
pseudo-source code output that exhibits features in the original high-level
programming languages. Besides research publications, this project will produce
a fully open-sourced, source-language-agnostic binary decompilation framework,
which will facilitate activities in security industry, research, education, and
among enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.