* 2146761
* III: Small: Comprehensive Methods to Learn to Augment Graph Data
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Meng Jiang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/28/2025
* USD 515,999.00

Machine learning algorithms learn from data. The quality and quantity of
training data has as much to do with the success of machine learning projects as
the algorithms themselves. Data augmentation methods aim at eliciting
information that is not readily available in the training data, but that is
needed to improve the performance of the learning systems. Data augmentation has
been successfully used in image classification: from adhoc augmentation, such as
cropping, flipping, rotation and 'learning ­to ­augment' methods. This work
focuses on data augmentation for Graph Machine Learning (GML). GML methods such
as graph neural networks (GNNs) play an important role in studying many types of
graphs of significant societal importance, including social networks, molecular
networks, and knowledge graphs. While augmentation methods have been applied to
GML before, existing techniques are applied in an adhoc manner and yield sub-
optimal results. This project will study principled methods for building
computational graphs, augmenting raw graph data, aiming at improving the
performance of graph learning methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims
of the project are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust develops novel
graph machine learning techniques to augment the graph data by counterfactual
inference on the effect of edges as treatment variables. The second thrust
develops novel graph machine learning techniques to augment the graph by
forecasting if sequential, temporal, or dynamic patterns exist in the data. The
third thrust develops novel graph machine learning techniques to augment the
graph by pseudo labeling and disconnecting the nodes in very different
communities or clusters. This project will deliver novel methods to augment
graph data integrating with theories and methods from a variety of research
fields, such as statistical causal analysis, sequence modeling and prediction,
and graph mining algorithms. It will advance the technologies of graph machine
learning and expand the scope of data augmentation for deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.