* 2146447
* CAREER: Holistic Framework for Constructing Dynamic Malicious Knowledge Bases in Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Xu Yuan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 98,988.00

Social networks’ reach makes them a tempting target for malicious users to post
spam messages intended to pollute social environments, deceive normal users, or
sway political opinions. The increasing amount of malicious content has resulted
in growing economic loss and adverse social impacts. This project aims to
mitigate malicious online behavior by modeling it through a dynamic malicious
knowledge graph. Inspired by human learning processes, the graph will gradually
accumulate knowledge, becoming over time a powerful tool for analyzing and
mitigating online misbehavior. Through modeling the relationships between
concepts, content, and actors online, the graph will support research on the
evolution of malicious communities and the detection of malicious behavior; the
graph itself will be designed to be adaptable across security contexts, and the
underlying methods designed to be usable in other applications that require
modeling interaction online. To this end, the team will share datasets and
software toolkits developed in this project with the research community, and the
findings will be integrated into instructional materials in the form of book
chapters, course materials, and tutorials to be widely disseminated. The team
will also engage undergraduate students, including those from under-represented
groups in computing, through a summer tutorial series and research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a holistic framework to
construct the dynamic malicious knowledge graph, organized around three main
thrusts. The first thrust is to develop a real-time malicious content detector
that addresses challenging issues such as feature variations, real-time scalable
processing, and label scarcity. The second thrust is to conduct periodical
analysis on the accumulated data to identify emerging malicious patterns,
behaviors, and latent features with the goal of identifying sophisticated,
stealthy malicious actors while growing the graph’s size and structure. The
third thrust focuses on the design of the knowledge graph itself, including its
structure, construction, label-aided evolution, and continuous self-monitoring.
The resulting solutions will be first evaluated on real-world datasets to be
gathered and then deployed into real-world social networks for full
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.