* 2146100
* CAREER: High-Speed Boundary Layer Transition on Realistic Non-Smooth Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Christoph Brehm, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2027
* USD 420,954.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the design of efficient high-
speed vehicles, it is essential to accurately predict the flow field and its
interaction with solid surfaces. In the presence of turbulent (non-orderly
moving) flow, surface friction and heat transfer are significantly higher than
for laminar (orderly moving) flow, leading to performance losses and potentially
critical failure. Accurate laminar-to-turbulent transition prediction is a key
challenge in fluid dynamics research as it depends on many parameters associated
with the geometry, flow conditions, external disturbance environment and
smoothness of the surface. At high speeds, exposure to hot, fast-moving flow can
lead to severe surface degradation through ablation processes. Therefore, a
thorough understanding of how these realistic non-smooth surfaces affect
transition is essential for accurate flow predictions. This project addresses a
definite gap in fundamental research knowledge by investigating the interaction
of time-evolving (ablative) rough surfaces with high-speed transitional flows.
This research can have a significant broader positive impact as it can, for
example, enable more energy efficient engineering systems involving fluid flows,
allow for more efficient space exploration, one day enable commercial hypersonic
flight and other forms of high-speed transportation as well as provide rapid
response capabilities essential for national security. The project will also
encompass significant educational activities encouraging students to pursue
careers in STEM disciplines, including computer-based learning experiences used
in several outreach efforts with a focus on teaching computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific research objective is to obtain a
fundamental understanding of how realistic non-smooth surfaces affect all stages
of the laminar-to-turbulent transition process. This project goes well beyond
the current state-of-the-art by including the interaction of transitional flows
with realistic time evolving (ablative) surfaces. The first ever coupled fluid-
ablation interaction simulations considering hypersonic boundary layer
transition will be performed. These simulations will provide insight into the
intricacies of the complex physical phenomena involved. A unique numerical
approach capturing the wide range of temporal and spatial scales will be
employed for these simulations and advanced analysis tools, such as modal and
bi-orthogonal decomposition, will be used to dissect the complex physics and
cultivate understanding of the different effects involving a wide parameter
space. This research will yield unprecedented understanding essential for
improving transition prediction capabilities and for providing the ability to
critically assess the transition process for realistic high-speed flow
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.