* 2146422
* CAREER: Systematic Design of Polymers to Reveal the Anomalous Role of Fluorine on Membrane-based Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Zachary Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2027
* USD 433,407.00

Polymer membranes would potentially benefit many sectors of the U.S. economy,
including manufacturing, chemicals production, healthcare, and defense, by
removing contaminants from various process streams. However, the materials
needed to make these membranes lack the efficiency, productivity, and stability
that is often required for current and emerging applications. To fill this gap
and provide broad opportunities for growth in various sectors of the U.S.
economy, fundamental research is needed to develop new materials design
strategies. This proposal focuses on a unique class of polymers that have
fluorine covalently attached to their structure. Unlike all other known
polymers, these fluoropolymers have theoretically unexpected and beneficial
abilities to separate contaminants from various products. To uncover the reason
behind these abilities, a series of polymers with varying amounts of fluorine
will be characterized to reveal the role of fluorine on enhanced efficiency,
productivity, and stability for membrane-based separations. Additionally, this
proposal will develop the Polymer Prodigies program to connect undergraduate and
graduate students from MIT with high school and middle school students who are
underrepresented in science and engineering. This program will involve in-person
lectures and hands-on experiments related to polymers, providing relevant
connections between these experiments and molecular separations. Curriculum
developed for this program will also be recorded as videos and disseminated
through online platforms to promote broader engagement. Finally, this proposal
seeks to attract a new generation of researchers to the field of separation
science through collaboration with the MIT UROP program, MIT ACCESS Program, and
NetPals. Through the UROP program, specific efforts will be made to bolster
opportunities for female students and underrepresented minorities in research
projects for this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike other nonpolar
molecules, perfluorinated molecules do not obey thermodynamic mixing theories
when combined with non-fluorinated species. This breakdown in theory has
important implications for membrane-based gas separations. For certain
industrially relevant gas pairs, perfluoropolymers have the best combinations of
permeability and selectivity of all known polymers, and these materials also
exhibit unprecedented stability to physical aging and a resistance to
plasticization. However, the origins of this theoretical anomaly are not well
understood. Therefore, the main consideration of this proposal is to investigate
the role of fluorine on membrane separation performance. To accomplish this
goal, this project will leverage strategies in macromolecular synthesis to
design glassy polymers of high molecular weight with varying amounts of fluorine
appended to the backbone of the polymer. These efforts will be complemented with
advanced materials and transport characterization, and findings will be
interpreted through theory and simulations. By doing so, hypothesis-driven
questions will be tested to investigate why fluorine unexpectedly increases
selectivity, reduces physical aging, and improves plasticization resistance for
membrane-based gas separations. From a broader perspective, this proposal seeks
to publish peer-reviewed papers on reference materials and reference standards
to enable more robust measurement techniques within the membrane
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.