* 2146350
* CAREER: Universal Modeling of Real and Virtual Energy Storage with Connected Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Yue Cao, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Energy storage supports the uninterruptable operation of electricity, mechanics,
heat, etc. Modern highly-dynamic electrical systems, such as renewable-dominated
grids, electric vehicles and aircraft, require energy storage to provide
resilience, mitigating power variations at much smaller timescales. Multiple
“real” energy storage physics exist, such as batteries, supercapacitors, fuel
cells, but are limited in energy or power bandwidth. Recently, modulated load
control, particularly through flexible thermal loads, such as building HVAC
systems or water heaters, has gained understanding and is regarded as “virtual”
storage, given its inherent existence as an energy buffer around a nominal load.
A typical design of an energy storage system considers one or multiple storage
physics and aggregates their respective electric models for control and energy
management; this way overlooks the system-level picture and handles the
complexity after it is created. This research explores a top-down co-design
process by utilizing a universal energy storage electric model, combining real
and virtual energy storage and connected power electronics. The proposed process
directly yields optimal energy storage requirements among a cluster of energy
storage options, and allows for most resiliency while reducing the complex
energy management burden and sustaining an extended lifetime. The work will
benefit many stakeholders in transportation electrification, utilities, and
building sectors. Further, the project will enhance undergraduate and graduate
curriculum by combining the advances in power electronics tied energy storage
systems. The project will work with management consulting and international
educational partners to train STEM students toward leadership and global vision.
In addition, the project will reach out to local small businesses and Native
American tribes to provide education in emerging energy storage technologies,
thereby enabling pursuit of prosperous careers in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel universal modeling and
design framework for energy storage systems. Conventional heuristic selection of
energy storage is suboptimal, dynamic interaction of real and virtual storage is
lacking, the power electronics side of virtual energy storage is not well
understood, and the lifetime impact of combined storage is not known.
Fundamental research in modeling and design emphasizes bandwidth selections
using an enhanced multi-timescale equivalent impedance network, followed by a
co-design of connected power electronics, multi-objective optimization, dynamic
energy management, and reliability analysis. Several machine learning-based
methods in intelligent search, deep reinforcement learning, and big-data-driven
control will also play a role in the work. Scientific knowledge will be gained
through in-depth electrical-thermal-mechanical physics, modern power electronic
converters and controls, emerging data science and artificial intelligence, and
a hardware testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.