* 2146347
* CAREER: SPatiotemporal INvestigation of Urban Pollution and Air Quality (SPIN-UP-AQ)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Pawel Misztal, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2027
* USD 550,000.00

Air pollution by volatile organic compounds (VOCs) has a significant impact on
air quality and human health in urban communities throughout the world. In urban
areas, VOCs are present in wide ranges of concentration, volatility, reactivity,
and toxicity. VOCs in urban air include intermediate-volatility organic
compounds (IVOCs) and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs). These fractions
are increasingly the focus of air pollution studies as they may include toxic
constituents or provide unique markers for specific atmospheric processes and
sources. However, measurements of I/SVOCs are extremely challenging due to their
relatively low concentrations in air samples and analytical instrument
limitations. Recent advances in chemical ionization mass spectrometry and the
availability of commercial high-resolution mass spectrometers have opened the
possibility of conducting measurements of atmospheric pollutants at ultralow
concentrations. Building upon these advances, the Principal Investigator of this
CAREER project proposes to measure the local and regional atmospheric
concentrations of a full spectrum of I/SVOCs. These compounds will be quantified
as a function of time and source location with a focus on mapping known and
emerging air pollutants in low-income urban communities that are often located
close to industrial or other anthropogenic pollution sources. The Austin
metropolitan area in Texas will be used as a model system. The successful
completion of this research will benefit society through the generation of new
data and fundamental knowledge to advance the quantitative understanding and
evaluation of pollution sources and factors affecting air quality and toxic
exposures in urban areas. Further benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of a graduate student and
a female undergraduate student at the University of Texas at
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to
measure and accurately quantify the spatiotemporal concentrations of
intermediate-volatility organic compounds (IVOCs) and semi-volatile organic
compounds (SVOCs) in air samples throughout the City of Austin (TX) metropolitan
area at a resolution of 50 meters that has not been achieved in previous
investigations of urban air pollution. The guiding hypothesis of the proposed
research is that the compositions and concentrations of I/SVOCs in the
metropolitan area of a city like Austin are spatially heterogenous with
significant differences between wealthy communities and low-income communities
located near major sources of air pollution including freeways, airports,
wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and industries. To test this hypothesis,
the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to deploy a state-of-the-art proton
transfer reaction time of flight mass spectrometer in a mobile lab vehicle
configured to carry out regional on-road spatial measurements of air quality.
The specific objectives of the research are to: (1) Quantify the spatial
compositions of I/SVOCs using mobile measurements; (2) Quantify the changes in
temporal compositions of I/SVOCs at a selected community receptor site using
stationary measurements; (3) Use the data collected during the mobile and
stationary air quality measurements to build and validate multivariate models
that could be used to quantify exposure risks and environmental justice indices
for communities in the Austin metropolitan area; and (4) Quantify the source
apportionment from the mobile and stationary measurements to build a community
source fingerprint inventory for I/SVOCs in the Austin metropolitan area. The
successful completion of this research has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new data and fundamental knowledge that will
advance the quantitative understanding of urban pollution sources and factors
affecting air quality and community exposure. To implement the educational and
training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will leverage the research
findings to update his experiential air quality courses at the University of
Texas (UT) at Austin. In addition, the PI plans to partner with the Whole
Community-Whole Health program at UT-Austin to educate and assist local
communities that are affected by air pollution to voice their concerns based on
the air quality data and exposure risk estimates from the PIâ€™s
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.