* 2146228
* CAREER: Supporting Data Visualization Design Practice
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Paul Parsons, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2027
* USD 219,493.00

This project aims to advance the practice of data visualization design and
strengthen relationships between the research and practitioner communities. Data
visualization design is becoming increasingly popular as a profession, and the
role of data analysis, presentation, and communication in professional and
public contexts is increasingly relevant to everyday life. This makes it
important to understand how designers can make use of academic research on
visualization design, as well as places where design practice points to gaps in
the research literature. To address these questions, this project will take a
specific focus on the cognition of data visualization designers—how they think,
work through problems, and develop solutions—and the kinds of knowledge they
rely on while they design. The research team will also study relationships
between the research and practice communities, looking for ways to strengthen
awareness, communication, and knowledge production and use between them.
Outcomes of this research are expected to influence professional design practice
and lead to the development of better materials and strategies for training
future visualization design professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three primary technical aims: (1) characterize decision making and cognitive
biases in data visualization practice, focusing on problem formulation and
solution generation in real-world practice; (2) map the landscape of data
visualization design knowledge, focusing on characterizing existing knowledge,
understanding its underlying organizational principles, and investigating its
generation and use in practice; and (3) analyze relationships between the data
visualization research and practice communities, focusing on modeling current
methods of knowledge sharing and proposing new mechanisms of knowledge
production and transfer. The work will draw on theoretical frameworks relating
to design judgment and decision making, fixation and other cognitive biases,
design knowledge, and research-practice relationships. Design practice will be
investigated using a variety of methods, including design probes, semi-
structured interviews, diary studies, design challenges, and co-creation
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.