* 2146763
* Second Workshop to Promote Educating the Next Generation of Atmospheric Scientists for Industry Needs
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Andrea Lang, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 01/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

Weather, water, and climate impact nearly every sector of the economy and nearly
every citizen of the United States. Atmospheric scientists, including
meteorologists, in the private sector regularly advise clients in other sectors
such as transportation, energy, agriculture, retail, insurance, financial
services, recreation, communication, health, and government on risks or
opportunities shaped by weather events, water availability, and climate
variability and change. The evolving private sector landscape in the atmospheric
sciences has exposed existing gaps between the education and preparation of the
atmospheric science workforce and the skillsets needed for successful private
sector employment. A 2019 NSF-sponsored workshop titled â€œMind the Gap''
articulated and identified solutions to these gaps. As a follow-up of the 2019
workshop, this project plans a collaboration between the atmospheric science
academic and private sectors to develop pedogeological materials to address
several of the academic gaps via a series of virtual and in-person meetings and
workshops. The outputs of the conference will include a set of modules, tools,
and datasets aimed at preparing the next generation of atmospheric scientists
with the skillsets and knowledge of the private sector and industry needs. The
products developed will introduce students to atmospheric science data and
methodologies applied in a variety of sectors including, energy, agriculture,
transportation, finance, and risk management. The conference design will enable
gathering of the diverse set of academic educators, students, and private sector
professionals for the development of these free ready to adapt materials for
existing atmospheric science curriculum. The network of professionals
established through this conference will work with higher education institutions
encourage implementation of the new materials and support them with
documentation and training for educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goals of
the pre-conference, conference, and post-conference activities are: a)
Categorize curriculum gaps and the associated weak skills that lead to the lack
of preparation for students pursuing careers in the private sector; b) Discuss
these gaps to identify appropriate courses and creative pedogeological solutions
to close the gaps; c) Create datasets of industry-relevant cases for use in the
classroom, applicable across various private sectors; d) Create pedogeological
materials with learning outcomes that include new skillsets and methodologies
valuable in private sector employment for implementations in identified
atmospheric science/meteorological courses; e) Develop a sustainable framework
for collaborative projects or data sharing between private sector and academic
community; f) Promote the usage of and engage the academic community on the
development and benefits of the new pedological materials in the classroom. The
benefits of this conference are intended for the entire atmospheric science
higher education community and have the potential to impact the future workforce
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.