* 2146931
* SBIR Phase I:  Neuromodulation device to promote healthy sleeping cycle
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Alexander Poltorak, NEUROLIGHT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,851.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to provide a
safe, wearable device to to improve the quality of sleep. Sleep deprivation due
to insomnia or other factors represents a significant health risk linked to
various daily issues and later disorders in life. The lack of sleep costs the
United States an estimated $411 billion in lost productivity and wages. This
novel medical technology will provide an externally worn system which delivers a
combination of low risk and reversible visual and auditory impulses, enabling
patients to experience brainwaves associated with the desired restorative sleep
stage. The product aims to capture a significant portion of the annual $80B
global sleep aid market predominantly comprised of supplements and drugs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will complete prototype engineering for a patient worn system which
provides sensory stimulation in order to modulate brain waveforms during sleep.
The system utilizes controlled and safe light and sound stimuli to transpose the
brainwaves associated with the desired sleeping state into the recipient’s brain
measured using non invasive electrical activity (EEG). The system is based on
peer-reviewed evidence that normal brain wave patterns can be effectively
transposed to a subject suffering from sleep disorders for restoring normative
sleep. The phase I project will complete the data analysis of reference patient
sleep patterns, and prototype design engineering to enable pilot studies and
gaining evidence in subsequent stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.