* 2146791
* Revising Models of the Glacier-ocean Boundary Layer with Novel Laboratory Experiments
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Alexander Robel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 660,800.00

Melt from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets is increasingly contributing to
sea-level rise. This ice sheet mass loss is primarily driven by the thinning,
retreat, and acceleration of glaciers in contact with the ocean. Observations
from the field and satellites indicate that glaciers are sensitive to changes at
the ice-ocean interface and that the increase in submarine melting is likely to
be driven by the discharge of meltwater from underneath the glacier known as
subglacial meltwater plumes. The melting of glacier ice also directly adds a
large volume of freshwater into the ocean, potentially causing significant
changes in the circulation of ocean waters that regulate global heat transport,
making ice-ocean interactions an important potential factor in climate change
and variability. The ability to predict, and hence adequately respond to,
climate change and sea-level rise therefore depends on our knowledge of the
small-scale processes occurring in the vicinity of subglacial meltwater plumes
at the ice-ocean interface. Currently, understanding of the underlying physics
is incomplete; for example, different models of glacier-ocean interaction could
yield melting rates that vary over a factor of five for the same heat supply
from the ocean. It is then very difficult to assess the reliability of
predictive models. This project will use comprehensive laboratory experiments to
study how the melt rates of glaciers in the vicinity of plumes are affected by
the ice roughness, ice geometry, ocean turbulence, and ocean density
stratification at the ice-ocean interface. These experiments will then be used
to develop new and improved predictive models of ice-sheet melting by the ocean.
This project builds bridges between modern experimental fluid mechanics and
glaciology with the goal of leading to advances in both fields. As a part of
this work, two graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training and
each year two undergraduate students will be trained in experimental fluid
mechanics to assist in this work and develop their own research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a comprehensive
experimental program designed for studying the melt rates of glacier ice under
the combined influences of (1) turbulence occurring near and at the ice-ocean
interface, (2) density stratification in the ambient water column, (3)
irregularities in the bottom topology of an ice shelf, and (4) differing spatial
distributions of multiple meltwater plumes. The objective of the experiments is
to obtain high-resolution data of the velocity, density, and temperature near/at
the ice-ocean interface, which will then be used to improve understanding of
melt processes down to scales of millimeters, and to devise new, more robust
numerical models of glacier evolution and sea-level rise. Specially, laser-
based, optical techniques in experimental fluid mechanics (particle image
velocity and laser-induced fluorescence) will be used to gather the data, and
the experiments will be conducted using refractive-index matching techniques to
eliminate changes in refractive indices that could otherwise bias the
measurements. The experiments will be run inside a climate-controlled cold room
to mimic field conditions (ocean temperature from 0-10 degrees C). The project
will use 3D-printing to create different casting molds for making ice blocks
with different types of roughness. The goal is to investigate how ice melt rate
changes as a function of the properties of the plume, the ambient ocean water,
and the geometric properties of the ice interface. Based on the experimental
findings, this project will develop and test a new integral-plume-model coupled
to a regional circulation model (MITgcm) that can be used to predict the effects
of glacial melt on ocean circulation and sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.