* 2146021
* CAREER: Nonlocal Metasurfaces with All-Angle Control of Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Chia Wei Hsu, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Angle-resolved modulation of light is at the heart of technologies such as
cameras, microscopes, LiDAR, Li-Fi, and augmented-reality devices.
Miniaturization of these devices are important for mobile, wearable, medical
(e.g., endoscope), and automobile applications. Nanostructures designed to
tailor the flow of light can substantially bring down the size, weight, and cost
of such devices, but a paradigm shift is necessary to come up with designs that
impart the appropriate modulation for not just one but all of the incident
angles of interest. This research program will build the analytical and
numerical tools for designing photonic devices with all-angle control of light,
as well as exploring new designs that can enable compact cameras with large
field of view and high-speed spatial light modulators. The computational tools
developed will be made open source. Knowledge created from this research program
will be incorporated into a new graduate course on applied physics at USC. These
activities are further integrated with teaching and outreach activities
including high school and undergraduate students in the research program,
creating STEM projects for high school students, and introducing interactive
optics demos to K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical metasurfaces
provide a versatile platform for spatially-resolved modulation of the phase,
amplitude, and polarization of light while being amendable to large-scale
fabrication. However, the widely adopted unit-cell-based locally periodic
approximation is inaccurate and suboptimal for large-angle operations, and local
phase-shift profiles cannot describe angle-multiplexed responses which are
fundamentally nonlocal. While designs based on full-wave simulations can in
principle overcome these limitations, they are extremely time consuming given
the large sizes of metasurfaces and the numerous input and output states
involved. This research program will develop new numerical methods that are
orders-of-magnitude more efficient in computing the transmission matrices of
large-area metasurfaces, introduce new perfectly matched layers that can
significantly reduce the computation domain of metasurface simulations,
establish fundamental thickness bounds for nonlocal metasurfaces with a large
field of view, and design and realize new classes of nonlocal metasurfaces that
are enabled by the preceding tools including compact wide-field-of-view imaging
systems that reach the fundamental bounds and high-speed metasurface spatial
light modulators. Beyond metasurfaces, these studies will also improve the
fundamental understanding of multi-mode optical systems and create numerical
tools for the broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.