* 2146804
* Collaborative Research: How have orogenies, rifting, and recent mantle dynamics shaped the lithosphere beneath the New England Appalachians?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Paul Karabinos, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 117,832.00

Continents represent a key component of the Earth’s plate tectonic system. Plate
tectonics appears to be unique among all planetary bodies in our solar system
and plays a crucial role in making our planet hospitable to life. Continents are
formed and modified by fundamental plate tectonic processes, including
volcanism, mountain-building, collisions with other continental masses, and
rifting or breakup of supercontinents. Understanding the evolution of
continental lithosphere (that is, the crust and uppermost mantle beneath
continents) through time remains one of the most important challenges in Earth
science. This project will study the processes that have shaped the continental
lithosphere beneath the New England Appalachians through geologic time using a
multi-disciplinary approach that includes seismic imaging of the crust and upper
mantle, the analysis of geological structures, and dating the motion on ancient
faults. The investigators will carry out detailed imaging using seismic waves
from distant earthquakes measured at seismometers deployed in two linear arrays
(one across New York and Massachusetts, the other across Vermont, New Hampshire,
and Maine). They will pair their seismic imaging work with studies of geologic
structures exposed at the surface that will provide essential context on its
plate tectonic history. The integration of information obtained from both
approaches will illuminate the processes that have shaped the lithosphere
beneath New England through the geologic past, opening a window into how
continental lithosphere evolves as a part of the Earth’s plate tectonic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand how rifting,
subduction, and terrane accretion have shaped lithospheric structure beneath New
England: Does the lithosphere preserve a record of subduction and accretion or
does lithospheric structure heal over time? How do subsequent accretion events
overprint the structure of earlier collisions? How did Mesozoic rifting affect
the structure of Paleozoic accretions? Are recent to ongoing mantle processes
modifying the lithospheric structure? The investigators will analyze data from
the NEST (New England Seismic Transects) experiment, a deployment of ~25
broadband seismometers that is configured to resolve crustal targets on length
scales that are appropriate for direct linkage with geological structures. They
will apply a suite of imaging techniques (receiver function analysis, body wave
travel time analysis, wavefield migration imaging, and SKS splitting
measurements) that will provide a comprehensive view of both the isotropic and
anisotropic structure of the New England crust and upper mantle, including the
region underlain by the so-called Northern Appalachian Anomaly (NAA). The U-Pb
geochronology work will focus on the identification and analysis of xenocrystic
(inherited) cores in zircon grains from arc plutonic and volcanic rocks from the
Shelburne Falls and Bronson Hill arcs, in order to understand the history and
timing of Taconic (and later) orogenic processes. The investigators will also
conduct field work and structural analyses to investigate the extent and
relative timing on frontal thrusts of basement massifs and the Taconic Mountains
in western New England and New York, and the Connecticut Valley border fault
system in central New England. They will constrain the timing of deformation by
collecting and dating samples via 40Ar/39Ar geochronology from these regions, in
order to determine how widespread reactivation of old faults (and displacement
on new faults) has been throughout the region. The project emphasizes
undergraduate involvement in cross-disciplinary research and field work,
particularly by participants from groups that have been historically
underrepresented in Earth science, enabled by collaboration among faculty at a
liberal arts college and research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.