* 2146440
* CAREER: Deciphering the roles of nodule-specific PLAT domain genes in the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis and host-strain specificity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Catalina Pislariu, Texas Woman's University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 541,957.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although nitrogen is the most
abundant gas in the Earth’s atmosphere, it cannot be assimilated by plants and
animals unless it is reduced to ammonium and other bioavailable forms, in a
process called nitrogen fixation. The conventional way of growing most of the
world’s crops is to apply reduced forms of nitrogen as fertilizer. Although it
promotes crop yields, much of the fertilizer leaches out into groundwater,
streams, and oceans, causing severe ecological disturbances, including
overgrowth of plant life, oxygen depletion, and death of animal life. Due to
overuse, more than 500 sites of coastal waters worldwide are now declared ‘dead
zones’. A group of soil bacteria collectively known as rhizobia can reduce (fix)
nitrogen. Legumes establish mutually beneficial associations (symbioses) with
compatible rhizobia, by allowing their selective entry into newly developed
organs (root nodules), thus acquiring an internal source of fertilizer. Nitrogen
fixation efficiency varies in different legume-rhizobia associations; therefore,
for high yields, fertilizer nitrogen needs to be applied on legume crops. This
shuts down symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF). The project seeks to uncover new
mechanisms of host-strain specificity to improve SNF efficiency, informing the
development of crop varieties and engineered bacterial strains that can enhance
the economic potential of SNF for low-input, sustainable agriculture. Research
activities from this project will be integrated into an inquiry- and project-
based revamped graduate course-lab, and into various educational activities
including training of undergraduate and graduate students, a postdoctoral
researcher, and training disadvantaged middle- and high school girls from rural
Texas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An intriguing aspect of SNF is host-strain
specificity, critical for efficient nitrogen fixation, but, still, poorly
understood at the genetic and the molecular level. Because the rhizosphere
contains multiple rhizobial strains at any time, it is critical for a legume
host to distinguish between friend and foe, and, also, to distinguish between
efficient and less efficient friends, for optimal nitrogen fixation. The
proposed research builds on the hypothesis that the Medicago truncatula MtNPD1
gene (nodule-specific polycystin-1, lipoxygenase, alpha-toxin domain-containing
protein) orchestrates rhizobial selection in order to maintain effective
nitrogen fixation in root nodules. The host-strain specific phenotype of the
npd1 mutant implies that MtNPD1 may be interacting with certain bacterial
factors to promote survival and normal function of compatible strains inside
root nodules. An assortment of molecular, genetic, proteomic, genomic, and
microscopic approaches will be used to decipher the biological roles of MtNPD1
and the other four members of this nodule-specific gene family. The main goals
of the project are to identify plant and/or bacterial protein partners of
MtNPD1, refine intracellular MtNPD1 localization in a strain-dependent manner,
and identify bacterial factors linked to the NPD1 gene function and host-strain
specificity using pan-genome analysis and genomic library switching between
strains with contrasting fate in npd1 nodules. Altogether, the proposed work is
poised to enhance our understanding of how M. truncatula selects favorable
symbiotic partners, thus optimizing SNF with specific rhizobial
strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.