* 2146868
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Bridging Research and Visualization Design Practice via a Sustainable Knowledge Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Nam Wook Kim, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This project aims to help align visualization practice with state-of-the-art
empirical research around visualization effectiveness. This alignment is
critical because a wide range of professionals in sectors including government,
business, engineering, and journalism are adopting data visualizations for data
analysis connected to social issues. However, their data analysis and
visualization work is often not well-informed by empirical research. Designers
are often self-taught, while practitioner-focused design guidelines are often
not substantiated by empirical evidence of their effectiveness and come from
different and sometimes inconsistent sources. Often, those sources are not
researchers; although there have been some efforts to develop research-backed
guidelines and visualization tools, on balance, the research community has not
made a concerted effort to make its results usable for practitioners. This, in
turn, leads to less effective visualizations that can harm both decision-making
and public understanding. This project aims to bridge this knowledge gap by
building a comprehensive platform for improving access to and learning about
effective visualization design and promoting informed, evidence-based design
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around three research
thrusts. The first thrust will explore the knowledge gap by examining the
current state of design practice and empirical research. The project will survey
the landscape of existing guidelines, collect a dataset of more and less
accurate and accessible visualization examples, and analyze overlaps and
discrepancies of these guidelines and visualizations with what is known from
empirical research studies. This analysis of artifacts will be complemented by
interviews with practitioners and researchers that focus on the practices and
challenges they have around knowledge transfer. The second thrust will
consolidate the data collection and analysis to develop an ontological framework
for scaffolding visualization design knowledge, along with a knowledge-based
platform where people can browse, discuss, and maintain an evolving list of
guidelines, empirical evidence, and relevant visualization examples. The final
thrust will go beyond knowledge management to production and dissemination. The
project will employ a citizen science approach to investigate the unexplored
design space in real-world visualizations that involve design elements absent in
typical empirical studies. The platform will also provide a programming
interface to enable novel external applications such as intelligent design
assistants and educational assessment tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.