* 2146518
* CAREER: Foundations of Statistical Program Reasoning
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Mukund Raghothaman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2027
* USD 252,290.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program analysis and verification
systems are both challenging to design and expensive to operate, with a
reputation for poor scalability, false warnings, and missed bugs. In addition,
these program-reasoning tools interoperate poorly with the continuous and
iterative nature of modern software engineering processes, and only have
rudimentary ways of interacting with human engineers. The project develops
techniques to extend the underlying deductive basis of these analyses---commonly
expressed using declarative formalisms such as constrained Horn clauses (CHCs)
or Datalog---with probabilistic modes of reasoning. These probabilistic models
provide a mechanism to prioritize warnings, incorporate feedback from
developers, and combine knowledge from multiple analysis tools. As such, the
project's main impact is to significantly improve the accuracy and usability of
program analysis technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops
algorithms to automatically learn probabilistic models from analysis of
implementations, and determine their accuracy using open-source code corpora
such as GitHub and databases such as Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE).
Next, it develops ranking techniques to optimize effective accuracy, time needed
to discover bugs, and other programmer-specified relevance criteria. The project
introduces new interfaces for users to interact with program analysis
algorithms, indicate preferences, and provide feedback on ground truth. For the
analysis user, the project builds new bug-finding tools that provide useful,
actionable insight into their programs. For analysis designers, the project
offers new ways to apply statistical techniques in program verification, and new
opportunities to produce accurate and scalable program analysis
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.