* 2146757
* Testing the Pristine Conditions Hypothesis of the Confidence-Accuracy Relationship in Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* James Lampinen, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 476,910.00

It has been estimated that eyewitness identification plays a role in
approximately 80,000 criminal cases per year. Eyewitnesses can provide crucial
evidence in criminal cases, but eyewitness identifications are not always
accurate. Eyewitnesses can make two kinds of mistakes. They can fail to identify
guilty individuals from lineups and they can falsely identify innocent people
from lineups. Both types of errors present a threat to public safety because
they contribute to perpetrators being free to commit additional crimes. In
addition, mistaken identifications risk the liberty of innocent suspects. For
these reasons, it is important to better understand the situations and
procedures that are associated with accurate eyewitness
identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important factor that may be used to
predict eyewitness accuracy is the witnessâ€™s confidence at the time of the
identification. A number of studies have found that when a witness identifies a
suspect with high confidence that the witness is quite likely to be correct.
This is particularly true when ideal procedures are used by police to obtain the
identification. However, more recently, some studies have found that there are
situations where, even when ideal procedures are used, highly confident
witnesses are not always highly accurate. The researchers have proposed a series
of studies using virtual reality recreations of crimes to help understand when
highly confident witnesses are likely to be highly accurate and when they are
likely to be less accurate. Use of virtual reality can create more lifelike and
emotionally engaging events than have traditionally been used by eyewitness
researchers. The research focuses on testing two ideas. The first idea is that
some witnesses might have a better understanding of how their own memory and
perception works than other witnesses. Witnesses who are more in tune with how
their memory and perception works are likely to only say they are confident when
the probability of being correct is high. Witnesses who have a poor
understanding of how their memory and perception works, may mistakenly say they
are confident, even when the odds of being correct are lower. The second idea is
that there may be witnessing conditions that are so poor (e.g., poor lighting,
very long distance) that even the best witnesses are unlikely to be very
accurate and witnesses may not fully take into account how poor the witnessing
conditions are when making their confidence judgments. These hypotheses will be
tested through a series of experiments testing both child and adult witnesses
and will provide a better understanding of how eyewitness confidence and
accuracy are related.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.