* 2146232
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the Role of Literacy on Predictive Processing during Spoken Language Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 18,825.00

Prediction has been proposed as a mental operation that facilitates language
comprehension. That is, when listening to a sentence, a listener makes
predictions about up-coming words (for instance, predicting "sugar" after
hearing "I drink my coffee with cream and ..."). When people's predictions are
correct, words are read faster because the person has anticipated what is coming
up. Past experimental research has demonstrated that prediction in a reading
task is modulated by reading skill. The interpretation of this finding is that
because reading exposes people to different types of sentence structures and to
a wider range of vocabulary, individuals with high reading skill have added
knowledge that can be used to generate accurate predictions. One aspect that has
not been considered in past literature, however, is the role of socioeconomic
status (SES). This is an important variable to investigate because individuals
from low SES backgrounds are also more likely to have less reading experience.
Hence, it is unclear whether it is reading skill per se or socioeconomic status
that impacts predictive ability. Clarifying this point is the goal of the
present doctoral dissertation research study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing data
from participants in a community where literacy and SES are not directly linked,
two experiments will be conducted to determine the role of literacy on
predictive processing during spoken language comprehension. In Experiment 1, eye
movements to objects displayed on a computer screen will be recorded while
participants listen to sentences where the cue to anticipation is grammatical.
Experiment 2 will also employ an eye tracking technique, this time to examine
how grammatical and semantic cues modulate anticipatory processes. Findings from
the proposed experiments will be used to create and to offer literacy workshops
for diverse and less-advantaged populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.