* 2146095
* CAREER: Extending Human Dexterity Through Hand-Held Continuum Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Tania Morimoto, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2027
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will serve to promote the
progress of science and to advance national health by providing new knowledge
related to hand-held continuum robots. Such robots are promising—particularly
for navigation through sensitive and constrained environments—because they
enable a workflow like using manual tools and can combine the benefits of direct
human operation with the precision and dexterity of robotic control. However,
the complex kinematics of continuum robots, along with the direct physical
coupling of the human and robot, pose challenges for how to enable precise and
intuitive control for operators. This project will investigate how different
human-continuum robot interaction methods affect task performance, and insights
will help guide the creation of new human-in-the-loop control methods and
continuum robot designs. The outcomes of this project have potential for
significant societal impact by transforming task performance in several
industries, including healthcare, inspection, and manufacturing. This project
will also support an extensive education and outreach plan that includes the
development of a new hand-held haptic device along with related hands-on lab
activities designed to promote problem-based learning that will be used in both
undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as in a series of workshops for
local middle school students to increase exposure and excitement for
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine how
different human-continuum robot interaction methods affect task performance and
to test these approaches in the context of a hand-held concentric tube robot and
a hand-held, steerable vine robot. To achieve this objective, the research will
proceed with three main aims. The first aim focuses on developing methods for
estimating and interpreting user intent to achieve seamless integration of
manual and teleoperated input, as well as quantifying the effects of this
integration on task performance. The second aim focuses on improving robotic
tool embodiment through automating the control of the robot shape and through
incorporating haptic feedback. Finally, the third aim centers on evaluating the
extent to which the principles of human-continuum robot interaction learned
through the first two aims hold across multiple robot platforms. For this
purpose, a new hand-held, steerable vine robot will be created and used for
testing the applicability of the new methods. Overall, this research will help
advance the fields of flexible and soft robotics and human-robot interaction,
enabling intuitive deployment of robots with shapes that can be controlled for
safe and effective completion of tasks in constrained environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.