* 2146264
* CAREER: Standing Out in a Crowd, Neutron Based Methods to Study Molecular
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Jonathan Nickels, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2027
* USD 194,019.00

Neutron scattering is a powerful and elegant experimental technique. Vital in
studying hydrogen-rich biological and polymeric materials, magnetism, imaging,
and exploring exotic states of matter; neutrons have clear role in the national
scientific repertoire. This project will develop novel neutron scattering
experiments – leveraging the unique advantages of neutrons to address
fundamental questions in molecular transport emerging from crowded aqueous
environments. This project will combine these research activities with the
creation of a teaching module within the mass transport course for chemical
engineers using neutron scattering to demonstrate the molecular origins of
diffusion in simple liquids; along with the development of a new undergraduate
course focused on "Large Scale Science". The overwhelming majority of neutron
science in the US is conducted at large facilities, cementing the notion that
some science simply requires shared national facilities. Neutron sources are
significant national investments, the "Large Scale Science" class will focus on
how neutron scattering facilities and other large scale scientific facilities
come to be, what they accomplish, how they operate, and finally, how they fit
into the national and international scientific landscape. Students will visit
national facilities and representative leaders to learn more about the process
and priorities of large-scale science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecularly crowded
environments are structurally complex and dynamic. Molecular transport via
diffusion is often observed to become anomalous within these environments. This
means that the mean square displacement (MSD) exhibits a weaker time dependence
than the typical Brownian diffusion mechanism. Solutes may become trapped for
arbitrarily long residence times, demonstrate highly correlated relaxation
times, and/or coupled dynamics to the local solvent. Neutrons offer unique
strategies to probe such questions when combined with contrast matching and
scattering cross-section manipulation strategies. Selective deuteration is the
enabling methodology for neutron scattering experiments in this project.
Deuteration will be deployed in several ways to highlight the solute molecule
motions in crowded environment as if it were a single particle in dilute
solution. This will isolate the single molecule contribution to anomalous
diffusion. This can be compared then to the local relaxations of the solvent or
other medium, such as a hydrogel, to isolate localized hydrodynamic effects
versus collective effects. Structural characterizations of the same systems will
inform our theoretical understanding of the ergodicity of the system, the
violations of which, can explain some of the anomalous phenomena through better
understanding of the flaws in the assumed structural and dynamical distributions
at the heart of existing models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.