* 2146003
* CAREER: Algorithmic Aspects of Pan-genomic Data Modeling, Indexing and Querying
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Sharma Thankachan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 363,637.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address the
following question: How to model the combined information of a pan-genome
collection succinctly (and in a biologically meaningful way) such that the
genomic analysis on that representation is both easy-to-compute and accurate?
This is one of the active lines of bioinformatics research currently. Pan-genome
collections may be represented as high-scoring Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA)
data, indexed text data, or the more popular graph-based representations (pan-
genome graphs). One of the fundamental objectives of these models is to support
read mapping queries efficiently. To that end, this research will lead to a new
class of string/graph algorithms for the analysis of pan-genomic data that are
closely tied to critical applications that have the potential to make a lasting
impact on the theory and practice of data-driven bioinformatics. The key
findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed conferences, journals, and
workshop tutorials. Several Ph.D. and Master's theses will also evolve from this
research. The investigator is committed to ensuring the participation of women,
students from underrepresented minority groups, and undergraduates in this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel aspects of this project include new
graph algorithms parameterized by different graph parameters and techniques for
indexing (highly similar, possibly dynamic) texts and graphs. The
parameterization of the string-to-graph matching and related problems might lead
to several efficient, practical solutions for restricted graph classes. Such
problems are well motivated by pressing applications, including read-mapping and
(reference-based) genome assembly. Additionally, some fundamental computational
biology problems, like the Multiple Sequence Alignment, will be revisited in the
context of pan-genomics for faster approximations and better heuristics. A
deeper investigation on popular heuristics like co-linear chaining is another
direction. The goal here is to provide solid mathematical reasoning on why such
methods work well in practice. These research objectives align with the
investigator's background in string algorithms and his long-term career goals of
transforming foundational research into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.