* 2146995
* OPUS: Lifetime strategies of wild bottlenose dolphins based on 40 years of research
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,189.00

Despite considerable public and scientific interest in their large brains,
complex communication systems and sociability, the detailed lives of wild
dolphins and whales remain virtually unknown. Because cetaceans are so long-
lived and difficult to study, no synthetic study on the lives of any wild
dolphin or whale species from birth to death has been published. The OPUS award
will help change that. The Shark Bay Bottlenose Dolphin Project, based in
Western Australia, is the largest comprehensive study of any wild dolphin or
whale in the world, including behavioral, demographic, ecological, genetic and
physiological data on over 1750 dolphins from birth to death. A team of
researchers has examined social behavior, social bonds, networks and structure,
kinship, tool-use, foraging ecology, lifetime reproductive success, senescence,
disease transmission, human impacts, and responses to extreme climate events.
Although there are dozens of long-term studies of wild cetaceans (spanning 10+
years), none have this level of detail about the lives of individual animals.
The OPUS project has two major goals: (1) Complete 3 books (for 3 distinct
audiences: scholars, the public, children) that synthesize 40 years (1984-2023)
of longitudinal study on wild bottlenose dolphins; and (2) Make these data
available to the public and scientists from diverse fields, thus accelerating
our knowledge and advancing our ability to protect wildlife species in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The books will synthesize 40 years of research for
distinct audiences, but will, in each case, provide insight into the lives of
dolphins at the individual and population level. The material will cover the
challenges of each life stage (infancy, juvenile period, early and late
adulthood), significant topics like tool use and social networks, and the major
threats to dolphins (e.g., epidemics, fishing gear entanglement, collapse of
food sources, pollution, and extreme climate events). In addition, the OPUS will
support integration of image, behavioral, demographic, spatial, and genetic data
so that scientists from multiple disciplines can access these datasets. There
are few longitudinal databases for any wildlife species that are this
comprehensive, with high dimensional complexity, and methodological rigor. The
investigator will finalize the relational database (integration of all archival
and current data) and create a detailed guide to facilitate access for the next
generation of scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.