* 2146838
* RINGS: Ensuring Reliability in mmWave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Leandros Tassiulas, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 755,680.00

This project aims to design resilient low-complexity transmission mechanisms for
multi-hop mmWave networks that achieve provably near-optimal performance and
provide service assurances. Within the wireless landscape, several important use
cases rely on multihop mmWave network deployments, including private networks,
such as in shopping centers, airports, museums and enterprises; mmWave mesh
networks that use mmWave links as backhaul in dense urban scenarios; military
applications employing mobile hotspots; and mmWave based vehicle-to-everything
(V2X) services, such as cooperative perception. Despite the aforementioned
promising aspects of mmWave communication, it is well known that -- because of
the hostile propagation nature of the mmWave spectrum -- mmWave links are highly
sensitive to blockage, channels may abruptly change and paths get disrupted.
Moreover, as in traditional wireless networks, mmWave network nodes are
susceptible to component failures, due to factors such as natural hazards and
resource depletion. If successful, this project aims to provide novel
transmission mechanisms that are resilient against such
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards achieving the objectives of the
research, the project builds on the so-called 1-2-1 network model that offers a
simple yet informative model for mmWave networks. The project work includes the
design of proactive mechanisms, that aim to build resilience in advance by
exploiting tools that range from multipath diversity to multilevel and network
coding; the design of reactive mechanisms, that identify and adapt to link or
node failures, using tools such as backpressure algorithms and reinforcement
learning; and synthesis of the above mechanisms to enable a suite of tools that
can serve a variety of applications. A key feature that differentiates mmWave
networks from networks that are represented as graphs is beam scheduling, which
offers both opportunities to build resilience, as well as challenges mainly in
terms of complexity of operation. The project develops solutions that bring
together tools from several disciplines; in particular, it combines tools from
information theory, machine learning, algorithms, and networking to address the
proposed goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.