* 2146261
* CAREER: Bayesian Graph Signal Processing for Machine Perception
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Florian Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 02/28/2027
* USD 169,780.00

Algorithmic methods for machine perception can detect, localize, and track
objects in the environment. They will establish new services and applications in
fields such as ocean sciences, robotics, autonomous driving, indoor
localization, and crowd counting. Existing methods rely on simplifications and
preprocessing stages that reduce the data rate of the measurements, but also
discard relevant information and thus limit performance. In particular, if
objects are close to each other or the measurements they generate are weak,
existing methods are often unable to perceive them reliably. This project aims
to establish new perception methods that make optimal use of all the available
information to provide unprecedented performance in challenging scenarios. The
key principle that will enable the use of a large number of sensors with high
data rates, is to systematically exploit graph structures in the mathematical
formulation of perception problems. The developed methods will be evaluated
using underwater acoustic data provided by vector sensors and large arrays of
hydrophones. Innovation resulting from this project will substantially improve
the performance of marine perception systems but also lead to tangible advances
in a variety of further applications including autonomous driving, medical
imaging, and wireless communication. Interdisciplinary education and outreach
activities aim to expose a diverse cohort of students to state-of-the-art
machine learning and perception techniques as well as their deployment at sea.
Research results will be disseminated to the scientific community and used in
teaching materials as well as tutorials and short courses to be presented
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce graph-based
estimation to establish perception methods that make use of all the available
information and thus yield unprecedented perception performance. The principle
of "stretching" or "opening" graph nodes will be employed to replace high-
dimensional operations by lower-dimensional ones. Based on this principle,
iterative perception methods with convergence guarantees as well as strongly
reduced computational complexity and superior scalability will be developed.
Contrary to conventional object perception approaches, the high scalability of
the envisaged methods makes it possible to generate and maintain a very large
number of object hypotheses and, in turn, improve perception performance. Of
particular interest are methods where a new object hypothesis is formed for each
real- or complex-valued data cell (sample, pixel, or bin), and each data cell is
probabilistically associated with an object hypothesis in a holistic graph-based
framework. In addition, the research team will introduce graph-based estimation
methods that embed simulators of the physical environment to exploit multipath
propagation and virtual apertures with the goal of improving the perception of
low-observable objects and providing robustness against uncertain environmental
parameters. The project will also devise an extension of graph-based machine
perception methods that adaptively refines the underlying statistical model by
information learned from data. Here, the graph that describes the original
statistical model of the perception problem is supported by a graph neural
network trained with labeled real data or with synthesized data provided by
simulators of the physical environment. Finally, an open software and hardware
platform for the demonstration of perception capabilities will bring together
research and education as well as support comprehensive outreach and
dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.