* 2146206
* CAREER: Improving Prosthesis Usability through Enhanced Touch Feedback and Intelligent Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Jeremy Brown, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2027
* USD 746,255.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research that
contributes to the knowledge needed to improve the functional usability of
upper-limb prostheses, thereby promoting the progress of science, advancing
national health, and securing national defense. Upper-limb prostheses are
artificial limbs used to replace someone’s natural limb after limb amputation.
These limbs are often motorized, featuring hands and fingers that move much like
our natural hands and fingers. Unfortunately, these devices do not provide the
wearer with haptic (touch-based) information. Haptic information is essential
for many tasks, such as picking up an egg without cracking it, closing a
resealable bag, or drinking from a plastic cup. This award supports fundamental
research needed to develop a new type of prosthesis that intelligently interacts
with the world like our natural limbs and provides wearers with haptic
information of those interactions. This new prosthesis will interpret the
wearers’ task intent and assist the wearer in accomplishing tasks with minimal
mental effort. Improving the usability of prostheses will ultimately lead to a
better quality of life for individuals experiencing limb loss, including
military veterans. Likewise, the knowledge gained through this research will
prove beneficial to other types of assistive devices, allowing more individuals
to return to the workforce after injury. Therefore, results from this research
will benefit the US economy and society. This research involves several
disciplines, including mechanical design, electronics, control theory,
biomedicine, and robotics. Through this interdisciplinary approach, the research
will broaden participation amongst the engineers, scientists, and physicians
developing assistive technologies and those in society who directly or
indirectly benefit from these technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dexterous
manipulation with our upper-limbs originates from a hierarchical control scheme
in which task intent is converted to operational motor actions in the peripheral
limbs that appropriately tune the limb’s mechanical impedance to accomplish the
task goals, all while haptic feedback from the limb is used to track task
progress and refine the motor plan. Achieving comparable dexterous control
capabilities with an upper-limb prosthesis requires a robust understanding of
the appropriate means by which this hierarchical control scheme can be extended
out through the prosthesis to the environment. This research seeks to fill this
knowledge gap through investigations into intelligent control that will enable
an amputee to perform dexterous tasks considered infeasible with current
prosthesis technology. The research team will utilize data-driven approaches to
model task intent from physiological and environmental interaction measures and
derive and empirically validate impedance control and haptic feedback strategies
that adapt to the amputee’s intent and the context of the task being
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.