* 2146924
* Collaborative Research: Community Structure of Marine Macroalgae: A Trait-Based Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Robert Miller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,198,668.00

Macroalgae, commonly known as seaweeds, are among the most important and diverse
primary producers in coastal marine ecosystems. Macroalgae range in form from
&gt;30-m high giant kelp to mm-scale filamentous turfs. They shape aquatic
ecosystems worldwide, providing food and habitat to legions of species including
many important to coastal fisheries and recreation. At the same time, the
diversity of macroalgal species and forms makes it challenging to understand the
processes affecting their abundance and distribution. Past efforts to define
functional groups based on gross morphology – for example, finely branching vs.
large-bladed or erect vs. prostrate - have had some success in interpreting
ecological patterns, yet key information is lost and quantitative tests of
predictions often fail with such broad groupings. Alternatively, trait-based
modeling is a promising approach to incorporate more complexity and define
relationships between quantifiable characteristics, such as blade mass per area,
and the distribution and abundance of species. This project combines field,
laboratory, and modeling components to measure macroalgal traits and validate
models of species distribution in the coastal ocean. The outcome will be a
framework for macroalgal communities that can be used to predict how the
distribution of groups and species change across space and time. The project
will provide training for undergraduate and graduate students in field and
laboratory research. Educational outreach efforts will leverage collaboration
with the Santa Barbara Coastal Long Term Ecological Research project to reach
K-12 students and teachers, including urban Los Angeles. Other outreach includes
interaction with the media, the Santa Barbara Sea Center, and agencies such as
the Santa Barbara Channel National Marine Sanctuary and Channel Islands National
Park. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community ecology is often mired in case histories
explaining distribution and abundance of select species, yet we need a more
holistic understanding of the forces driving marine ecosystems to predict change
due to climate and human impacts. In temperate marine ecosystems, macroalgae
serve as the base of food webs and provide habitat, but we lack a framework for
understanding macroalgal ecology beyond decades-old gross morphological
generalizations. Trait-based modeling is a promising approach to incorporate
complexity and define relationships between quantifiable traits and the
distribution and abundance of species. The investigators are combining field and
laboratory measurements with modeling to assess how well the depth distribution
of common macroalgal species in southern California is predictable based on
measured functional traits. The project objectives include: 1) define and
measure key functional traits within and across key species of macroalgae; 2)
create a trait-based simulation model for the assemblage of nearshore macroalgal
communities as a function of depth; 3) test the model’s predictions by
quantifying the depth distribution of macroalgal species, grazers, and
environmental parameters in the Santa Barbara Channel; and 4) use individual-
based models to test mechanistic hypotheses for interspecific competition. The
investigators are accomplishing the first objective by measuring a suite of
functional traits related to performance at multiple sites (and depths) for at
least 20 species of common macroalgae in the Santa Barbara Channel, including
mass-specific photosynthetic rate, nitrogen uptake rate, specific blade area,
canopy height, crown area, blade thickness, mechanical and material properties,
lifespan, and grazing resistance. For objective 2 the investigators are creating
an ecosystem model that represents a large number of potentially viable
macroalgal “species” with stochastically determined physiological
characteristics. Initialized species will interact with one another and their
environment, evolving into an ecosystem where community structure and diversity
are not imposed, but are emergent properties. The third objective involves an
extensive field program to quantify the distribution of all identifiable
macroalgal species across a depth gradient from 0 m to the terminus of hard
substrate (up to 40m depth) at six sites in the Santa Barbara Channel. Physical
properties (light, temperature, wave forces) are also measured along each cross-
depth transect. In the fourth objective, the investigators are using results to
improve their model, adding interspecific competition in an individual-based
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.