* 2146728
* CAREER: SusChEM: Iron Catalysts for the Reduction of Amides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Michael Findlater, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2023
* USD 108,188.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael Findlater of the Department of Chemistry at Texas
Tech University is developing sustainable catalysts based upon the earth
abundant transition metals. Chemical catalysis is used to produce many commodity
chemicals in the pharmaceutical, construction, communication and food industries
and thus, is a fundamental economic driver for the U.S. economy. However, many
of the most importance catalytic transformations rely on expensive and rare
metal elements. These rare metals currently provide a critical need in catalytic
chemistry. To meet this challenge, new catalysts based on less toxic and earth
abundant elements are being designed and synthesized as replacements for the
precious metal elements currently in use. An outreach program developed by
Professor Findlater involves the development of traveling Labs which focus on
catalysis. The labs are designed for portability to allow transport to rural
area high schools; allowing the students the means to learn about catalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new environmentally benign
catalysts based on diimine complexes of iron, as well as the study of the varied
mechanisms at play in iron catalysis. Various catalyst structures are being
examined, and the most promising ones are being studied further using X-ray
crystallography, paramagnetic NMR spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectroscopy and
detailed kinetic analyses. The broader impacts of this work include potential
societal benefits from the discovery of catalysts from less toxic, earth
abundant metals and new insight into the reaction chemistry of first-row
transition metals.