* 2146406
* CAREER: Problems in Extremal and Probabilistic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Asaf Ferber, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 173,861.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In this project the PI will study various topics in
extremal and probabilistic combinatorics, two areas which have grown
significantly in both depth and breadth in the 21st century, resulting in
methods that apply well beyond their original settings. These include
applications, and many significant breakthroughs, in number theory, group
theory, probability theory, information theory, and theoretical computer
science. The approaches and techniques resulting from this project will have a
significant impact on the development of these areas and will also be applicable
in other branches of mathematics and theoretical computer science. This project
is also designed for training undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems the PI intends to study
are fundamental and belong to some of the most actively studied topics of
current research in extremal and probabilistic combinatorics. The first set of
questions is coming from the sub-area of Ramsey theory and includes several
classical questions on Ramsey numbers, spectral Ramsey theory, the clique number
of Cayley graphs, Ramsey properties of random graphs, and more. The second set
of questions is related to perfect matchings in (hyper)graphs. In particular,
the PI will study fundamental problems such as: finding the Dirac threshold for
the existence of a perfect matching, finding/counting 1-factorizations in
(pseudo)random hypergraphs, decomposing the edges of d-regular (pseudo)random
d-regular hypergraphs into perfect matchings, etc. Furthermore, the PI intends
to study other interesting problems such as: finding the smallest number of
(linear) bases over a finite field whose union forms an additive base, extremal
problems in k-majority tournaments, counting Hadamard matrices, and more. Common
themes run through these areas, and the methods developed in one area are likely
to have implications for the others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.