* 2146480
* CAREER: Achieving Resilience in Brittle Materials Through Bio-inspired Nested Cylindrical Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Fariborz Tavangarian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2027
* USD 615,796.00

Ceramics and brittle polymers play a pivotal role in biomedical, automotive, and
aerospace applications. Their catastrophic failure when undergoing thermal and
mechanical stresses is a concern. In contrast, although marine spicules are also
made of a brittle ceramic (silica), they show unusual toughness and flexibility
due to their nested cylindrical structure. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will initially focus on investigating the microstructure,
micromechanical properties, and crack development patterns and mechanisms in
marine spicules found in a marine sponge, Euplectella aspergillum. The research
findings will be subsequently used to design and fabricate similar structures
from brittle materials such as rigid polymers and ceramics and explore their
potential for bone tissue engineering and other applications. As part of the
project, research will be integrated in the curriculum to train next-generation
engineers. Undergraduate and graduate underrepresented minority and female
students will be recruited into the research effort. There will be summer
programs and workshops for K-12 students to learn about additive manufacturing.
Lastly, high school teachers will be invited to summer research programs and
industrial connections will be strengthened through collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to investigate the role
of architecture in the facture behavior of bio-inspired nested cylindrical
structures made of brittle materials. The inspiration comes from marine spicules
composed of silica that resist the propagation of cracks due to the layered
structure. The plan is to mimic and engineer similar structures with lower
weight and improved fracture performance. First, a combination of scanning
electron microscopy and finite element modeling will be used to extensively
examine the toughening effect of various geometrical configurations, roughness,
and morphology of the surface of cylinders and materials properties of marine
spicules. These findings will form the basis of various spicule-inspired
structural configurations made of tough polymers and ceramics, which will be
fabricated with stereolithography 3D printing processes. An extensive
experimental program based on the Taguchi method and finite element analysis
will be used to understand the operative deformation mechanisms. Lastly, the
analysis of variance will be performed to find the critical parameters most
affecting the fracture behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.