* 2146563
* CAREER: Reinforcement Learning for Recursive Markov Decision Processes and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Ashutosh Trivedi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 04/30/2027
* USD 227,973.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a
sampling-based approach to optimization of Markov decision processes (MDPs),
where agents rely on rewards to discover optimal solutions. When combined with
powerful approximation schemes (e.g., deep neural networks), RL has been
effective in highly complex tasks traditionally considered beyond reach of
Artificial Intelligence. However, its sensitivity to the approximation
parameters makes RL difficult to use (significant Machine Learning expertise is
demanded of the programmer) and difficult to trust (manual approximations can
invalidate guarantees). The vision of this project is to democratize RL by
developing principled methodologies and powerful tools to improve the usability
and trustworthiness of RL-based programming at scale. These research objectives
are complemented by efforts to integrate the foundations of RL-based
computability in CS education and to explore the role of RL-based programming in
CS education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximation in RL is needed because RL
algorithms with guaranteed convergence work on finite MDPs, and yet scale
poorly. Approximation affects usability and trustworthiness. This proposal
identifies two goals addressing both concerns: 1) to discover convergent RL
beyond finite MDPs and 2) to develop abstraction-based approaches for RL with
rigorous optimization guarantees. The success of the proposed approaches will be
evaluated by their ability to handle systems at scale. The algorithms and
datasets will be disseminated as open-source software. The proposed research
makes fundamental contributions to three disciplines: formal methods, machine
learning, and control theory; at the same time, it takes fundamental, concrete
steps towards broadening participation in computing by making RL-based
programming easier and more inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.