* 2146436
* CAREER: Development of Learning Frameworks for Nonlinear Massive MIMO Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Duy Nguyen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

The need for enabling massive connectivity using energy- and cost-efficient
massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) wireless transceivers, mobile
devices, sensors, and actuators has motivated engineers to use low-cost and non-
customized hardware. However, these hardware components are highly susceptible
to generating nonlinear distortions. Moreover, each component distorts the
signals of interest in its own way with a possibly unknown nonlinear transfer
function that needs to be compensated by signal processing techniques. Studies
of massive MIMO have demonstrated its tolerance to hardware impairments. In
addition, community research efforts have also focused on new performance
frontiers in signal processing for nonlinear massive MIMO. This CAREER project
is framed into these efforts by developing novel learning frameworks for signal
processing in nonlinear massive MIMO systems in which structured optimization of
their performance is not feasible or too complex to implement. The project aims
to construct a holistic approach to estimate, detect, optimize, and adapt in
nonlinear MIMO systems with the development of model-based and model-free
machine learning, deep learning, deep reinforcement learning, and meta-learning
frameworks. The outcomes of the project can transform the area of MIMO signal
processing and propel massive MIMO into the next stage of development. Moreover,
the project will integrate research and education activities through the
development of undergraduate and graduate level courses and an integrated
wireless testbed for research and training. The project also aims to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities and women in research and
educational activities in electrical engineering with an emphasis on
communications and signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop new learning frameworks to resolve the aggregation of nonlinearities in
wireless transceivers and to optimize massive MIMO performance in highly dynamic
and ill-defined operational environments with possibly unknown distortions. The
project is organized into four interconnected thrusts: i) Learning to estimate
and detect with machine learning and deep learning by incorporating the domain
knowledge of nonlinear MIMO for devising efficient model-based and data-driven
learning models, ii) Learning to optimize signaling designs with deep learning
and deep reinforcement learning, focusing on optimizing pilot and signaling
designs for model-based and model-free nonlinear MIMO systems, iii) Learning to
adapt with offline and online meta-learning, focusing on developing learning
models that will enable fast adaptation to a newly observed nonlinear MIMO
system configuration with only few training samples, and iv) Integrating
research into coursework development for teaching wireless communications and
signal processing to undergraduate/graduate students with hands-on experiments
using built-in software-defined radio and off-the-shelf wireless testbeds.
Through the development of learning to estimate, detect, optimize, and adapt
frameworks, this project will promote a better understanding of signal
processing in nonlinear MIMO systems and will have broad applications in other
learning-based wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.