* 2146531
* CAREER: Deregulated Market for Flexible Transmission
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Mostafa Ardakani, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Achieving the United States’ climate goals requires a massive level of
investment in new power transmission infrastructure. This NSF CAREER project
aims to substantially reduce this need by improving the transfer capability of
the existing transmission network. This will be achieved by designing new
markets that provide incentive for efficient operation of flexible transmission.
It is expected that such incentives will lead to enhanced utilization of the
existing grid and pave the way for innovation, making the nation’s power grid
more modern, flexible, resilient, and economical. The intellectual merits of the
project include development of new theories and methods that enable deregulated
and market-based operation of flexible transmission, as opposed to today’s
regulated structure. Guided by engineering and economics principles, the project
will ensure that the power flows stay within the limits, social welfare is
improved, and the market is revenue adequate. The broader impacts of the project
include substantial savings in avoided new transmission project costs,
enhancement of the efficiency of the nation’s electric power infrastructure and
offering an economical pathway to adoption of increased renewable generation.
Additionally, the project includes educational and outreach activities that will
provide cutting-edge training opportunities in optimization, economics, and
public policy, contributing to the advancement of the nation’s workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible transmission, including topology control, nodal
voltage phase control, and line impedance control, can significantly increase
the transfer capability over the existing network. Despite the availability of
the technology, deployment of flexible transmission has been rather limited,
mainly due to lack of incentives. This CAREER project will develop theories,
methods, and algorithms to offer market-based incentives for efficient operation
of flexible transmission, based on the state of the system. The project will
investigate two different market designs, based on: (i) allocation of financial
transmission rights, and (ii) marginal value payments. The potential for
exercise of market power within each design will also be studied, which will
lead to regulatory guidelines for preventing market manipulation. The efficiency
of the designs will be rigorously tested based on three criteria: (i) social
welfare improvement, (ii) revenue adequacy, and (iii) computational
tractability. The final market design, satisfying the efficiency criteria, will
enable widespread utilization of flexible transmission technologies. While the
project will formulate a linear market, ensuring compatibility with existing
electricity market designs, the impacts of nonlinearity in power flow equations
will be thoroughly investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.