* 2146909
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Optimizing Large-Scale Heterogeneous ML Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Zhenhua Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2024
* USD 249,997.00

Large-scale artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) platforms are
playing a vital role in the current data revolution. To minimize efforts from
users, an end-to-end solution is desired to deploy complex workflow over
possibly heterogeneous computing clusters. However, the scheduling and resource
management problems behind such “push-button” deployment are challenging. If
left unsolved, these costly systems will be severely under-utilized, leading to
unnecessary electricity consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. This project
will develop efficient resource allocation policies for distributed, large-scale
AI/ML systems to tackle the challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project will accelerate and parallelize the large-scale optimization and
inference tasks that dominate workloads in AI/ML platforms via distributed
optimization that provides fault tolerance and robustness to stragglers in
heterogeneous settings. Built upon the distributed optimization, the project
will further schedule AI/ML workflows with precedence constraints among sub-
tasks. Finally, heterogeneous resources are allocated among jobs fairly and
efficiently in the case where the resources being allocated are exchangeable,
which is key for AI/ML platforms with graphic processing units (GPUs) and other
accelerators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new fundamental
algorithms for scheduling and resource allocation in AI/ML platforms used across
academia and industry. The algorithmic ideas will be developed in the context of
core, classical models and so will apply more broadly than AI/ML platforms,
e.g., to networking, storage, supply chain management, and beyond. The project
will seek to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics by planned activities including the
development of accelerated mathematics programs for middle school students,
summer programs for middle-school and high-school students, and summer research
programs for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make
its software artifacts, datasets, and research results available to the research
community on the project website at https://adamwierman.com/optimizing-large-
scale-heterogeneous-ml-platforms/ Artifacts will be maintained for a minimum of
10 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.