* 2146260
* CAREER: Quantifying Adaptation and Recombination in Pathogen Populations
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Daniel Weissman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2027
* USD 313,676.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;To usefully anticipate the evolution of
pathogenic viruses and bacteria, quantitative theories that can connect it to
the genetic sequencing data are needed. In this project, the PI will use
mathematical models, computer simulations, and analysis of genetic data to
determine the quantitative rules of pathogen evolution. The PI will focus on
three main research objectives. First, the PI will understand how adaptations
driven by large-effect mutations, such as is typical for immune escape or
antibiotic resistance, interfere with pathogensâ€™ ability to simultaneously adapt
in other ways, including via small-effect mutations and combinations of
mutations. Second, the PI will find how interactions among mutations could have
led to the sudden emergence of the Alpha, Beta, and Gamma SARS-CoV-2 Variants of
Concern. In addition whether they likely evolved as the virus was passed from
person to person, or within individual immuno-compromised people over the course
of long-term infections will be studied. Third, the PI will find quantitative
rules for how often bacteria within a species exchange genes with each other,
using models together with a database of tens of thousands of genomes from the
skin bacterium Staphylococcus aureus, including many methicillin-resistant
(MRSA) samples. Quantitative theories for pathogen evolution will have
substantial benefits for human health. The specific work in the proposed project
will help us predict how much we need to limit the spread of the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic to avoid the potential emergence of Alpha-like adaptations on the Delta
background, or even more complex adaptations. It will also help us predict which
bacterial strains are likely to exchange genes, including those responsible for
virulence and antibiotic resistance. The proposed middle-school science club
will help encourage public interest in science, diversify the pool of future
scientists, and train undergraduate and graduate students in scientific outreach
and teaching The PI will also start a science enrichment program at a local
middle school for refugee girls, leading hands-on lessons that will show that
evolution follows regular patterns like all other natural
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will study the dynamics
of adaptation and develop tools to be able to predict it from a set of
measurements, primarily genetic sequencing. In the proposed work, the PI will
find new ways to use sequencing data to infer potential genetic interactions,
modes of evolution, and patterns of gene transfer. He will also find how much
other adaptation one should infer to have been deferred by interference when
rapid adaptation is observed in response to strong selection. These theories
will be applicable to all microbial life, not only pathogens, and some aspects
will be useful for understanding eukaryotic
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.