* 2146896
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying melt in the mantle and controls on lithosphere-asthenosphere dynamics and intraplate magmatism: a joint seismic and EM survey of the Cocos plate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Samer Naif, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 122,903.00

The existence of a weak, ductile asthenosphere, the upper layer of Earth’s
mantle below the lithosphere, is fundamental for the operation of plate
tectonics on Earth since it enables the motion of the overlying mobile
lithospheric plates. Since the discovery of plate tectonics more than 50 years
ago, the dominant mechanism responsible for this weakening remains unresolved.
Debate centers on two competing mechanisms: partial melting and hydration of the
mantle. In theory, geophysical imaging of seismic velocity and electrical
resistivity could distinguish between these competing mechanisms, but inherent
trade-offs and uncertainties associated with inferring physical properties from
the field observations result in significant ambiguity. This project will image
the seismic and electric structure of the mantle beneath a portion of the Cocos
Plate in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean, where the presence of
asthenospheric melt is confidently known. The new observations will provide an
independent calibration for the effect of asthenospheric melt on seismic and
electric properties and constrain the regional extent and geometry of the melt.
This will in turn enable improved understanding of the source of abundant and
anomalous volcanism in the region. The project will support the research
activities of four graduate students and several undergraduate students, as well
as data sharing and collaboration with partners in the neighboring countries of
Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Costa Rica. More than 20 cruise participants will be
trained in geophysical data acquisition during two research expeditions,
including students, international partners, and community participants.

This project will utilize passive-source seismic and magnetotelluric imaging to
quantify the seismic velocity and electrical resistivity structure of the Cocos
Plate lithosphere and asthenosphere. A co-located array of ocean-bottom seismic
and electromagnetic receivers will be deployed over a 500 km by 500 km section
of the Cocos Plate on both sides of the Nicaragua Fracture Zone (NFZ). The
seafloor in the survey area shows abundant evidence of past intraplate
magmatism, including elevated seafloor bathymetry, numerous seamounts
significantly younger than the plate age, and prominent volcanic sills within
the sediment column. The presence of a partial melt channel at the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary is clearly imaged by a previous small-scale
magnetotelluric profile. Observations from this study will provide new insights
on the dominant controls on asthenosphere rheology and the mechanisms that
produce intraplate magmatism by addressing the following key questions: (1) What
is the spatial and depth extent of the high-melt region? Does the bathymetry
contrast across the NFZ reflect a change in melt content and/or volcanic
productivity? (2) What is the seismic signature of the previously inferred melt-
rich channel? Are seismic observations consistent with magnetotelluric results
and how can they be calibrated to each other? Given this calibration between
melt content and velocity, what does it imply for the weakening mechanisms in
the asthenosphere globally? (3) Does the mantle fabric change across the NFZ,
both within and below the lithosphere? Does the implied flow field suggest a
Galápagos plume influence on past seafloor spreading, and/or recent melt
productivity beneath the plate?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.