* 2146461
* CAREER: Body Modification Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Katia Canepa Vega, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 115,235.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). This project investigates Body Modification Technologies: wearable
devices for biosensing through novel form factors with embedded biosensors that
interact with body fluids. Current practices for body modification include
piercing, tattooing, branding, binding, bodybuilding, and inserting implants. By
establishing new collaborations with surgeons, cosmetics companies, beauty
salons, and dermatologists, this project investigates placing biosensors on and
underneath the skin through body modification materials--lipstick, hair dye,
piercings, and tattoos. Biosensors in direct contact with body fluids can
significantly improve biological sensing data. This project develops new
knowledge about methods and effects of transforming the body into a bio-display,
in order to make visible information from metabolism that is usually
imperceptible. Potential applications include monitoring illnesses, hormonal
changes, dental health, eating disorders, stress tracking, pharmacokinetics,
maintaining a culture of health in communities, and sensing changes in
environmental factors such as pollution, temperature and UV. Further, the
project will collaborate with experts on privacy, safety, and biocompatibility
to articulate ethical principles for creating Body Modification
Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Body Modification Technologies project
advances wearable computing by developing implementation and evaluation methods
to reveal metabolic information by using the form factors of body modifications
as a substrate for chromogenic, fluorescence and electrochemical biosensors.
This project investigates the design of the electronics, functional algorithms,
biotechnology applications, and form factors, e.g., the shape, size, materials,
and other physical characteristics that make it possible to wear such devices.
Expected outcomes include: (1) fabrication processes for creating the form
factors that embed biosensors into body modification materials; (2) design and
implementation of hardware and software for devices and mobile applications; (3)
dissemination of benchmarking datasets and methods for evaluation of Body
Modification Technologies; and (4) derivation of a set of principles and
implications on privacy, safety, bio-compatibility, and inclusive
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.