* 2146700
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organization of Rural Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jocelyne Ponce, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 25,118.00

The goal of this project is to increase understanding of socioeconomic
organization in tropical and sparsely populated regions. The research team will
undertake research to study the relevance of settlement density in a lowland
tropical region. Settlement density -how populations were spaced across the
landscape- influences the degrees and nature of social interactions, which may
result in diverse lifeways and forms of organization. Archaeology is well placed
to provide relevant insight by focusing on the spatial and material components
that are relevant to the notion of socioeconomic organization. Previous
scholarship on socioeconomic distinctions has focused on class and status. This
project provides an alternative approach by defining whether location in the
settlement density continuum played a relevant role in socioeconomic
organization. It will reassess assumptions of socioeconomic homogeneity and lack
of large-scale integration within tropical societies. Results of this project
will be incorporated into plans of local sustainable ecological and
archaeological focused tourism in the region. Undergraduate students will be
trained in archaeological methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the relationship between settlement density and socioeconomic
organization. Specifically, this project will characterize and compare extended
household groups in three settlement density classes (urban, peri-urban and
rural). How did lifeways and organizing schemes differed across them? Does
settlement density correlate with varied forms of socioeconomic organization?
Using a battery of techniques including remote sensing sampling, excavation of
architecture and middens, material analyses, and sourcing studies, the project
will study five material proxies in each sampled group (function of spaces,
architectural energetics, specialized production, non-local items, and dietary
patterns). If the materials proxies varied, it will be possible to distinguish
these units based on location and settlement density likely played a relevant
role in socioeconomic organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.