* 2146549
* CAREER: Controlling molecular enrichment in biomolecular condensate materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sapun Parekh, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2027
* USD 232,289.00

Non-Technical Summary: Understanding naturally occurring, biological materials
is a critical step toward designing new, better materials for societal
challenges. In recent years, biomolecular condensates, self-assembled cellular
compartments composed of proteins and other macromolecules, have garnered
significant interest as they have been shown to be responsible for various
biochemical reactions in cells. Being soft biological materials by their nature,
and having variable biochemical properties, certain condensate materials have
been shown to enrich solutes; however, the fundamental material and chemical
properties that drive enrichment are unknown. In this project, we will quantify
solute enrichment into condensates and relate this enrichment with physical
chemical and mechanical properties in condensates using model condensate systems
with tunable composition and interactions. These data will be essential in
developing rules to customize condensates for enrichment of different molecule
classes relevant for drug delivery and industrial catalytic applications. The
proposed project will also focus on workforce development through implementation
of a practical course in optical microscopy targeted at two communities that are
underrepresented in the research industry: first generation high school students
and enlisted military personnel. Our goal is to provide a path to learning about
optics in a hands-on environment where intuition and concepts are built by
“doing”. The PI will offer monthly courses at local high schools and military
installations in the area where interested individuals will be given the chance
to build a microscope as they use it. Following completion of this course,
participants will be given the opportunity to work as mentored summer
researchers, similar to an REU, in labs at UT Austin to see how their skills
translate into cutting-edge research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
Biomolecular condensates are protein-rich and dynamic membrane-less biomaterials
that have been shown to play critical roles in different subcellular processes
such as membrane trafficking and transcriptional regulation. Recent studies have
shown that condensates can enrich solutes, specifically chemotherapeutics and
other small molecules. However, the rationale for such enrichment remains known.
Do molecules partition based on avidity, or number of binding sites? How do the
mechanical properties or interconnectedness of proteins in condensates affect
solute enrichment? The objective of this CAREER project is to clarify how the
intra-condensate environment, specifically protein density and protein-protein
interactions affect solute enrichment for hydrophobic and hydrophilic solutes.
This project will use an array of quantitative in situ microscopies to evaluate
the intra-condensate environment for two model condensate systems stabilized by
electrostatic (LAF-1) or various short-range interactions (FUS) in which the
protein density and connectivity can be independently controlled. Establishing
the governing parameters for solute enrichment in different types of condensates
for both hydrophilic and hydrophobic solutes will allow development of
predictive models to customize these biomaterials to specific applications.
During this research, the PI will establish a practical, hands-on optical
microscopy course aimed at building confidence and providing technical
experience to two historically underrepresented groups in research: soon-to-be
first-generation high school graduates and enlisted military personnel. In
addition to this course, a new mentored research program will be established to
give course participants the opportunity to work in materials science and
microscopy labs to broaden the population that has access to cutting-edge
research environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.