* 2146079
* DMS-EPSRC: The Dynamics and Structure of Multiway Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Anil Damle, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2024
* USD 117,004.00

Network science is a widespread mathematical framework for interacting systems
and connected data. Much of the power of network science comes from breaking
down complex connectivity into basic structure: nodes that model entities and
edges that connect two nodes at a time. For example, social relationships can be
modeled as networks where individuals are nodes and edges correspond to
friendship, family, or work relationships. Transportation systems, the Internet,
and gene regulation can similarly be modeled by networks. This awarded project
centers on the mathematical development of multiway networks, which model
interactions between more than two entities at a time. The research will involve
the development and theoretical analysis of new types of dynamical systems on
multiway networks, including diffusions, random walks, and consensus formation
to understand processes involving the spread of information or disease. The
dynamics will be studied on empirical data and new mathematical models developed
in the project, which will in turn lead to new algorithms for data science and
machine learning. Much of the funding of this award goes to support a graduate
student working on the topics of the award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphs or
networks are a broadly used mathematical model for complex systems and
relational data. The research in this award will advance the understanding of
dynamics and structure of multiway networks, which go beyond graphs by directly
modeling multiway interactions. The methodology is based on hypergraph and
simplicial complex models of multiway networks, and studying random walks,
diffusions, and consensus in the context of these models. The research is
organized around four directions. The first is the development of random network
models and the collection of empirical data for motivating and evaluating new
dynamical systems. The second involves the theory and analysis of dynamics on
hypergraphs. The third is based on new types of dynamics for simplicial
complexes and how these differ from similar dynamics on hypergraphs. The fourth
is the development of new data science and machine learning algorithms for
multiway networks based on these dynamics, such as clustering and semi-
supervised learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.