* 2146269
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Preparing an Adaptable Cyber Security Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Jim Alves-Foss, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,410,908.00

The University of Idaho (UI) has participated in the CyberCorps®: Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program since its inception in 2001. UI has prepared students
to enter the federal workforce across the nation supporting cybersecurity
operations and research in many aspects of the government, including the
military, intelligence, law enforcement, federal banking, government operations,
political branch, and critical infrastructure sectors. This renewal of the UI
project will allow UI to continue educating and training diverse, highly
skilled, and adaptable cybersecurity professionals. Graduates from the UI
CyberCorps® program of activities have a foundational knowledge strongly rooted
in mathematics and scientific theory, a practical set of skills learned through
hands-on laboratories, and a research-oriented innovative approach to problem-
solving. In addition, graduates develop the presentation, communication, and
management skills necessary to be effective in the workforce. This enables them
to design, develop, and maintain the needed secure and resilient computing
systems critical to our government, thriving digital economy, and nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prepare undergraduate and graduate
students for entry into the federal cyber workforce and life-long learning as a
professional. These students will be enrolled in degree programs emphasizing
cybersecurity, specifically with degrees in Cybersecurity, Computer Science, or
Computer Engineering. An experienced team consisting of three faculty and one
staff program manager, manages the UI SFS project, with support from several
other faculty in affiliated departments. The students will be exposed to the
breadth of cybersecurity concepts, including access control, accountability,
auditing, cryptography, cyber ethics, cybersecurity planning, and management,
computer and network forensics, legal aspects of cyber, networking, and network
defense, operations security, operating systems and their defense, secure
coding, and software vulnerability analysis. Students will have hands-on
experience, the ability to explore real-world aspects of cybersecurity, and
ongoing opportunities to interact with working government cybersecurity
professionals. Students will be prepared to learn new technologies and systems
and adapt to the ever changing aspects of cyberspace and cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or continuing
scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber
Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation,
scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal,
state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration as their
scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.