* 2146853
* I-Corps:   Software platform to predict patient no-shows using machine learning algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Janani Narumanchi, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an AI-based healthcare patient scheduling system. Patient no-
shows to medical appointments are a major logistical and economic challenge for
clinics and hospitals, with an estimated average yearly no-show rate for primary
care/specialty medical appointments of 20 - 35% leading to significant revenue
loss. In addition, patients who failed to keep an appointment were 70% more
likely not to return within 18 months, and older patients experiencing chronic
illnesses are likely not to return to their physicians’ offices after missing
just one appointment. Missing an appointment has been shown to create a
significant negative impact on disease management leading to increased morbidity
and increased costs. Factors that cause patients to miss their appointments have
been identified, and the proposed system offers a proactive solution that may
result in higher appointment adherence. Reduced missed appointments may decrease
economic costs in medical services such as imaging studies, and downstream
services resulting such as pharmacy services and medical equipment services. The
proposed technology may increase operational efficiency by minimizing empty
timeslots, increasing revenue, and also may lead to a significant boost in
patient and clinician satisfaction and improved patient
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of software tool that employs AI-based predictive models that has the potential
to more accurately predict patient no-show and cancellation rates. Initial
testing of the proposed AI-based algorithm resulted in no-show prediction rates
of up to 90% as compared to other software applications using least-squares
predictive techniques, which realized a 68% prediction rate. In addition, the
use of a patient’s historical demographic data allows the system to
learn/improve, increasing prediction accuracy over time. Currently available
solutions are not dynamically adaptive and are dependent on individual
physicians for protocols, which increases variability in scheduling and hence
difficult to implement at a system level. The proposed algorithm provides the
likelihood of appointment adherence based on patient’s historic behavior, and
clinics and hospitals as well as patients may benefit by scheduling appointments
more efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.