* 2146505
* TROPICAL ECOSYSTEM RESPONSE TO LATE-QUATERNARY ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE: INSIGHT FROM REMARKABLE ASPHALT-PRESERVED BIOTAS
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Emily Lindsey, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2027
* USD 390,005.00

At the end of the last Ice Age, about 12,000 years ago, most of the big animals
on Earth went extinct and many ecosystems changed drastically. Scientists still
don’t know why these changes happened because the fossil record is incomplete,
preserving just brief snapshots in time. An exception are “tar pits,”
paleontological sites where asphalt (a type of crude oil) seeped to the surface
over thousands of years, preserving fossil remains of whole ecosystems including
bones, wood, and insects. In this project, scientists and college students from
Los Angeles and Peru will work together to excavate and study fossils from a
Peruvian tar pit, reconstructing the biodiverse Ice Age ecosystem and
investigating how it changed into the barren desert it is today. This ecosystem
collapse occurred during a time of climate changes and human impacts similar to
those happening now. It is hoped that studying these past changes can help
prevent future extinctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage
North- and South American students and scientists in recovering, identifying,
and describing fossil material from a north-coastal Peruvian asphaltic locality
(colloquially, “tar pit”). The curated flora and fauna, comprising plant, small
vertebrate, and invertebrate remains, will form a comprehensive and
scientifically valuable late-Quaternary fossil collection in this poorly-studied
region, and will be analyzed to investigate interactions between humans,
climate, and biotic communities. This research will focus on three main
questions: (1) What was the late-Quaternary ecosystem structure in the coastal
western Neotropics, before the disappearance of the Pleistocene large mammal
communities?; (2) How, when, and in response to what climatic and anthropogenic
processes did this ecosystem undergo the dramatic ecological state change to its
current desertified condition?; and, (3) How did these processes integrate with
environmental changes and anthropogenic impacts in other South American regions,
leading to a continental – and global – extinction
event?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.