* 2146708
* Collaborative Research: Convective Upscale Growth Processes during RELAMPAGO
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Angela Rowe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2024
* USD 320,688.00

Storms spanning hundreds of kilometers and lasting for hours into days have an
important role in our global water cycle. In subtropical South America east of
the Andes, 95% of rainfall during the warmer months are attributed to these
large systems, which also can produce flash floods, devastating hail, and
frequent lightning. In late 2018 into early 2019, an international team of
scientists conducted the Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, and
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations (RELAMPAGO)
field campaign near the Sierras de Cordoba mountains in central Argentina to
study these frequent, impactful storms with observations at higher temporal and
spatial resolution. Initial results from this campaign have provided valuable
insight into conditions supporting the initiation and rapid growth of these
storms, yet many questions remain regarding the specific evolution of the storms
and the hazardous weather they produce. Therefore, this project builds off the
initial RELAMPAGO findings to further understand the processes occurring within
storms as they rapidly grow large and how the conditions that support these
processes compare with those in other mountainous regions of the world that
experience similarly hazardous conditions. This research also permits continued
education and outreach opportunities through training of graduate students,
international collaborations, and representation through a diverse team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prediction of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) is
challenged in part by limitations in understanding and representation of the
convective lifecycle. A region in central Argentina near the Sierras de Córdoba
mountain range is a global hotspot for deep and intense severe convection that
also grows rapidly upscale to MCSs producing flooding, hail, and frequent
lightning. This area was a focal point for RELAMPAGO field campaign, for which
initial results from the datasets supported previous satellite-based inferences
of convective lifecycle and contributed new findings related to the role of mid-
level vertical wind shear, the South American Low-Level Jet, and terrain
interactions in the upscale growth process. This research builds off those
results to address the following overarching science questions: 1) How do
microphysics and kinematics within convective systems evolve as they grow
upscale? 2) Which synoptic and mesoscale factors support rapid upscale growth of
convection and how does terrain modify those factors? A combination of RELAMPAGO
data analysis, high-resolution model simulations, and reanalysis data provides
the means to address these questions and gain a better understanding of
convective upscale growth to MCSs, the environmental controls on these upscale
growth processes, and the production of high lightning flash rates and hail
during upscale growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.