* 2146974
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Interdisciplinary Approaches into Biology Textbooks
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Angela Willey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 04/30/2025
* USD 265,325.00

This project brings together research from interdisciplinary fields to create a
novel approach to biology and biology education. This project draws from
theoretical work across the humanities and even outside of the academy to change
the way we think about knowledge about our living worlds. Currently biology
education continues to rely on memorization of biological facts. Those facts are
often simplified and narrowly developed in one discipline. By integrating
knowledge from current science and technology literature into biology
curriculum, undergraduate students will learn additional skills for engaging in
science and research throughout their lives. The developed curriculum aims to
shift how all people think about their competence and ethical responsibility to
understand and fully participate in science. This study therefore has the
potential to impact who becomes interested and invested in biology by using
participatory ways of learning. This pedagogical intervention will contribute to
the benefits of science to be more evenly distributed throughout society. The
project outcomes will be of interest to policy makers, educators, parents and
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is broken into three parts. The
first part provides the basis and rationale for the project by analyzing current
biology textbooks identifying points for intervention. Part two of the project
culls research on the subject matter of biology, bodies and environments, from
interdisciplinary academic and non-academic sources that are typically
underrepresented in biology education. The final part of the project integrates
these knowledges into education modules to be tested in classes and public
forums. To realize its potential and allow for future expansion to K-12 and
larger segments of the public, the results will be made broadly accessible to
educators and laypersons through open access. This project may also serve as a
model for how more interdisciplinary research can be successfully conducted
across typical divisions between the humanities and
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.