* 2146711
* I-Corps: Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) bioplastics produced from waste resources
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Bandaru Ramarao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of biodegradable plastics from waste resources to replace petroleum-
based plastics in packaging. Continually increasing demand for plastic
packaging, coupled with the inevitable escape of plastic waste into the
environment, is posing a monumental pollution issue for the world. Entities
within the consumer goods value chain have a pressing need to address these
issues, manifested in the form of changing customer demands and legislative
pressures. Unfortunately, recycling is not a feasible global solution. Also,
most currently available bioplastic alternatives are not considered viable due
to issues of cost, sustainability, functionality, and/or biodegradability. The
successful development and commercialization of novel biodegradable plastics for
packaging may not only address an environmental need for sustainability, but
also may create a stronger packaging economy driven by technologies that address
both commercial and environmental problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) copolymers
produced from waste resources. Implementation of PHAs has long been hindered by
lack of versatility in the material, as well as production technologies based on
using food crops. Upcycling abundant waste streams into novel PHA copolymers and
blends may overcome these hindrances and address the technical challenges
required for PHAs to replace petroleum-based plastics in packaging. Basing
production of PHAs on waste resources may significantly reduce the cost and
improve the sustainability of production. Currently, commercialized PHA
technologies are limited to incorporating only a handful of different PHA
monomers, such as the 4-carbon polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and the medium chain
length (MCL) 6-carbon PHA polyhydroxyhexanoate (PHHx). Important properties for
industrial application of bioplastics, such as the melting temperature,
crystallization kinetics, elasticity, and Youngâ€™s modulus, may be improved by
incorporation of different monomer units into the biopolymer product. Research
and development into this proposed technology has demonstrated feasible
production of a whole family of PHB-co-MCL copolymers and blends, incorporating
all monomer units from 4 to 14 carbons. This may allow for production of a
diverse array of fully biodegradable bio-based packaging
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.