* 2146262
* CAREER: Variability of Severe Convective Storm Mode and Hazards as a Function of Environment and Pre-convective Updraft Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Daniel Dawson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2027
* USD 270,623.00

While decades of study have led to greatly improved scientific understanding and
forecasts of severe thunderstorms, they continue to present a substantial threat
to life and property in the United States each year. These storms come in
various types or “modes” that differ in the type and severity of the hazards
they produce, but otherwise form in similar environments. In particular,
discrete, rotating storms known as supercells produce the most severe tornadoes
and largest hail, but the environmental conditions in which they form are very
similar to those that support severe squall lines, which tend to produce large
swaths of damaging straight-line winds. How a given severe weather scenario
plays out also depends on poorly understood details of the early stages of storm
development. For these reasons it remains difficult to anticipate which modes
will be dominant leading up to a given severe weather event. Using many
sophisticated computer simulations and comparing them with the behavior of real-
world storms, this project will investigate how severe storm mode depends on the
details of early storm development across a range of different environments. The
results of this investigation will aid forecasters in their ability to
discriminate between environments and details of early storm development that
are most likely to produce a given storm mode and its associated severe weather.
An additional aspect of this project is the application of emerging and
affordable virtual reality technology to the simulation results to visualize the
complex 3D structures of these storms. These platforms will be leveraged to
develop interactive educational spaces designed to engage students from a high
school to college level, with a particular emphasis on those students from
underrepresented minorities and economically disadvantaged groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this project is to fill a major gap in
our understanding of how severe convective storms (SCS) develop, persist, and
produce severe hazards as a function of their large-scale environment (LSE), the
small-scale details of their initiation and interaction, and the links between
them. Using a large suite of idealized storm-scale numerical simulations, this
project will 1) investigate the sensitivity of SCS mode to the morphology of
convective initiation across a range of LSE’s, 2) determine the role of
convective cold pools in modulating supercell vs. QLCS modes in different LSE’s,
and 3) investigate the variability of tornado development, longevity, and
intensity as a function of storm mode and LSE. More broadly, results of this
study will improve our understanding of how mid-latitude continental convection
operates within the climate system and will help inform future avenues in the
modeling of past, present, and future climate. The other goal of this study is
to develop interactive virtual reality-based 3D visualizations of simulated
storms to make their complex structure and behavior more accessible and
intuitive to students and researchers alike. This effort aims to increase public
engagement with and ultimately broaden the diversity of the STEM community. It
will specifically target both the undergraduate classroom and develop outreach
events to high schools with a large proportion of underrepresented minorities
and economically disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.