* 2146523
* CAREER: Developing Display Ecologies for Visual Analysis and Sensemaking
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Haeyong Chung, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2027
* USD 519,398.00

The ongoing proliferation of various types of displays and devices, ranging from
small wearable devices to large wall displays, provide new possibilities for
designing personal, professional, and educational computing tasks. In
particular, using multiple displays for visual analysis and sensemaking has the
potential to improve upon the capabilities of a single display screen and
interface, increasing peopleâ€™s ability to gain new insights from data. However,
multi-display environments present a new set of design and development
challenges for visual analysis tools that coordinate across the displays: (a)
combining different types of displays into a holistic visual analysis space to
meet the demands of a given task; (b) distributing data, visualization views,
and representations across displays; and (c) helping people make connections
between these data, views, and representations across separate displays. This
project addresses these challenges by building a comprehensive understanding of
how multiple displays can be integrated for enhanced visual analysis and
sensemaking, tools for rapidly implementing multi-display views, and methods for
assessing their effectiveness for end-users. The team will work closely with
students from a number of disciplines in several local universities, creating
opportunities for evaluating the systems, educating students in data science and
human-computer interaction, and involving students from groups historically
underrepresented in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to
conceptualize and empower the concept of the display ecology, whereby
heterogeneous displays interact with each other and function in concert to aid
interaction, navigation, analysis, and sensemaking tasks. Effective display
ecologies will aid the user in flexibly establishing and modifying the roles of
each display (e.g., view, visual representations, and user interfaces), as well
as assist in determining relationships among the displays according to different
visual analysis needs. This project will explore four interrelated research
goals pertaining to the development of display ecologies for visual data
analysis and sensemaking. The first goal is to gain design knowledge of how
multiple displays and devices can create a cohesive visualization system for
tackling visual analysis tasks by analyzing existing multi-display applications
from the academic literature. The second goal is to then develop display
ecologies for a variety of visual analysis tasks based on the obtained design
knowledge. The third goal is to incorporate and support essential aspects of the
spatiality and physicality of multiple displays in a novel display ecology
infrastructure based on augmented reality. The fourth goal is to integrate the
results from these goals into a cohesive visual analysis system based on display
ecologies; this final goal will require qualitative and quantitative evaluations
of the diverse impacts of using multiple displays on visual analysis and
sensemaking. Findings from this research will guide the design and development
of more effective visualization and analysis tools for multiple displays,
supporting data analysis in various application domains, which continue to
emerge with the explosion of available data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by Human Centered Computing (HCC) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.