* 2146354
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Defending the National Cyber Infrastructure
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,268,804.00

This project supports the continuation of the CyberCorps® Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program at Florida State University (FSU). Renewal funding will
support 32 scholarships to undergraduate and graduate SFS scholars seeking
combined Bachelor of Science/Master of Science or Master of Science degrees in
cybersecurity. The project's components are designed to provide graduates with
general computing and security skills that will directly impact the federal
workforce's information assurance and forensics capabilities. SFS scholars will
have the opportunity to collaborate on real-world projects to gain practical
experience and enhance internship and job placement prospects. In addition, the
renewal project aims to strengthen efforts to engage members of groups that are
underrepresented in their participation in the cybersecurity field, as well as
other non-traditional students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
address the current cybersecurity personnel gap through the following seven
objectives. First is to identify and recruit SFS scholars with an emphasis on
recruiting students who are women or members of minority groups that have not
had a history of engagement with the field of cybersecurity. Second is to
improve retention through cohort class enrollments, dedicated teaching
assistants, hands-on curricula, and interactions between the SFS scholars and
existing academic support units. Third is to identify internship, cutting-edge
research (at the intersections of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and
machine learning), leadership, and outreach opportunities for these SFS
scholars. Fourth is to gather feedback from current SFS scholars to refine the
scholarship project's offerings and curricula. Fifth is to use a system to
endorse and place at least 70% of FSU SFS graduates in federal executive
agencies, up to 20% of graduates in other agencies, and up to 10% of graduates
in institutions that offer SFS scholarships. Sixth is to identify factors that
influence students to obtain an SFS scholarship and increase the participation
of women and minorities in the SFS program. Finally, the seventh objective is to
disseminate educational findings and cybersecurity research through
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.