* 2146068
* Move, Adapt, or Change: Examining the Adaptive Capacity of a Southern Ocean Apex Predator, the Leopard Seal
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Sarah Kienle, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,185.00

The leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) is an enigmatic apex predator in the
rapidly changing Southern Ocean. As top predators, leopard seals play a
disproportionately large role in ecosystem functioning and act as sentinel
species that can track habitat changes. How leopard seals respond to a warming
environment depends on their adaptive capacity, that is a species’ ability to
cope with environmental change. However, leopard seals are one of the least
studied apex predators on Earth, hindering our ability to predict how the
species is responding to polar environmental changes. Investigating the
adaptability of Antarctic biota in a changing system aligns with NSF’s Strategic
Vision for Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research. This research,
which is tightly integrated with educational and outreach activities, will
increase diversity in STEM and Antarctic science by recruiting students from
historically underrepresented groups in STEM and providing training, mentoring,
and educational opportunities at an emerging Hispanic Serving Institution and a
Historically Black Colleges and Universities campus. This project will improve
STEM education and science literacy via museum collaborations, creation of
informational videos and original artwork depicting the research. The proposal
supports data and sample reuse in polar research and long-term reuse of
scientific data, thereby maximizing NSF’s investment in previous field research
and reducing operational costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
investigate leopard seals adaptive capacity to the warming Southern Ocean by
quantifying their ability to move (dispersal ability), adapt (genetic
diversity), and change (plasticity). Aim 1 of the research will determine
leopard seals’ dispersal ability by assessing their distribution and movement
patterns. Aim 2 will quantify genetic diversity by analyzing genetic variability
and population structure and Aim 3 will examine phenotypic plasticity by
evaluating changes in their ecological niche and physiological responses. The
international, multidisciplinary team will analyze existing data (e.g.,
photographs, census data, life history data, tissue samples, body morphometrics)
collected from leopard seals across the Southern Ocean over the last decade.
Additionally, land- and ship-based field efforts will generate comparable data
from unsampled regions in the Southern Ocean. The research project will analyze
these historical and contemporary datasets to evaluate the adaptive capacity of
leopard seals against the rapidly warming Southern Ocean. This research is
significant because changes in the distribution, genetic diversity, and
ecophysiology of leopard seals can dramatically restructure polar and subpolar
communities. Further, the research will expand understanding of leopard seals’
ecological role, likely characterizing the species as flexible polar and
subpolar predators throughout the Southern Hemisphere. The findings of this
research will be relevant for use in ecosystem-based management
decisions—including the design of Marine Protected Areas— across three
continents. This study will highlight intrinsic traits that determine species’
adaptive capacity, as well as showcase the dynamic links between polar and
subpolar ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.