* 2146295
* CAREER: Context-Aware Runtime Safety Assurance in Medical Human-Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Homa Alemzadeh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 04/30/2027
* USD 209,814.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
(MCPS) increasingly rely on complex and connected software and artificial
intelligence for control and decision making in various diagnostic and
therapeutic applications. But contrary to other CPS, they often depend on
advanced medical knowledge and human expertise for real-time operation. Tele-
operated surgical robots for minimally invasive surgery are an example of the
most complex human-in-the-loop MCPS, envisioned to enable remote operations in
inaccessible areas, low-resource populations, and extreme environments. However,
an increasing number of recalls and adverse event reports have shown the
vulnerability of MCPS to accidental or maliciously-crafted faults and human
errors with potential negative impacts on patients. The objective of this
research is to investigate the fundamental problem of runtime safety assurance
in human-in-the-loop MCPS, and to develop integrated model and data-driven
capabilities for timely detection and mitigation of safety hazards and reducing
the risk of harm to patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance the state-of-the-art in runtime verification and anomaly detection by
introducing three novel principles for design of context-aware safety engines
for MCPS: (i) Formal specification and learning of human-cyber-physical system
contexts and their relationship with potentially unsafe control actions that
lead to hazards and accidents; (ii) Real-time inference of the human-cyber-
physical context through multi-level monitoring and model-based state estimation
to detect the likelihood, timing, and risk of impending hazards; (iii) Risk-
aware hazard mitigation through the context-aware generation of safe and
corrective response actions that prevent adverse consequences in the physical
layer. The research activities will be integrated with education through multi-
disciplinary curriculum development and hands-on training for graduate students,
research experience for undergraduates, and engagement activities, including
summer internships, Girlsâ€™ Geek Days, tech camps, and hackathons for K-12
students. These activities aim to broaden the participation of students from
underrepresented groups and minorities in CPS and engineering in medicine
research and train the next generation of diverse CPS professionals with
expertise in areas such as healthcare, robotics, safety, and security that have
the potential for significant societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was funded under the NSF CPS CAREER program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.