* 2146129
* CAREER: Describing and Quantifying "Adversarial Thinking" For Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Peter Peterson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2027
* USD 366,152.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Adversarial Thinking (AT) is widely recognized as a
critically important ability for cybersecurity. The importance of AT has been
widely discussed in the cybersecurity community, and many educators have created
activities and exercises explicitly intended to strengthen AT in students to
enhance their cybersecurity understanding and abilities. However, there is no
broadly accepted description of AT or its components beyond describing it as the
ability to “think like an attacker." As a result, there is no test to
meaningfully quantify AT or the effectiveness of interventions designed to
improve AT. To meet this important need, this foundation-building five-year
project will create a description of the core components of AT. The project will
use a consensus approach drawing on the knowledge and experience of a diverse
group of individuals in the cybersecurity community. The project will create and
validate a non-technical test for AT and use the test to 1) identify AT in
individuals and 2) evaluate the effectiveness of exercises meant to improve AT.
This project will shed light on fundamental knowledge about AT in cybersecurity,
help identify the next generation of cybersecurity professionals, and give
cybersecurity educators tools to improve the effectiveness of security
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the widespread belief that AT is
critical for security, the hypotheses of this project are that 1) critical
components of AT for cybersecurity can be identified, 2) a non-technical test
can be created and validated that measures these components, 3) the test can be
used to perform rigorous research about AT, and 4) this research can be
integrated with and inform cybersecurity education. To test these hypotheses,
the PI will work with a diverse set of cybersecurity experts in a modified
Delphi process to identify and describe AT's most crucial elements and publish
the results. The PI will then create, screen for bias, rigorously validate, and
publish the Adversarial Thinking Assessment (ATA), an instrument to measure AT
ability. The test will not require technical cybersecurity knowledge and hence
can be administered broadly. Using the validated ATA, the PI will conduct
experiments to identify AT ability across various groups of students and
professionals. The PO will also develop and evaluate new interventions to help
individuals develop AT skills. The overall project will drive an iterative,
five-year AT-focused curriculum development for a sequence of two security
courses at the University of Minnesota Duluth. The impact of this project is a
new foundation for research around the critical concept of AT in the context of
cybersecurity education. This CAREER award is supported in part by NSF's
IUSE:EHR Program which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is also supported
by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals
that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.