* 2146483
* CAREER: Evolution of Collective Disaster Memory: A Dynamic Behavioral and Systems Analysis toward Community Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* David Yu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2027
* USD 546,668.00

People recollect and share information about past natural disasters. A cultural
trait known as collective disaster memory emerges when such information is
widely shared among contemporaries or passed down to subsequent generations
through conversations, historical texts, or built environment features. Although
collective memory has a potential to significantly shape people’s vulnerability/
defense to future similar events through changes in their preparations and ways
of thinking, there is a lack of empirical understanding of under what set of
conditions disaster memories can be collectively forgotten or sustained over
multiple generations. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
award supports research to study this puzzle in the context of flood hazards,
flood memory, and the built environment for flood protection. Multiple methods,
comprised of surveys and case studies based in distinct risk settings (Portland,
Oregon and Houston, Texas) and human-subject behavioral experiments, will be
used to test hypotheses related to explaining variation in the durability of
collective disaster memory. Based on the empirical data, system-level models
will be developed to computationally test how different forms of memory
transmission and people’s adaptations affect the dynamics of collective memory
and regional vulnerability in different environmental and social settings. The
project will also contribute to education in two ways: developing a new method
and tools for evaluation of students’ learning about social and collective
memory implications of civil engineering; and offering education and training
opportunities for the next-generation workforce in disaster science and
resilience studies through mentored research experiences and new course modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address two key questions: 1) how
different configurations of memory transmission forms and physical and social
contextual factors will lead to differences in the durability of collective
flood memory and 2) how the state of such memory, in turn, affects people’s
collective action to deal with future flood events. This will be achieved
through a multi-method approach comprised of behavioral experiments, surveys and
case data collection, and systems modeling. The research will begin with case
studies of two distinct areas (Portland, Oregon and Houston, Texas) to generate
case specific insights, identifying the details of each area’s historical flood
events and their memories. A survey will be conducted in each case area with the
representative random sample of the general public to assess the current
collective memory states of the historical floods and how people learned about
them. This will be followed by controlled behavioral experiments with different
populations to test effects of different forms of memory or cultural
transmission on the durability of collective memory and group ability to solve a
collective-risk social dilemma framed as a public levee maintenance problem. The
resulting empirical findings will be compared and triangulated for the
generality and transferability of the results. Finally, generic system-level
models of collective memory dynamics in a prototypical human-flood system will
be developed and tested for synthesis and generalizable understanding. This
project is expected to lead to new knowledge, tools, and research trajectory for
disaster science and resilience studies that consider the effects of collective
disaster memory and its interplay with built and social environmental features.
The project’s significance lies in its rigorous experimental and modeling work
that seeks to disentangle and test unresolved hypotheses related to the
relationship among the durability of disaster memory, different forms of
cultural transmission, infrastructure and hazard attributes, and underlying
social structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.