* 2146028
* Collaborative Research: Pollution Mitigation and Productivity in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Gautam Gowrisankaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 32,979.00

The economies of many developing countries have experienced huge transformations
over the past 20 years, but a major cost of development has been air and water
pollution. The fact that pollution remains a central problem suggests that it
may be very costly to mitigate pollution, in terms of lost productivity and
revenues. An opposing view is the "Porter hypothesis" that postulates that
environmental policies lead to greater productivity. The current empirical
evidence on these tradeoffs is both limited and ambiguous, with some studies
finding a substantial productivity cost of pollution mitigation and others
finding evidence in favor of the Porter hypothesis. This research conducts a
detailed empirical evaluation of whether policies in developing countries to
lower pollution have been successful. The investigators also quantify the
productivity and distributional costs of these policies. This research
investigates these questions for both the manufacturing and power generation
sectors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research makes a significant contribution
to intellectual merit, through its use of novel data, its innovative
identification, and its use of frontier methods. This research is among the
first to combine firm-level panel datasets on industrial production, power plant
investment in environmental mitigation technologies, and air and water pollution
discharges, in developing or developed countries. The investigators develop new
sources of identification to understand pollution in developing countries by
focusing on panel variation in environmental discharge fees and pollution
reduction mandates. Using the detailed data, the investigators also evaluate
whether pollution mitigation policies cause firms to invest in new mitigation
technologies or simply reduce their output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.