* 2146270
* CAREER: Spin Dynamics Measurements of Site-to-Site Variations in Hydration Water at Soft Nanoscale Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* John Franck, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2026
* USD 693,677.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging program and co-funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms A program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. John Franck and his group
at Syracuse University are developing instrumentation and associated software to
routinely characterize the molecular-scale properties of the water that
surrounds and permeates large molecules. This water plays an active role in all
the processes that drive biological reactions and control bioinspired materials
but remains relatively poorly characterized. The new methodology is expected to
greatly facilitate the difficult task of characterizing these unique water
molecules and has begun to unlock a deeper understanding of the forces that bind
small molecule ligands to their macromolecular targets and polymers and proteins
to each other. Dissemination of the methodology will speed the design and
development of new drugs and materials, with potential impacts in areas such as
cancer treatment and energy harvesting. Talented diverse students recruited to
engage in this research will learn about the possibilities of employing modern
technology and programming to build new types of chemical characterization
tools. The work will provide unique open-source data-processing libraries for
public use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydration water controls far-ranging
properties of macromolecules, from the shapes they adopt to the energetics and
kinetics of important binding events. Because any type of binding interaction or
any conformational fluctuation that determines the final folded structure of a
protein or synthetic polymer must necessarily displace hundreds of water
molecules, the properties of those water molecules crucially determine the
relevant kinetics and thermodynamics. Much that currently remains poorly
understood or difficult to predict about protein-protein binding and the
interactions of synthetic polymers and solvents can be attributed to an
inability to characterize the hydration water molecules, which are known to have
dramatically different properties from the bulk solvent. The liquid-state ODNP
(Overhauser Dynamic Nuclear Polarization) techniques being developed offer a new
angle of attack for revealing the properties of hydration water by tracking the
motion of the nuclear centers of water relative to a chemically placed target
moiety (known as the spin probe) and offering a site-specific measurement that
can be directly related to fully atomistic molecular dynamics simulations. These
techniques are being developed and used to elucidate the connection between
nanometer-scale variations in hydration dynamics and the thermodynamic barriers
that govern macromolecular interactions, thereby clarifying the contributions of
water molecules moving on different timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.