* 2146278
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal) - Preparing Scholars for a Career in the Government’s Cybersecurity Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Diane Murphy, Marymount University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,187,413.00

Cybersecurity is increasingly important to society, whether for national defense
or for the protection of citizens as they take advantage of today's digital
world to maintain their jobs, health and prosperity. Unfortunately, there are
many actors ready to steal personal identities, illegally take intellectual
property from U.S. companies, and even to make life difficult through
interfering with energy supply chains or poisoning water resources. To ensure
safety, steps are needed to make certain that there are enough superior
cybersecurity experts in the government to guard against such growing threats.
To maximize the impact of the cybersecurity workforce, these experts must also
reflect the diversity of society including women, minorities, veterans, and
those with disabilities. By way of this renewal, Marymount University will
continue to recruit, educate, and place in government service, a diverse set of
academically qualified individuals from a wide set of backgrounds, including
community colleges. The grant will support their achievement of academic success
and readiness for their placement in government service. They will be provided a
full scholarship (tuition and some living expenses for the final 2 years of
their program) as well as a first-class educational experience (earning a BS,
MS, or DSc in Cybersecurity). The program will expand their knowledge, skills,
and abilities in cybersecurity so that they can protect all of society as the
use of technology continues to grow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds
on the success and experience of the previously funded SFS project and will be
guided by five objectives. First, is to continue to recruit a well-qualified,
diverse group of students at all levels. Second is to ensure the highest levels
of development of the students for government work. Third is to retain and
graduate all students with a minimum GPA of 3.5 and facilitate 100% placement in
government positions. Fourth is to develop professionals capable of designing,
building, and managing secure information systems for the new connected world.
Finally, it is to evaluate the extent to which enhanced student-faculty
interactions, mentoring, community outreach, and joint involvement in research
contributes to positive workplace outcomes, particularly for the members of
groups historically underrepresented in their participation in the field of
cybersecurity. Marymount has increased the effectiveness and sustainability of
its programs by implementing an agile curriculum process to keep pace with
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence and cloud computing. These
curriculum changes are informed by workforce studies including a detailed
understanding of the federal government needs, and by alliances with larger
public institutions for research and resources. Marymount is an inclusive and
representative institution that has successfully placed women, underrepresented
minorities, veterans, students from community colleges, and the neurodiverse in
government cybersecurity positions. The project will continue to produce an
increasingly diverse pool of graduates, prepared to combat the security threats
of today and tomorrow, but also responding to diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) efforts in the government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.