* 2146220
* Collaborative Research: OPUS: Permutational Biometry: Synthesizing the Analytics of Data Analysis in Ecology and Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Michael Collyer, Chatham College
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2024
* USD 111,690.00

In this project, the investigators will synthesize their work in statistical
theory. The analysis of biological data has long been accomplished using
standard (parametric) statistical methods. However, these tools lack solutions
for many complex questions. As an alternative, resampling of data using
computers provides a general procedure that can replace traditional methods in
cases where they are insufficient. These new methods have the potential to
provide a tool for biologists that is less restrictive than traditional tests. A
full-length book will be produced and made freely available providing broad
impacts. Web-based tutorials demonstrating all topics in the book will also be
provided. Both products will leverage existing software the investigators have
developed and distributed freely to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By synthesizing 25 years of permutation-based
analytics they have developed, the investigators will arrive at an entirely new
philosophy for performing data analysis in the biological sciences. This new
paradigm results from the union of their methods in four interrelated areas: 1)
Resampling of Residuals in a Permutation Procedure (RRPP), 2) permutation-based
effect sizes, 3) permutation-based pairwise comparisons, and 4) permutation-
based evaluation of independent or correlated datasets. The result will be a
biometric perspective that emphasizes both hypothesis testing and biological
signal strength determination, where the generation of empirical sampling
distributions enables both components simultaneously. The approach is both
univariate and multivariate, and can be used to evaluate trends in independent,
or correlated observations. When complete the synthesis will provide a
comprehensive learning platform, that combines thorough explanation of
permutational analytics, and integrates this emerging statistical perspective
with hands-on tutorials that utilize existing software for implementation. This
advance has the potential to transform how biologists conduct their research, as
the RRPP synthetic paradigm provides analytical tools that are capable of
addressing hypotheses that parametric procedures
cannot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.