* 2146844
* OPUS: Forest Canopy Communities as Arenas to Advance Syntheses and Understanding of Disturbance Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Nalini Nadkarni, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,566.00

Disturbances in ecosystems are increasingly recognized as being important in
influencing the ways that different species function and are sustained in
rainforests. Recent research shows that treetop biota play important ecological
roles such as retaining nutrients and water, and providing resources for
arboreal mammals, birds, and insects. However, effects of disturbances such as
deforestation and climate change on canopy biota have been little studied, and
have never been synthesized. Nadkarni proposes to advance the field of
disturbance ecology through review and synthesis of studies on canopy
disturbances, which will provide insights for future transformative rainforest
ecology research, and, ultimately, in managing complex rainforest ecosystems in
more sustainable ways. In addition, an insight paper will draw on Nadkarni’s
innovative approach to integrating intellectual merit and broader impact that
can serve as a guide to future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spark and
foundation is the body of work that Nadkarni has produced in nearly four decades
of NSF-supported canopy research (136 Core Publications, including three
scholarly books, with 141 colleagues, 45 of which are women and people
underrepresented in science). One outcome is a review paper on processes of
disturbance and recovery of canopy plants in temperate and tropical habitats. A
second outcome is a synthesis paper on how forest canopy communities provide
ecologists with “arenas” to test theories concerning disturbances, which are not
possible using full-scale ecosystems and landscapes because forest canopies: a)
have established metrics and response rubrics; b) are comprised of elements that
can be manipulated for experimental studies; and c) allow replication of field
elements to yield sound quantitative analyses. These activities will lead to
recommendations, directed to community and ecosystem ecologists, to inform
future questions and address hypotheses about effects of ecological
disturbances. Nadkarni and her team will create an accessible archive of data
and metadata of her canopy research, for sharing with other ecologists and with
scientists in other fields. Nadkarni will also draw from her career-long work in
public engagement to non-traditional public groups to create three broader
impacts activities: 1) a bilingual blog, distributed through academic and
ecotourism websites; 2) participation to an existing monthly bilingual lecture
series in Monteverde, Costa Rica, and 3) a reflection/insight paper that
discusses the benefits and challenges of integrating intellectual merit and
broader impact activities during an ecologist’s
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.