* 2146027
* Collaborative Research: Identification and Structural Modeling of Intrinsically Disordered Protein-Protein and Protein-Nucleic Acids Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Lukasz Kurgan, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2025
* USD 248,508.00

Many key cellular processes rely on the protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid
interactions. A large and functionally important portion of these interactions
is carried out by intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) in proteins. Proteins
with IDRs are involved in the pathogenesis of numerous human diseases and are
considered as attractive and potent drug targets. IDRs lack a stable structure
under physiological conditions and as such are particularly challenging to
analyze and work with. This project addresses this challenge by developing a
full suite of advanced computational tools and databases for predicting and
modeling functions and structures IDR-protein and IDR-nucleic acids
interactions. The knowledge of the interacting IDRs, their binding partners, and
modeled 3D structures of interactions will guide building hypotheses for
experiment design and interpretation of experimental data. The project will
train Ph.D. students of different backgrounds through interdisciplinary
coursework and mentoring at Purdue University and Virginia Commonwealth
University (VCU). High school students will be recruited through outreach
activities and programs that the PIs are involved in. Altogether, this project
focuses on the interdisciplinary computational life science education and
research efforts at Purdue and VCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three interlocked
computational methods will be developed for studying molecular interactions of
IDRs at the 1 dimensional (1D), 2D, and 3D levels, significantly advancing over
the conventional solutions that are limited to 1D/sequence predictions. The
corresponding aims are: (1) high-accuracy prediction of protein and nucleotide
binding regions within IDR sequences using cutting-edge multi-task deep learning
models (1D level); (2) integrative identification of the partner molecules
(proteins and nucleic acids) for these binding regions (2D level); and (3)
structure modeling by innovative docking between IDRs and the partner proteins
and nucleotides (3D level). The developed tools and results will be provided to
the research community through a web-based database and open source
repositories. Overall, this work significantly advances structural
bioinformatics field by developing modern computational tools and a database for
understanding, predicting, and modeling tertiary structures of interactions of
IDRs with proteins and nucleotides. The resulting new deep learning technologies
will be transferrable to other bioinformatics areas that rely on the prediction
and analysis from protein sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.