* 2146466
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Strengthening the Cybersecurity Workforce through an Emphasis on Diversity, Mentoring, and Career Success
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Rajendra Boppana, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,871,404.00

This project continues the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at
the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). During its lifetime the SFS
program has increased the number of cybersecurity graduates entering the
workforce and those working for the government. UTSA, a Hispanic-majority
institution, will expand on these successes for a workforce segment historically
underrepresented in the field: women, persons with disabilities, first-
generation students, and persons from minority groups whose participation in
cybersecurity is below their proportion in the overall population. This project
enhances the infrastructure for the education and research of students in
science, engineering, and information technology directly by supporting SFS
scholars, and indirectly by attracting more students to the cybersecurity and
artificial intelligence (AI) fields. The project's educational and career
development activities will prepare a diverse group of future cybersecurity
professionals to meet critical shortages in the government cybersecurity
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTSA offers high-quality, multi-factored
learning experiences in cybersecurity. Multiple degree options in cybersecurity
are available through three different colleges (Sciences, Engineering, and
Business). The SFS scholars will be mentored for academic and career success,
offered experiential learning through real cybersecurity projects with
organizations and communities, and encouraged to participate in hackathons and
cybersecurity competitions or pursue research with faculty for learning beyond
the classroom. Moreover, outreach activities will aim to increase awareness of
the opportunities in cybersecurity and AI among high school, community college,
four-year degree, and graduate students in the San Antonio region and throughout
Texas. The project activities will lead to a more diverse set of cybersecurity
graduates with a well-rounded education and confidence to pursue careers in
government. This, in turn, will improve national security in two ways: (a) there
will be more students working in government from groups who are underrepresented
in the cybersecurity field, and (b) these well-trained students are likely to be
productive quickly and be able to adapt to rapidly changing challenges in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.