* 2146267
* CAREER: Towards Practical Mobile Visible Light Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ashwin Ashok, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2027
* USD 314,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visible Light Communication (VLC)
is an emerging technology that uses light (optical) energy to communicate. VLC
is increasing in popularity for research and development, however, still has
significant gaps to cover to become a standalone mobile technology. These gaps
are particularly in improving communication data rates and range, making the
technology viable for mobile conditions, and conditioning the technology for
low-energy battery sourced operation. Today, the development efforts in VLC have
largely been confined within a limited set of research labs around the globe,
thus making the technology less accessible and known to the public. This also
puts students and faculty from academic departments which do not have the
infrastructure and knowledge--base to teach and/or research in VLC at a great
disadvantage. With an overarching vision to realize VLC as a practical wireless
commercial mobile technology, this project executes a plan to achieve this goal
through a unified set of integrated research, education, and outreach
activities. This project studies and designs machine learning models to improve
throughput, design novel techniques for maintaining VLC links under mobility,
designs energy-aware strategies for VLC transmission and reception, and
experimentally validates the solutions through prototype implementations under
controlled and real-world conditions. In parallel, this project performs
educational outreach that is well-integrated with the research efforts, by
developing research experiences for undergraduates (REU) and designing a novel
VLC hands-on learning kit to be made freely accessible to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s five-year research and education
plan focuses on addressing the fundamental impediments for realizing reliable
and robust VLC under practical constraints in real world applications. The
target goals for VLC performance are medium-long ranges, Mega-Giga bits-per-
second throughput and battery operation under static and mobile conditions. To
achieve these goals, this project uses an experimentation and data driven
approach realized through a set of integrated research and educational
activities along five key objectives, which are: 1.) Achieving High Throughput
and Long Range using novel transmission and reception techniques; 2.) Building
Mobility Resilience using novel hardware and sensor-fusion; 3.) Optimizing
Energy Usage using novel signal designs and low-energy communication protocols;
4.) Prototype Implementation and Experimental Evaluation; and 5.) Enhance VLC
Education and Outreach. The VLC learning kit creates a new resource for the VLC
research community and the public. The REU efforts create a direct impact on URM
students in Atlanta and Georgia State University’s large population of African-
American and Hispanic students. Overall, this project motivates the community to
study and operate VLC in real-world conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.