* 2146007
* CAREER: Defining kinase-driven cellular response networks using single-cell genomics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Jose McFaline-Figueroa, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2027
* USD 431,542.00

How a cell responds to stress is critical to its performance in biomedical
applications. Modifying the response can dramatically improve treatment
outcomes. For example, altering the response to chemotherapy could inhibit or
reverse tumor growth. Altering the immune system response could reduce the need
for vaccine development. Many of the key regulators of these responses are
enzymes known as kinases. Several kinase inhibitors have proven successful in
treating certain cancers. Utilizing genomic tools to identify which kinases
control specific cellular stress responses is a core strategy in this project.
Advancing equity and inclusion in the genomics field at various academic levels
is another major objective. Introducing genomic technologies and analysis to
high school students in the NY Bioforce program is another major thrust of this
project. Collaboration with the University of Puerto Rico to develop short
courses will also be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to enable large-scale data-driven prediction of how genes alter cellular
response. To this end, assays that extend single-cell genomics to a multiplex
platform to map the effects of perturbations will be developed. The objective is
to define the molecular changes that cells undergo in response to cellular
stress and how those responses depend on the activity of individual kinases in
the protein kinome. Information on kinase regulatory networks will be used to
manipulate cellular response towards phenotypes of interest, such as treatment-
sensitive cell fates. Methods to query these cellular responses must account for
how even a seemingly homogeneous group of cells can display substantial
heterogeneity in their response to cellular stress. The project leverages high-
throughput single-cell genomic techniques to arrive at kinase regulatory
networks that define the response of cells to genotoxic stress, immune-
associated programs, and genetic redundancy driving dynamic changes induced by
kinase inhibition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.