* 2146520
* CAREER: CONIFER: Role of Canopy Turbulence in Wildland Fire Behavior
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Tirtha Banerjee, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2027
* USD 231,921.00

Wildfires have become increasingly more destructive with changing patterns of
climate and land-use change. A small number of very large fires have become
extremely high-intensity infernos and have been causing the majority of the
damage. However, the understanding of the physical processes governing wildland
fire behavior has remained limited. Although some research progress has been
made in understanding how fires spread on grasslands, several aspects of fire
behavior in forested environments are still not well understood. Under certain
circumstances, surface fires occurring on a forest floor can ascend vertically
and damage the forest canopy. Moreover, if the conditions are favorable, the
fire can spread horizontally tree-to-tree across the canopy, becoming a much
higher intensity crown fire. Understanding the physical and dynamic meteorology
of wildland fires is consequently of utmost importance and necessary to develop
mitigation strategies such as prescribed burns and effective fuel management
practices such as forest thinning. To assess the effectiveness of such
management efforts, it is, therefore, crucial to understand wildland fire
behavior inside the forest canopy environment. This project will characterize
the mechanisms of turbulent wind flow in the forest canopy during wildland fire
events, which will result in (i) advances in fire behavior modeling, (ii)
developing decision support tools for fuel treatments and prescribed fires, and
(iii) improved models of air quality impacts from wildland fires. Moreover, the
project will train a cohort of early-career scientists and students in the
fundamentals of wildfire science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a vegetated
environment, the fire occurs below the forest canopy, which means that canopy-
induced turbulent eddies interact with the fire and the fire-atmosphere
interaction is modulated by the fundamental nature of canopy turbulence. The
forest canopy acts as an extended sink of momentum for the air above, thereby
imposing a range of length and velocity scales. Moreover, the presence of shear-
induced instabilities at the canopy-atmosphere interface results in intermittent
coherent structures that penetrate the sub-canopy airspace and aid in canopy-
atmosphere interaction. The physics of turbulent flow in vegetated canopies
itself is an active area of research to date. Standard atmospheric boundary
layer formulations are inadequate in explaining canopy-atmosphere exchange of
mass, momentum, and energy. This is rendered further complicated by the presence
of the fire, which generates additional shear and buoyancy-induced motions.
Using lab and field experimental datasets, this project will explore the
following questions: (i) how do the coherent structures imposed by the canopy
influence the convective and radiative regimes that regulate fire spread? (ii)
how do the unique nature of turbulent transport and turbulent diffusivity in the
canopy impact the redistribution of turbulent energy during wildfires? and (iii)
how does the intermittent nature of canopy turbulence impact bursting motions
associated with fire spread? This project will alter the current fuel-centric
perspective, where the vegetation appears as mere fuel to be consumed by the
flames, to a new paradigm, where the canopy itself actively modulates the wind
and the fire through interactions spanning multiple
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.