* 2146490
* CAREER:  Optimizing Power Processing for Heterogeneous Energy Storage Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Al-Thaddeus Avestruz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 01/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to enable widespread and equitable access to
sustainable power and energy through sustainable energy storage. Globally, the
number of used EV batteries is rising exponentially together with the need for
stationary energy storage, which is a concern for sustainability. The project
will bring transformative change to the techno-economic feasibility of using
retired batteries from electric vehicles (EV) for stationary battery energy
storage (BESS) for grid and EV fast charging applications. This will be achieved
by dramatically reducing the cost of power processing within a second-use
battery energy storage system (2-BESS), which is currently a significant portion
of the total cost. The intellectual merits of the project include building the
foundation of theory, algorithms, and hardware for a new method for using and
optimizing power processing in battery energy storage systems consisting of
second-use (2U) EV batteries. The broader impacts of the project include
widespread penetration of renewable energy sources while maintaining a more
robust grid and reducing the cost of energy, equitable access and energy justice
through affordability, availability, and sustainability; faster proliferation of
EVs by reducing the cost of fast charging by buffering the energy and reducing
the potential cost of grid upgrades and peak demand charges; and providing high-
quality and effective, remote/distance learning to a workforce that may be
vulnerable to changing technology and manufacturing landscapes, global crises
(like pandemics), and shifting socio-economics.&lt;br/&gt;Although second-use
(2U) EV batteries contain approximately 80% remaining capacity, the challenge in
their cost-effective use is the diversity in their characteristics that include
different drive and temperature cycles while in the EV and potentially different
chemistries. This results in a significant variation or heterogeneity in their
energy and power capabilities, and their degradation rates. The current state of
the art in handling the heterogeneity is to use one power converter at the
output of every battery, leading to higher cost and power losses. The research
in this project will address: (1) a design and optimization framework for power
processing with few dissimilar converters at lower power ratings; (2) optimal
control of 2-BESS in a new power processing
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.