* 2146428
* CAREER: Crystallization of Chiral Liquid  Crystals Under Curved Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* MONIROSADAT SADATI, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2027
* USD 205,390.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals, with properties between conventional liquids and
crystalline solids and facile electric response, are the heart of many displays
and electro-optic technologies. However, the advent of miniaturized, curved, and
flexible devices such as displays, fiber optics, or wearable sensors has created
a significant knowledge gap as crystallization under curved confinement remains
less well-understood. This project combines experimental and computational
studies to discover the governing mechanisms by which high chirality liquid
crystals reconfigure their 3D crystal lattices to adapt to curved confined
boundaries. These basic nanoscale physical processes underlie a range of
macroscopic phenomena, including response time and photonic bandgap, which can
be utilized to expand the applications of soft chiral liquid crystals from
photonics, sensing, and electronic displays to information technologies. PI
combines this research with synergistic educational and outreach activities,
including research training for students from minority-serving institutions,
curriculum development, and organizing a regional “Soft Matter Workshop” to
enhance the exposure of the broader scientific community to soft condensed
matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Blue phases (BPs) are
chiral liquid crystals with submicron cubic-crystalline lattices that exhibit
Bragg refraction of visible light and short coherent length, enabling fast
response times of &lt;1 ms, making them attractive for display, photonics, and
sensing applications. Geometrical incompatibility between the three-dimensional
cubic lattice structure of BPs and curvature can constrain the organization of
these nanostructures within curved confined spaces, which can lead to structural
instability and the emergence of topological defects. In this project, top-down
fabrication strategies are employed to systematically confine BP soft crystals
in well-defined curved geometries and tailor the self-assembly of chiral
entities over multiple length scales. Moreover, reshaping the BP lattices
through interactions with electric fields and mechanical forces are examined,
which may enrich the means of controlling the light bandgap of BPs in curved
geometries. This work advances our fundamental understanding of the mechanism by
which BP 3D crystalline lattices deform, contract, and reconfigure to adapt to
the curvature of the bounding surfaces and respond to the environment. Moreover,
it provides a foundation for understanding and developing design principles of
complex skyrmion structures, which may appear in chiral materials under strong
curved confinement. Understanding the fundamental underpinnings of this
“curvature-guided” self-assembly and crystal growth may catalyze the use of
tailored BP soft nanocrystals and enable the development of new fast-response
materials with unique properties needed for practical devices, such as flexible
displays, wearable sensors, and information storage
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.