* 2146567
* CAREER: Acoustic-driven Manipulation of Electrons and Exciton Species in Atomically-thin Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2028
* Luis Jauregui, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2028
* USD 328,689.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims at investigating novel quantum
phenomena in new quantum materials. This project studies the effect of acoustic
waves on the electrical and optical properties of atomically thin materials.
These acoustic waves allow in-situ dynamic control of the properties of the
materials. The goal of the project is to advance our knowledge of quantum
properties in low-dimensional systems which is the key to developing new
technologies, computers, and devices. The project strongly integrates education
with research, to provide quantum research training for graduate and
undergraduate students. The educational activities include the development of
new coursework focused on cutting-edge quantum research and the introduction of
new quantum physics experiments in the classroom. The outcome of these
educational activities will also be disseminated in Spanish to reach out to the
Hispanic community. Outreach activities, such as high school summer camps,
laboratory visits, and public lectures have a special focus on science
communication to the general public and the media. Recruiting efforts focuses on
the integration of women, and underrepresented minorities, into the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims at creating a reconfigurable solid-state simulator of quantum many-
body systems by developing a new and effective method to manipulate the dynamics
of electrons and excitons in situ in atomically thin two-dimensional (2D)
materials and heterostructures. The electrical and optical properties of
different 2D materials and heterostructures under acoustically created dynamic
strain patterns are investigated. This approach enables the creation of non-
equilibrium quantum states and long-sought oblique spacetime crystals. This work
can open up a new branch in condensed matter and optical physics of acoustic-
driven phase transitions and acoustic control of quantum objects that will pave
the way towards the creation of a solid-state quantum simulator and other
quantum acousto-electric devices. The research outcome of this project will
provide a foundation for educational activities focused on training graduate and
undergraduate students of diverse backgrounds in quantum sciences. Several
initiatives are implemented to foster the participation of underrepresented
minorities and women in quantum sciences. These activities include multiple
approaches to increasing public engagement in the sciences, including a high
school science summer program, the inclusion of quantum experiments in the
classroom, and the development of quantum-focused summer research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.