* 2146151
* CAREER: Modeling Language Evolution via Deep Probabilistic Factorization
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2027
* USD 237,566.00

The broad diversity of contemporary and historical languages, dialects, and
writing systems presents a daunting challenge for artificial intelligence (AI)
systems that must process language data (e.g. systems that automatically
recognize handwriting or attempt to translate from one language to another).
However, within this great diversity, there are strong patterns of regularity.
Historical linguists have shown that many aspects of language evolve over time
in accordance with regular patterns of change, including spoken language,
spelling, and even the visual appearance of symbols. This project aims to
develop novel AI frameworks that can better understand language diversity by
automatically analyzing large and diverse datasets consisting of many languages,
dialects, and writing systems. The project will result in a collection of new AI
systems that track how visual and textual aspects of language evolve over time
in order to (1) provide better understanding of how languages change and develop
and (2) make downstream AI systems more robust to language diversity. Finally,
this research will also support interdisciplinary training of a diverse set of
graduate students at the University of California San Diego, as well as the
development of interdisciplinary educational modules for high school students
interested in AI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop a novel
computational framework that combines methods from matrix and tensor
factorization with deep generative modeling techniques to support analysis of
language evolution over a broad range of languages, dialects, and writing
systems. The project will create a learning paradigm that (1) incorporates prior
phylogenetic knowledge of language history as structured priors, (2) supports
efficient approximate inference of historical language forms using neural
decoders, (3) is easily portable to a variety of linguistic domains and levels
of language representation, and (4) directly analyzes primary data (e.g. images
of signs) rather than manually-curated feature lists. Further, the framework
will generalize across both visual and textual modalities, allowing for study of
the multi-modal nature language evolution -- e.g. scripts evolve through visual
change, cognates through phonetic or orthographic change -- and potentially
laying the groundwork for future work investigating how script and dialect co-
evolve or cultural evolution studies of spoken audio. Finally, the outcomes of
each of several applied studies may lead to new evidence for specific historical
and paleographic hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.