* 2146988
* Continuous strength, population-based representations in visual working memory
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2025
* USD 519,793.00

Visual working memory allows people to hold information in mind for a brief
period of time so that they may use that information to perform a task (e.g.,
holding in mind which mug is yours as you look for it in a cluttered cabinet).
This memory system is very limited. For example, we struggle to retain accurate
information about just a few objects even over short timescales. The current
proposal uses novel computational modeling and experimental techniques to better
understand what information is stored about items in visual working memory.
Importantly, the amount of information a person is able to hold in mind (i.e.,
in working memory) has been shown to be related to many other cognitive
abilities (including intelligence), and disruptions of working memory are common
in clinical disorders like attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and
schizophrenia. New knowledge regarding how this information is stored and used
is therefore critical for understanding the nature of important differences
between individuals. Improving our understanding of the visual working memory
system may also improve how we understand the execution of visual skills such as
those involved in driving and other complex tasks which require simultaneous
remembering and monitoring of multiple locations and objects (e.g., tracking the
positions of cars in other lanes to decide whether it is safe to merge). This
work may also inform the design of displays and user-interfaces by providing
deeper knowledge of which visual elements are easiest (or hardest) for users to
remember or navigate between. Beyond the primary research, this proposal also
includes a significant outreach component, featuring both the recruitment and
training of first-generation college students from underrepresented groups, as
well as the development of software to allow scientists to better measure memory
performance and to do so via methods that allow for recruitment of a wider, more
representative sample of individuals (i.e., via internet-based
experiments).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to understand
what information our working memory system holds in mind about an object.
Existing theories of visual working memory commonly assume that a memory for a
feature is represented by just a single value (e.g., for color memory, “I think
the couch was ‘red’”). By contrast, this proposal uses computational models of
continuous reproduction tasks, whereby participants must reproduce the exact
color or shape of a set of items in order to test for signatures of continuous
strength population-codes. The alternative conception of memory advanced by this
project assumes that memory is not represented by a single value, but by an
activation value for each possible value of a feature (e.g., memory for the
color of the couch is not just ‘red’ but a range of values for each color). The
research in this proposal tests whether people have access to a probability
distribution over features, rather than simply what single feature best reflects
their memory. It also tests whether the variability between items (in precision
and confidence) is predictable from such representations. The new theoretical
framework advanced here – which is rooted in signal detection theory – not only
allows for an understanding of objective measures like memory error, but also
makes predictions about memory strength and the subjective feeling of confidence
associated with memory strength. The framework also shares close parallels with
neural population coding models of working memory. Thus, this work makes novel
connections between working memory capacity, memory precision and confidence,
and provides a bridge between neural and cognitive models of working
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.