* 2146476
* CAREER: Reliable and Secure Minimally Invasive Bioelectronic Implants through Contextual Awareness
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Kaiyuan Yang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless, Battery-less, Minimally Invasive (WBMI) bioelectronics promise a
plethora of transformative clinical and scientific applications benefiting human
health and well-being. This CAREER project aims at studying and addressing the
critical but largely overlooked reliability and security challenges in WBMI
bioelectronic devices. Given the extreme power and size constraints of these
devices, reliability and security protections cannot be an afterthought and must
be designed holistically with the essential bioelectronic functionalities. This
project will investigate and create theoretical foundations along with practical
hardware and system implementations to tackle three critical challenges towards
reliable and secure WBMI bioelectronic implants. The challenges include safe,
efficient, and reliable wireless power transfer, secure access and communication
in both remote telemedicine and emergency scenarios, and real-time monitoring of
potential failures or attacks over extended periods of operation. The research
outcome of this project will be a one-of-a-kind hardware platform that expedites
the research and development of practically reliable and secure implantable
bioelectronic systems for pre-clinical and clinical applications. Meanwhile,
this project targets reinforcing the semiconductor hardware workforce by
engaging and educating graduate, college, and high school students, especially
the underrepresented minorities. This highly interdisciplinary project spanning
materials, integrated circuits, power electronics, security, wireless
communication, and computing, targets promoting interests in semiconductor and
hardware, by engaging students at all levels in high-quality scientific and
engineering research activities and creating educational materials to reach a
much broader group of K-12 students and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate principled and
proactive methods to enable reliable and secure Wireless, Battery-less,
Minimally Invasive (WBMI) bioelectronic implants. The key idea is to exploit
positional and contextual awareness of the device to build reliability and
security assurances within the fundamental power, communication, and control
mechanisms. The research tasks include (1) safe, efficient, and misalignment-
tolerant wireless power transfer to WBMI implants, (2) WBMI-specific secure
authentication scheme for remote telemedicine and its lightweight
implementation, and secure access and communication channel in emergency
scenarios, and (3) novel specification-based online monitoring for the
bioelectronic implants and transmitters and its efficient, compact hardware
implementations. This project involves designing, optimizing, and prototyping
energy-efficient miniature circuits and systems that blur traditional design
boundaries to realize proactive protections with low overheads. Proof-of-
principle implants integrating all the reliability and security protections
studied in this project will be fabricated and experimentally
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.