* 2146530
* CAREER: Catastrophic Rare Events: Theory of Heavy Tails and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Chang-Han Rhee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2027
* USD 568,493.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and welfare by developing mathematical
tools that provide strategies to understand and mitigate risk associated with
the "heavy-tail" phenomena. Heavy-tailed distributions provide useful
mathematical models for seemingly disparate rare events, such as the global
pandemic, the 2012 blackout in India, and the 2007 financial crisis. Beyond such
isolated catastrophic events, heavy tails are pervasive in large-scale complex
systems and modern algorithms. A particularly simple and well-known
manifestation of heavy tails is the so-called “80-20 rule”, whose variations are
repeatedly discovered in a wide variety of application areas. Under the presence
of heavy tails, high-impact rare events are guaranteed to happen eventually, and
may occur more frequently than decision-makers may account for. Accounting for
(or even utilizing) the impact inflicted by such rare events will support the
design and operation of reliable and resilient systems in many important
scenarios, including environmental catastrophes, power system failures,
financial crises. The accompanying educational plan aims to broaden STEM
interest in underrepresented communities and train future leaders of academia,
industry, and government by equipping them with fundamental skills in risk
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a comprehensive theory
of large deviations and metastability for heavy-tailed stochastic systems. The
classical theory of large deviations and rare-event simulation has a long
history but these approaches and the metastability framework often fall short
when the underlying uncertainties are heavy-tailed. This project leverages and
extends recent advances in extreme value theory, optimization, control, and
stochastic simulation to fill the gap by building large deviations and
metastability frameworks tailored for heavy-tailed systems. With the new
framework, the project will also address open problems in artificial
intelligence and actuarial science. This research will contribute to a rigorous
theoretical foundation for designing reliable and accountable AI so that the
technology can be applied to high-stake decision-making problems. Successful
implementation of such a program will expand our understanding of how system
failures and phase transitions arise in many stochastic systems, which, in turn,
will provide provably efficient computational machinery for insurance risk
management and accountable AI design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.