* 2146099
* CAREER: Towards Realizing Timely Information Transfer and Processing for Networked Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Ahmed Arafa, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

With the ever-growing amounts of data exchanged in today's world, there needs to
be a reliable means for timely information processing and transfer between the
end users. Inspired by the novel age-of-information (AoI) metric that assesses
information freshness, this proposal offers a pathway towards realizing the ex-
change of data in a timely manner in federated learning (FL), cloud computing,
and remote sensing systems. It introduces a novel information timeliness metric,
AoI, into the study of these systems, and investigates various approaches to
achieve timely learning, computing and sensing over networks. It has the
potential to become an enabler for various applications, including collaborative
autonomous driving, precision health- care, and others. As an integral part of
this research proposal, an extensive educational plan that involves K-12,
undergraduate and graduate level agendas is proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project spans three fundamental information processing categories. The first
involves intelligent agents in a FL setup. Novel agent scheduling and efficient
model compression algorithms are proposed for this category to realize the
notion of timely FL at-scale. The second considers clients in cloud computing
systems, for which innovative job uploading policies are devised under system-
level constraints to achieve timely job completions. Finally, the third category
focuses on remote sensing, and presents novel variable length coding schemes to
enable timely multi-process tracking over noisy communication channels. This
project has the potential to transform the way information acquisition and
processing systems operate under stringent communication and resource
constraints, while the educational plan provides the necessary tools to reason
about the timeliness of information in networked
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.