* 2146537
* CAREER: Automatically Taming System Complexity with the Least-Authority Virtual Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Nathan Dautenhahn, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 126,849.00

Today's computing systems resemble a modern day Titanic. They are huge, easy to
penetrate, and structured without sufficient isolation. Attackers exploit weak
outer shells and instantly gain access to the whole system. For example, malware
such as SolarWinds or Stuxnet has penetrated deeply into government and
corporate systems to leak, control, or corrupt sensitive information such as
nuclear control systems, finances, or state secrets. Breaches like this cost
billions of dollars per year across the public and private sectors. LAVA
addresses this problem by automatically partitioning systems into limited-access
compartments and introduces mechanisms to ensure decomposed software elements
cannot corrupt each other while efficiently allowing legitimate interactions and
discovering attacker behavior. All prototypes will be released as open source
artifacts that can be used by non-expert end users. New findings will be
incorporated in Rice University security courses. A mini-series of Arduino based
lectures and labs will be released with security challenges and taught through
the Rice REMSL program as well as homeschool communities to engage elementary
aged children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining required access and capabilities
for users of complex systems is challenging. For example, the Linux kernel has
over 200 modules and would require over 40000 unique access control decisions.
LAVA (Least-Authority Virtual Architecture) suggests the radical view of an end-
to-end compiler and runtime framework for analyzing, optimizing, transforming,
and enforcing compartmentalized systems. There are three primary challenges and
objectives. First, how to scale to large numbers of objects and users without
complete system expertise? LAVA addresses this with a new unified representation
and analysis framework that is mapped from source code to target runtime and
enforcement mechanisms. Second, how to enhance security with fine-grained
compartments without degrading performance? LAVA's novel runtime architecture
provides efficient yet secure system isolation using a combination of new
mechanisms and portable translation layers to optimize policies. Third, how to
monitor attackers that easily cloak themselves inside of black box applications?
LAVA extends the enforcement monitor with provenance tracing that is capable of
deploying security policies as well as tracking and investigating attacker
behavior. The overall outcome is an efficient and powerful in-process monitoring
facility that can detect sophisticated cloaked threats in real systems. Programs
can go from monitoring a few objects to monitoring the majority. The project
will contribute analysis frameworks, compiler extensions, and a security monitor
with appropriate abstractions and protection mechanisms to make protection fine-
grained and fast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.