* 2146475
* CAREER:  Hardware/Software Co-design for Serverless Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Seunghee Shin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 12/31/2026
* USD 198,264.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing has become a dominant computing
paradigm in diverse sectors. Behind this considerable success, decades of
research efforts have evolved cloud environments to offer better services to
their users. Keeping up with this trend, the current cloud community is adopting
a new cloud-computing paradigm, serverless computing, which allows cloud users
to have conceptual distance from the underlying hardware resources and focus
instead on developing their applications. Despite its benefits, the serverless
platform raises new challenges. One of the apparent problems is slow service
time. The serverless platform needs to provide as timely responses to users'
requests as other cloud applications. However, its high dependency on the
network causes long service latency, significantly hurting users' experiences.
This project addresses this slow service time by reducing dependence on network
memory resources using emerging devices, namely, smart network interface cards
(SmartNIC) and non-volatile memories (NVM). The successful outcomes directly
benefit cloud-computing technology, one of the crucial areas in modern computer
technology. This improvement leads to a better cloud-computing environment,
helping cloud users be more productive with serverless computing but without
concerns about its slow service time. This project also focuses on educating
computer science students on hardware and nurturing them to be advanced
engineers capable of designing hardware/software co-designed systems. The
education plans include diverse activities for female and under-represented-
minority students, providing them with backgrounds in computer
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than investigating only software
optimizations, which often offer expensive trade-offs, this project plans to
redesign both the software and hardware platform to address serverless
platforms' slow service latency. Specific research objectives to achieve this
goal include: (1) migrate the entire storage protocols from the host kernel to
the SmartNIC; (2) implement a non-volatile cache controller, which inserts a
non-volatile cache layer between the main memory and the network storage; (3)
employ non-volatile memory to enhance the non-volatile cache. This project
dissects the network storage latency into two sub-problems, network latency and
storage access latency. The first research objective addresses network latency
by offloading protocol processing burdens from the host CPU. The other two
objectives address slow storage latencies by adopting the SmartNIC-controlled
non-volatile cache with the caching space in the local disks and the NVMM. The
proposed design will be one of the references for the next-generation cloud
server, showing how the hardware and the software can be co-designed to satisfy
the high software demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.