* 2146798
* NSF-BSF: Bridging encoding and retrieval perspectives on sentence processing errors: Comparing Hebrew and English
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Brian Dillon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2025
* USD 226,954.00

To understand language, people need to form links between words that are far
apart. For example, the sentence "The dog with the very shiny and healthy black
fur doesn’t usually bark" requires the listener or reader to associate the dog
with bark, even though those words are quite far apart. To do this, language
users need to rely on memory to link words and concepts. However, human memory
is famously prone to error: Humans routinely forget, misremember, and conflate
aspects of their experience. In the context of language understanding, these
memory failures can lead to incorrect interpretations of sentences. This project
aims to understand how and why memory can distort reading and language
comprehension by looking at how memory errors impact users of two very different
languages, English and Hebrew. English and Hebrew differ in how they organize
the words within sentences and whether they assign gender to nouns; Hebrew
assigns masculine and feminine genders to nouns, similar to languages like
Spanish and French but unlike English. The researchers will study how these
linguistic differences between Hebrew and English influence when interpretation
errors will arise in users of these two languages. In doing so, the researchers
will try to uncover characteristics of memory errors that have the same effect
on understanding across languages and those that are language-specific. The
results of this project will be used to understand how human memory systems
support real-time language comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on this
question suggests that two kinds of processes can disrupt language comprehension
when a sentence requires the reader to hold multiple words in memory. One
process occurs when the features of more recent words accidentally overwrite
parts of earlier words. This type of ‘encoding error’ means that the reader
erroneously perceives a word that recombines the features of two different
words. For example, in a sentence like “The road to the mountains was blocked,”
they may misremember "road" as "roads" by combining the singular “road” with the
plural feature of “mountains.” Another type of error can arise when trying to
retrieve a particular word from memory. For example, a reader or listener might
pick out the wrong word from memory at the critical moment in understanding a
sentence, thinking that the mountains were blocked in the sentence above, rather
than the road (a ‘retrieval’ error). Language comprehension can in principle be
disrupted by either or both of these processes. The investigators will track eye
movements of people while they are reading in English and Hebrew and collect
speeded acceptability judgments. Together these measures should reflect the
relative contribution of encoding and retrieval errors in both languages. The
particular pattern of comprehension errors that arises in reading will then be
tested against computational models of human working memory in language
processing. The combination of these two research methods will help account for
how people understand sentences so easily most of the time, and why
misinterpretations can and do arise at other times. Understanding how and when
interpretation errors arise can also help us better understand various atypical
language and reading patterns, such as shown in dyslexia. This project will
advance collaboration between American and Israeli language researchers and will
involve advanced STEM training for researchers at different career stages, from
undergraduates to post-doctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
co-funded by PAC, Linguistics, and EHR Core Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.