* 2146613
* Using drone technology, communal motivation, and strength-based approaches to engage middle school female students from rural areas in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Sam Catherine Johnston, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

The project uses drones in middle school science and career and technical
education classrooms as a mechanism to increase female students’ awareness of
STEM occupations, knowledge and skills in multiple STEM disciplines, and
motivation to pursue STEM careers. This project confronts society’s messaging
and students’ own perceptions of “who can be, should be, and is good at STEM”
which is often reinforced by the notion of there being a single path into STEM.
The project will encourage female students from rural areas in New Hampshire and
Maine to develop their own STEM career goals by establishing a clear link
between communal goals (those that are collaborative or altruistic) and success
in STEM. The project adds to knowledge about drone-based projects by explicitly
linking STEM and Career and Technical Education in middle school classes and by
studying the alignment between the multidisciplinary and communal
characteristics of drones and female students’ strengths and interests. It also
advances knowledge about how to optimize motivation through an intervention that
both increases the approach of STEM goals by highlighting their communal nature
and decreases the avoidance of STEM goals due to stereotype threat by applying
the Universal Design for Learning framework to the design of the curriculum
materials and classroom activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop and research a model that uses strength-based strategies and communal
motivation to reduce stereotype threat and increase motivation to pursue STEM
goals. The project is guided by the following research questions: (1) To what
extent will female middle-school students in intervention classrooms increase
their motivation to pursue STEM goals compared to their peers in comparison
classrooms? (1)(a) Will female middle-school students in intervention classrooms
reduce their susceptibility to stereotype threat for pursuing STEM goals
compared to their peers in comparison classrooms? (1)(b) To what extent are
decreases in stereotype threat associated with increases in the motivation of
female students to pursue STEM goals? (1)(c) To what extent is the relationship
between program participation and increased motivation of female students to
pursue STEM goals mediated by susceptibility to stereotype threat? (1)(d) Will
middle-school students in intervention classrooms increase their awareness of
communal (collaborative or altruistic) goals in STEM fields compared to their
peers in comparison classrooms? (1)(e) To what extent are increases in the
awareness of communal STEM goals associated with increases in the motivation of
female students to pursue STEM goals? (1)(f) To what extent is the relationship
between program participation and increased motivation of female students to
pursue STEM goals mediated by increases in their awareness of communal STEM
goals? (2) To what extent do increases in the motivation of female students in
intervention classrooms to pursue STEM goals predict increases in their choice
of elective STEM classes in high school? (3) To what extent will middle-school
students in intervention classrooms increase their knowledge and skills in
multiple STEM disciplines compared to their peers in comparison classrooms? (4)
To what extent do increases in students’ knowledge and skills in multiple STEM
disciplines predict increases in their choice of elective STEM classes in high
school? The plan for carrying out research activities includes pilot testing,
the use of impact instruments based on established sources, and triangulation
with qualitative data from the external evaluator. In Phase 1, the curriculum
will be co-developed with 4 teachers, and impact instruments will be adapted. In
Phase 2, the team will conduct a pilot test with 7 teachers and 175 students and
develop the professional development program and fidelity of implementation
measure. Phase 3 will comprise a quasi-experimental field test with 50 teachers
and 1250 students (625 girls), plus follow up with pilot study students on their
10th grade STEM enrollment. Deliverables include a Playbook (curriculum,
professional development program, recruitment strategies, and videos),
constituting a scalable model. This research adds critical insights and much-
needed research into effective strategies for supporting career exploration in
middle school and is one of the first R&amp;D projects to explicitly study the
combination of approach and avoidance motivational pathways in the context of
broadening STEM participation. The project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts, and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.