* 2146333
* CAREER: Computational structured light imaging for widefield mapping of histologic primitives
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Nicholas Durr, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2027
* USD 395,566.00

The research goal of this CAREER project is to create new optical and
computational tools to improve histological imaging of unprocessed tissues.
Histology is essential in the diagnosis and treatment of most cancers, yet its
core workflow has not changed in over a century. This research explores the
potential of a patterned ultraviolet light and artificial intelligence approach
to directly image histological information over large areas. This “slide-free”
approach could increase speed and accuracy of diagnosis while improving surgery
and assessment for a wide range of cancers. This research plan is closely
integrated with an educational program that aims to train undergraduate
engineers to solve important clinical needs in pathology, connect pathologists
with engineers through large hackathons, and introduce high school students to
medical device design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional spatial frequency
domain imaging (SFDI) provides quantitative optical property maps of large
tissues but suffers from poor resolution and optical sectioning due to
decreasing modulation depths with increasing spatial frequencies. This program
will create a novel macroscope that projects ultraviolet illumination at very
high spatial frequencies to recover high-resolution, superficial optical
property maps of bulk tissues. Histologic primitive maps that quantify nuclei
morphology, cellularity, and other clinically relevant features, will be
measured via Microscopy by Ultraviolet Excitation (MUSE). Paired optical
property and histologic primitive maps of ex-vivo human skin samples will be
acquired for training and testing machine learning models. New multimodal deep
learning architectures will be researched to predict these histologic primitives
directly from macroscopy inputs and also to jointly optimize the macroscope
hardware and prediction algorithm. The knowledge gained from this research will
be important for 1) bridging the knowledge gap between diffuse optical imaging
and microscopy, 2) understanding how to co-design artificial intelligence models
with imaging hardware, and 3) creating a foundation for innovative histology
tools that could dramatically improve pathology
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.