* 2147890
* Developing Computer Science Master Teachers for Georgia Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Thomas Koballa, Mercer University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2027
* USD 945,326.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective
computer science (CS) teacher leaders. These teacher leaders will be prepared to
strengthen the ability of rural school systems to provide access to high-quality
CS instruction for all students. In preparing CS teacher leaders, the project
seeks to address the insufficient level of CS instruction in rural schools, a
significant gap in the STEM knowledge pipeline. The project will prepare 16
exemplary and certified grades 6-12 STEM teacher leaders in southern Georgia
schools. The preparation of CS teacher leaders will encourage continuing CS
education in partnering school districts and provide CS learning experiences for
current and future students. Project efforts are aligned with the Georgia
Department of Education's CS Career Pathways and opportunities to pursue careers
in a well-paying industry with a shortage of applicants. Partnerships with
agriculture, health care, and the military will provide participating teachers
with exposure to paths for students to pursue CS careers. Providing students
with CS educational experiences that can lead to well-compensated jobs will
provide economic benefits to rural communities across the entire region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Mercer University includes partnerships
with Wiregrass Georgia Technical College, the Computer Science for Georgia
Academic Partners Network, and Georgia high-need school districts in Clinch
County, Coffee County, Dublin City, Evans County, Jeff Davis County, Tattnall
County, Treutlen County, and Wheeler County. Unique to the proposed project is
CS as a new teaching area for experienced STEM teachers. The project will
implement and investigate a professional development approach to increase the
number and diversity of CS teacher leaders in rural, high-need school systems in
southern Georgia. Guiding the project's approach and evaluation is a research-
based framework that extends the work of the Developing Master Teachers through
the South Carolina Science and Mathematics Teacher Leaders program, which
highlights areas of need for rural school systems and their teachers, specific
to CS teaching and leadership. The project team will employ research-based
strategies to develop a network of teacher leaders with CS content and
pedagogical knowledge, understandings of instructional coaching, and awareness
of content-specific teacher leadership. The strategies will be implemented
through a 14-month online Educational Specialist in Teacher Leadership master’s
degree program, followed by online CS mini-courses, in-person CS Leadership
Assemblies, and CS system-level planning events. Evaluation and assessment data
will be used to investigate how the project approach affects the learning,
actions, and dispositions of the Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs) and school and
system-level factors impacting the MTFs' success as CS teacher leaders.
Nonprofit and industry partners will provide the MTFs with CS career-focused
links within rural communities. Project results will be presented at
professional conferences and submitted for publication. This Track 3: Master
Teaching Fellowship project is supported by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in
high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.