* 2147195
* FAI: Advancing Deep Learning Towards Spatial Fairness
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Xiaowei Jia, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2025
* USD 755,098.00

The goal of spatial fairness is to reduce biases that have significant linkage
to the locations or geographical areas of data samples. Such biases, if left
unattended, can cause or exacerbate unfair distribution of resources, social
division, spatial disparity, and weaknesses in resilience or sustainability.
Spatial fairness is urgently needed for the use of artificial intelligence in a
large variety of real-world problems such as agricultural monitoring and
disaster management. Agricultural products, including crop maps and acreage
estimates, are used to inform important decisions such as the distribution of
subsidies and providing farm insurance. Inaccuracies and inequities produced by
spatial biases adversely affect these decisions. Similarly, effective and fair
mapping of natural disasters such as floods or fires is critical to inform live-
saving actions and quantify damages and risks to public infrastructures, which
is related to insurance estimation. Machine learning, in particular deep
learning, has been widely adopted for spatial datasets with promising results.
However, straightforward applications of machine learning have found limited
success in preserving spatial fairness due to the variation of data
distribution, data quantity, and data quality. The goal of this project is to
develop a new generation of learning frameworks to explicitly preserve spatial
fairness. The results and code will be made freely available and integrated into
existing geospatial software. The methods will also be tested for incorporation
in existing real systems (crop and water monitoring). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to advance deep learning methods toward spatial fairness via four
innovations. First, new statistical formulations of spatial fairness will be
investigated to address unique challenges brought by the continuous spatial
domain, particularly due to a variety of ways to partition the space and create
location-groups for fairness evaluation, and the fact that statistical
conclusions are sensitive to changes in space-partitionings. Second, new network
architectures will be developed to improve the spatial fairness by mitigating
the conflicts amongst different locations due to the shift of data distribution
over space. Third, new fairness-driven adversarial learning strategies will be
used to guide the training to converge to parameters that can maintain a high
overall solution quality while maximizing spatial fairness across locations.
Finally, a knowledge-enhanced approach will be proposed, which integrates
general physical relationships to mitigate data-inequality incurred spatial
biases, and simulates relevant variables and parameters in underlying physical
processes to enhance knowledge-based interpretability of spatial
fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.