* 2147482
* I-Corps:  Software platform for predicting hospital patient re-admissions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Ryan Buckley, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of predictive modeling tools to help reduce preventable hospital
readmissions. One in every eight patients discharged from acute care hospitals
is readmitted within 30 days. Over a quarter of these readmissions could be
avoided with appropriate and timely healthcare interventions. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services estimate that they spent over $17 billion per
year on avoidable readmissions in 2015. In addition, there are nearly 100
hospitals that are fined over $1M annually for having hospital readmission rates
much higher than industry averages. Insurers, accountable care organizations,
self-insured employers such as large hospital systems, and health plans seek to
decrease preventable readmissions to provide high quality care while managing
their medical loss ratios. The busiest hospitals, consistently operating near or
over maximum bed capacity lose revenue from low acuity preventable readmissions
that reduce the institution’s case-mix index. The goal for the proposed
technology is to provide better care to patients while simultaneously lowering
costs for hospitals and insurers alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a software platform that includes machine
learning algorithms to predict hospital readmission risk and identify specific
factors contributing most to that risk for individual patients. The proof-of-
concept for this technology was built using data from approximately 80,000
patient encounters over two years at a major academic medical center. It
outperformed widely used industry standards by approximately 40%. These
algorithms incorporate both modifiable and unmodifiable risk factors including
various social determinants of health and incorporate fairness criteria to
ensure predictions don’t reinforce biases of societal structures. Since these
contributing risk factors may vary widely from one population to the next, each
healthcare system or insurer requires their own unique predictive model based on
their data. The proposed next steps are to identify and prioritize customer
needs for the application of this technology such as algorithm validation
services for each customer’s patient population, electronic health record
interoperability, and user interface design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.