* 2147029
* Collaborative Research: An integrative framework for decision support models including plumbing system dynamics and value of information to meet Legionella control goals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alexis Mraz, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 64,824.00

Legionella is a waterborne pathogen, that if inhaled, can cause severe illness
in humans including Legionnaires’ disease and Pontiac fever. Despite growing
knowledge about Legionella aerosolization and inhalation in residential,
commercial, and institutional buildings and in healthcare facilities, disease
outbreaks are increasing. Since the first Legionella outbreak in 1976, numerous
bench, pilot, and field-scale studies have been conducted to develop strategies
and guidelines for the mitigation and prevention of disease outbreaks. However,
the development of a quantitative framework to predict Legionella disease
outbreak in buildings has remained elusive. The overarching goal of this multi-
institution collaborative project is to advance the fundamental understanding of
Legionella growth in building water systems and leverage this new knowledge to
develop and validate a computational model to predict potential hotspots of
Legionella growth and exposure in buildings. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge and modeling tools to identify the design/operational parameters and
environmental conditions of a building’s premise plumbing system that most
affect the growth and persistence of Legionella. Further benefits to society
will be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring
of two graduate students and an undergraduate student at Arizona State
University, the New York State Department of Health, and the College of New
Jersey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legionella pneumophila (L. pneumophila) is an
infectious pathogen of increasing concern due to its ability to cause
Legionnaires’ Disease (LD), a severe pneumonia, and the difficulty in
controlling the bacteria’s persistence in drinking water systems. L. pneumophila
thrives within large premise plumbing systems such as those found in hospitals.
Commonly used disinfectants are not effective in eradicating L. pneumophila from
premise plumbing systems. In addition, there is no validated model to predict
the concentration of viable Legionella cells in a building water system. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop and validate a computational
model that could predict the growth and persistence of L. pneumophila within a
building’s premise plumbing as a function of system design, operational
parameters, and environmental conditions. The specific objectives of the
research are to: (1) Use state-of-the-art, rapid sampling techniques to quantify
Legionella concentrations, water quality parameters, operational parameters, and
building design specifications in data-rich buildings with known Legionella
problems and/or disease cases where the New York State Department of Health has
ongoing partnerships; (2) Derive Legionella kinetic information over a
multivariate parameter space using targeted and multifactorial experiments with
a combination of parameters including biofilm conditions, disinfectant residual
concentrations, temperatures, and nutrient loadings; and (3) Develop and
validate a computational model (with site-specific information and updated
kinetic information) to predict Legionella persistence and growth in premise
plumbing systems that will inform quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA)
models of LD outbreaks in buildings. The successful completion of this project
has the potential for transformative impact through the development of new
fundamental knowledge and modeling tools to support more accurate estimates of
human health risks associated with LD outbreaks in buildings. To disseminate the
findings of this project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) plan to conduct
outreach events (including targeted workshops and conferences) to present the
results of their research findings and solicit feedback from a broad audience of
stakeholders including the Association of American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), the American Water Works
Association (AWWA), and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) premise
plumbing working group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.