* 2147125
* RAPID: North Dakota Field Measurement Campaign to Improve Understanding of Fog Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* David Delene, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 45,000.00

Fog is a high-impact weather hazard over many locations worldwide causing
serious disruptions to road traffic, marine transport, and especially aviation
operations. The main impact of fog is visibility reduction that can lead to
financial damages, severe road accidents, devastating aviation disasters, and
loss of lives. Therefore, improved understanding of fog formation and
dissipation has broad societal impacts since such knowledge will result in
improved atmospheric models that enable a more reliable and efficient
transportation system. Such improvements are especially critical for routine
utilization of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) in transportation since flights
need to be near the ground and out of sight of the operator. Accurate and
detailed information on current, and near future atmospheric conditions, help to
ensure safe and effective deployment of UAS platforms. Educating students to
provide this necessary atmospheric information prepares them for emerging jobs
and enables them to provide needed scientific advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
genesis and evolution of fog is the result of many atmospheric processes (cloud,
turbulence, radiation), which make accurate modeling of fog a challenge.
Accurate measurements of atmospheric conditions are necessary for improved
understanding of fog processes and related atmospheric interactions (clouds,
aerosols, turbulence). Obtaining a better understanding of fog processes enables
improvements in numerical weather prediction modeling. The project will conduct
atmospheric observations during two month-long intensive observational periods
at Hector International Airport (Fargo, North Dakota), and the surrounding area,
during the peak period of fall and spring fog events. The field projects will
deploy a complex suite of meteorological, cloud, and aerosol instruments at
surface locations, and on balloon, aircraft, and weatherized UAS platforms.
Utilizing these airborne platforms enables detailed observations of the vertical
structure of the boundary layer, which will provide a unique database of
measurements available to the scientific community for
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.