* 2147764
* Planning Grant: Workshops to Build Capacity for Biological Field Research in Southern California Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Steven Allison, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 24,999.00

Climate change and associated extreme events, like droughts and wildfires,
threaten communities and natural landscapes worldwide. In 2006, researchers
established the Loma Ridge global change experiment in Irvine, California, to
study drought, pollution, and fire impacts on local grasslands and shrublands.
These unique ecosystems provide critical habitat and recreational benefits while
serving as a living laboratory for environmental research. Still, as a
relatively new field research facility, Loma Ridge has not yet realized its full
potential. Therefore, the goal of this project is to transform Loma Ridge into a
globally recognized hub for transdisciplinary research on climate adaptation
with benefits for society and the environment. A series of workshops will engage
a broad community of scholars, students, and community organizations in planning
discussions about Loma Ridge. Together, this community will develop
collaborations aimed at applying scientific research to improve land management,
climate resilience, and conservation practices. Specific goals for the workshops
include: develop a strategic plan, establish an executive committee, grow the
research and stakeholder community, provide professional development training to
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, and design a communications
strategy and website. Achieving these goals will engage the private sector,
residents, and the scientific community in tackling environmental problems in
Southern California and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last 15 years at
Loma Ridge, researchers have developed an interdisciplinary understanding of the
ecological processes and environmental variables that govern plant and microbial
communities in Southern California. Studies have quantified the response of
Mediterranean grassland and shrubland ecosystems to environmental change with a
replicated whole-ecosystem manipulation that includes factorial combinations of
ambient conditions, nitrogen addition, added precipitation, and reduced
precipitation. Thus far, the experiment has supported over 50 scientific
publications on plant communities, microbial communities, and ecohydrology along
with dozens of student projects and multiple outreach programs. These activities
have been conducted in partnership with the Irvine Ranch Conservancy that
manages the Orange County-owned land on which the experiment is located. Through
a series of proposed workshops, the investigators will bring together
researchers and land management experts to establish a long-term vision and
strategic plan for Loma Ridge. Experts will be drawn from a range of fields,
including the social sciences, to assemble a transdisciplinary planning team.
The team will identify long-term goals in three main research areas: climate
response of communities and ecosystems, recovery of previously restored
habitats, and mitigation of ecosystem disturbance. In addition, the planning
team will develop policies and best practices to manage data and ensure
effective communication. The plan to expand Loma Ridge’s scope and capacity will
facilitate new research infrastructure, training opportunities, and outreach
programs. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will bring diverse
intellectual perspectives while gaining scientific and professional skills
required for their career success. Together, these activities will position Loma
Ridge as a hub for research and educational programs that focus on mitigating
the impacts of human-caused environmental change. For more information about
Loma Ridge, see https://faculty.sites.uci.edu/mgoulden/the-loma-ridge-climate-
change-experiment/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.