* 2147625
* Integrating AI Machine Learning into the Teaching of Paleontology Using Fossil Shark Teeth in Middle Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,275,109.00

Sharks have ruled the Earth’s oceans for 400 million years, leaving behind a
widespread fossil record. Inspired by the extinct 65-foot-long predator
Megalodon, fossil shark teeth can spark student interest and curiosity in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics). Machine Learning (ML), a
branch of Artificial Intelligence (AI), is used in a variety of fields today and
is broadly applicable for developing predictive models that drive research and
development. This project will integrate the previously separate domains of
paleontology and computer science via ML. Middle school students will develop ML
models to classify shark teeth by their form and function to test authentic
research questions. Students will learn fundamental concepts about ML, increase
awareness of 21st century careers, and gain access to diverse scientist role
models. The project will document and address misconceptions about fossil
sharks, paleontology, and ML. Focused on middle school teaching and learning in
urban and rural Title I schools throughout Florida, the project team aims to
address educational disparities in STEM to encourage students from
underrepresented groups to consider the sciences and computational technology as
a career path. The Scientist in Every Florida School infrastructure will
facilitate recruitment, mentoring, and best practices, such as ensuring that the
science and ML content is integrated into the scope and sequence of existing
curricula. Additionally, participants will have access to thousands of digital
fossil shark specimens in museum and global biodiversity databases. This project
will advance the progress of science and promote innovative learning. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate a set of
interrelated questions focused on how middle schoolers and their teachers learn
about ML, including: (1) What instructional components promote effective and
feasible integrated learning of science, computational thinking, and ML? (2)
What are teachers' perspectives on the value and usability of the new curriculum
in their classrooms? (3) What learning scaffolds are needed, and to what extent
will students learn AI knowledge? (4) How do misconceptions impact students' and
teachers' comprehension of AI and science? (5) How does the curriculum impact
interest, self-efficacy, and identity in science and 21st-century careers? A
total of 76 teachers will be recruited within three successive year-long
cohorts. Each year, the teachers will participate in professional development to
acquire the necessary disciplinary knowledge and skills to co-develop curricula
along with scientists and then implement the activities in their classrooms.
Teachers will partner with scientists and join a large growing learning
community, with over 1,000 teachers and 750 scientists statewide. Scientists
will conduct visits to classrooms, either virtually or in-person, to facilitate
curriculum implementation and provide personal examples of role models. Middle
school teachers will be recruited primarily from Title I schools throughout
Florida. Project data will be collected and analyzed using mixed methods
including surveys, interviews, observations, knowledge tests, projects, and
focus groups. This project will provide an innovative and under-explored context
for advancing understanding of STEM integration with an emphasis on student and
teacher learning about ML as they engage in paleontology investigations. The
goal is to serve as a generalizable model for engaging students in K-12 AI
education and enhancing students’ understanding and interest in relevant
careers. Deliverables will include annual professional development for the
teachers, year-round scientist classroom visits, vetted curricula and lesson
plans that will be freely shared and promoted online, presentations at
professional conferences, and research articles published in peer-reviewed
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.