* 2147765
* Magnetic Cogging Parallel-elastic Actuators for Energy-efficient Robotic Legs
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 732,643.00

This award explores a novel enabling technology for next-generation robots that
are agile, efficient, and that safely interact with humans: the magnetic cogging
parallel-elastic actuator (MC-PEA). The MC-PEA is particularly promising for use
in robotic legs, including prostheses, exoskeletons, and the legs of autonomous
robots such as humanoids and quadrupeds. The MC-PEA comprises an electric motor
connected in parallel with a passive magnetic cogging-torque element (CTE). The
defining characteristic of the MC-PEA is that it has a discrete, controllable-
by-design set of stable equilibria created by strong passive magnetic springs.
No energy is required from the motor to simply hold a static load. Rather,
bursts of energy are required to cause the CTE to cog over to a neighboring
equilibrium. The MC-PEA will efficiently implement bioinspired motion
primitives, including multiple resonance modes that will lead to efficient
oscillatory movements required during walking and running. The MC-PEA will
represent an energy-efficient alternative to the ubiquitous series-elastic
actuator (SEA) in applications in which the SEA is currently the go-to solution.
In addition, this award will support training and mentorship of graduate
students, inclusion of undergraduate students in research, and improvements to
teaching curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this grant is to
characterize the natural and forced dynamics of the magnetic cogging parallel-
elastic actuator (MC-PEA) and determine how to control it effectively and
efficiently for robotic motions. The work will improve understanding of the
performance specifications of an optimally designed MC-PEA across potential
parameter variations. The benefits of the MC-PEA will be explored through
application in powered ankle prosthesis and legged robots. The approach includes
investigation of bioinspired dynamic motion primitives—including impedance
control, point-to-point sub-movements, and oscillations—using a two-link robotic
leg with a simple point-like foot and with MC-PEAs powering the hip and the
knee. The research also includes development of custom energy regeneration
circuits that can be rapidly switched on and off to enable energy to be
reclaimed during dynamic movements. The project outcomes will be the optimal
parametric designs of the magnetic cogging-torque element (CTE) for a wide
variety of step sizes, to be disseminated to robot
designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.