* 2147422
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Response to the 29 July 2021 Chignik M8.2 Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Freymueller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 72,419.00

This RAPID award is a response to The July 2021 Chignik earthquake (M8.2) along
the Alaskan Peninsula. This is the biggest earthquake in the US since 1965 (Rat
Islands). It ruptured a segment of the megathrust offshore of the Alaska
Peninsula, which last ruptured in 1938. The project deploys an integrated on-
land observational field campaigns: geodesy to rapidly resurvey nearby monuments
and document earthquake-related deformation, and seismology to deploy nearby
instruments to record aftershocks. Understanding this earthquake will provide
critical information for evaluating models of earthquake behavior and hence
hazard among the planetâ€™s largest earthquakes. Although only a small tsunami
occurred, understanding better the rupture will allow for more realistic tsunami
hazard assessments. The earthquake also provides ample opportunities for
broadening participation in science, through rapidly making available data to
the seismic and geodetic research communities. The project includes outreach to
local schools, communities and governments and restarts a popular blog focused
on geophysics in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chignik earthquake is a very
rare example of a fault segment with two great earthquakes in the instrumental
record, and is a critical locale to test theories of how seismic cycles work.
The earthquake follows a pattern of along-strike segmentation previously
documented between segments with large differences in locking behaviors and
earthquake histories. The cause of this segmentation (or indeed of the variation
in slip behavior more generally) remains uncertain, and collecting new data may
elucidate the controlling mechanisms behind interseismic and coseismic rupture
segmentation. Additionally, the earthquake provides an excellent laboratory to
test theories of fault loading between segments and of our understanding of
postseismic deformation. Almost precisely a year earlier, a M7.8 ruptured the
abutting Shumagin segment to the west, indicating some possibility of
triggering. That relationship can be explored, as well as the potential for
bringing the next segment to the east closer to failure. The project takes
advantage of decades of geodetic work on the Shumagins, Alaska Peninsula, and
nearby islands, and the large 2018-9 GeoPRISMS-EarthScope-supported Alaska
Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment. The project's outcome will be valuable
in addressing questions related to the characteristics of earthquakes as
articulated in the Earth in Time report from the National Academies of Science,
Engineering and Medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.