* 2147527
* Collaborative Research: Overstepping and the Formation of Metamorphic Garnet - Field, Laboratory, Geochronological, Experimental and Modeling Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Ethan Baxter, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 104,044.00

Metamorphism is the process by which sedimentary rocks are transported deep into
the Earth to high pressures (P) and temperatures (T) conditions. Deep in the
Earth, clay, sandstone, and limestone are transformed into crystalline
metamorphic rocks like schists, quartzites, and marbles. Chemical reactions that
transform sedimentary minerals into metamorphic minerals can also release fluids
such as water (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2), originally trapped in the
sedimentary minerals. These fluids have a major impact on earth processes such
as the formation of volcanoes, the triggering of earthquakes, and the formation
of valuable ore deposits. In addition, these fluids may make it to the Earth’s
surface where they affect the climate. Over the last 50-60 years most scientists
worked within the paradigm that metamorphism is a slow process, releasing fluids
gradually over millions of years during mountain-building events. However, more
recent work suggests that metamorphic processes may occur relatively rapidly in
brief bursts that may occur over timescales of hundreds of thousands of years or
less. The goal of this study is to test the more recent alternative hypothesis
about rapid metamorphism. This study may shift longstanding interpretations that
metamorphism occurs over very long timescales to a new paradigm of more rapid
recrystallization, metamorphic mineral growth and release of fluids and has the
potential to alter views on Earth processes. This work supports research
opportunities and the training of postdocs and PhD students belonging to
underrepresented groups. This grant will also contribute to a series of
educational outreach videos on the YouTube channel “Every Rock Has A Story” that
feature a diverse slate of co-hosts (e.g., kids, women, and scientists from
underrepresented groups). “Every Rock Has A Story” brings to life the remarkable
stories that exist inside every rock. When these stories are told by a diverse
cast of co-hosts, kids see themselves as scientists and are inspired to explore
the science of the Earth themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
investigate this alternative hypothesis — that rocks transform relatively
rapidly with consequential relatively rapid release of fluids with a multi-
pronged, multidisciplinary approach that includes field work, laboratory
analysis, geochronology (dating mineral formation), high temperature-pressure
experiments, and thermodynamic modeling of the nucleation and growth of the
mineral garnet as a type example of metamorphic recrystallization. The field,
laboratory and geochronological studies will focus on a comparison of rocks from
the same outcrop that display numerous small garnets and few large garnets.
Nucleation theory predicts that the number of new crystals (i.e. nuclei) that
form under similar conditions is a function of the amount of overstepping of the
equilibrium reaction (called the “affinity”). The pressure-temperature
conditions of garnet formation will be determined from a combination of
inclusion barometry using Raman spectroscopy and trace element thermometry
(e.g., quartz or graphite-in-garnet; Zr in rutile thermometry) to see if garnets
nucleated at consistent displacements from the equilibrium isograd for the bulk
composition or whether they nucleated at similar P–T conditions, which would
suggest significantly different degrees of overstepping at a common point of
garnet nucleation. Ages of garnet formation using Sm-Nd geochronology will
constrain whether garnets from both types of samples nucleated at different
times consistent with the different locations of the equilibrium isograd, or as
part of a single orogenic-scale nucleation event. Experiments at high pressures
and temperatures will be conducted using piston-cylinder apparatus in order to
determine (a) the location of the equilibrium garnet isograd for each specific
rock composition and (b) the amount of overstepping of the isograd required to
nucleate garnet as a function of the MnO content of the rock. This will provide
experimental verification of the field studies and enable refinement of the
thermodynamic properties of the Mn-component (spessartine) in garnet.
Thermodynamic modeling of assemblage evolution in far-from-equilibrium
assemblages will provide a basis for comparison with the natural parageneses and
will refine our understanding of how metamorphic rocks evolve on a nano scale.
The grant will also provide episode content and co-hosts for new episodes of
“Every Rock Has A Story”, a YouTube series created by co-PI Ethan Baxter to
engage and inspire elementary school age children about the geosciences. Rocks
collected — or experimentally created — through the course of this research will
be the centerpiece of some of the new episodes. Episodes will present the
science through storytelling, designed to engage and inspire our young learners.
Storytellers will include co-PI Baxter as well as other team members including
women and underrepresented minorities to help more children see themselves as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.