* 2147166
* DDRIG: Enigmatic Nature: Absent Laws and Hidden Objects in Theoretical Physics
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,499.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant provides supports a
research project in history of science about the history of theoretical physics
from 1967 to 2004. This project explores how theoretical physicists came to
regard nature as enigmatic, in the sense of both demanding and resisting
interpretation. For these physicists, it became possible to think of nature as
shaped by laws that are only faintly or indirectly evidenced within it, and to
conceive of the world of human perception as an imprint, artifact, or effect of
some absent and yet-unknown ordering principles. This shift of perspective has
had significant consequences for the character of scientific theory over the
last fifty years; in particular, its effects can be seen in the proliferation of
theoretical concepts that embed the observable world within some larger physical
or mathematical space, often by appealing to unobserved or “hidden” entities.
The broad goal of this research is to produce the first systematic historical
account of this transformation in scientific thought, and in doing so to
contribute to popular science programming and public outreach efforts, to
produce publicly available oral history interviews with prominent living
physicists, and to bring historical perspective to conversations among
physicists and philosophers about the future of theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores this shift in scientific
theory through archival research, oral history interviews, and conceptual
analysis, focusing on five episodes in theoretical physics between 1967 and
2004: the development of renormalization group theory in condensed matter
physics, the search for hidden symmetries in particle physics, the theorization
of dark matter candidates in astrophysics, debates over multiverse ideas and
anthropic reasoning in cosmology, and the formulation of black hole
thermodynamics and the holographic principle. This project will contribute to
three active areas of scholarly research: the history of modern physics,
historical and social studies of scientific practice and theory, and the history
of US culture and political economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.