* 2147839
* Employing Peer Mentoring to Empower Youth to Become 21st Century Energy Leaders
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Juliette Rooney-Varga, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,143,464.00

Cities and states, clean energy businesses, labor organizations and engaged
citizens are increasingly addressing climate change by exploring how to
transition to renewable energy. Those who do the least to cause climate change
are often the most vulnerable to its impacts, so it is important to consider the
needs of these populations to support a "just transition" to renewable energy.
As a result, there is a need for a broader and more diverse "STEM- and equity-
literate workforce" – knowledgeable about STEM, possessing requisite thinking
skills, and committed to diversity, equity and inclusion. This project proposes
to make use of an existing energy transition/climate change simulation
experience, En-ROADS, followed by student energy projects to help learners come
to understand the issues involved in energy transition and its environmental
justice implications. This intervention is intended to advance climate literacy,
STEM efficacy, a solutions-focused mindset, and thinking skills. The innovation
of this project lies in pairing undergraduates with high school (HS) students as
near-peer mentors, with preference given to minority students during
recruitment. The undergraduate near-peer mentors will assist the high school
students with the simulation activities and with using the knowledge gained from
the simulation to create a real-world energy transition project for their local
setting. The project is a partnership between universities, local climate change
organizations, and a local minority-owned clean energy business, to connect the
learners with authentic challenges and career paths in their area. By impacting
hundreds of students, the project aims to diversify STEM undergraduate education
and the STEM and energy/climate professional and technical workforces in
Minnesota, as well as to enhance citizen decision-making by increasing STEM
knowledge about energy systems, climate impacts and policy implications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions interrogate the impact of near-peer
mentoring on student outcomes (STEM efficacy, STEM knowledge, hope and urgency
with regards to climate issues, knowledge and interest in STEM/ICT careers), on
the mentors’ STEM/ICT career aspirations, and also explore the synergistic
impact of project components on students’ ability to make connections across the
learning opportunities. To address the research questions, 7 high school
student-undergraduate teams where the university students provide near-peer
mentoring will be compared to 7 high school student-undergraduate teams
participating in the same simulation and energy project activities but without
near-peer mentoring. The research questions will be addressed via pre/post
survey data and via a Grounded Theory analysis of focus group and interview
data. Focus groups and interviews will also be used to explore how mentors
supported the learners. The contribution to the field arises from the fact that
the research questions specifically probe how one strategy, near-peer mentoring,
may enhance simulation-based and project-based learning. This project will
increase our knowledge about how simulations can be used to prepare learners to
engage in real-world projects of personal significance – in other words, it is a
demonstration project to show how simulation-based learning can be situated
within a larger real-world tapestry of community and career engagement, as
opposed to a stand-alone activity intended to convey STEM knowledge alone. The
project will produce a series of guides (a standards-aligned curriculum guide,
student-led project facilitator guide, and an energy/climate career guide local
to the state) that will be disseminated via a number of established networks to
permit other educators to emulate the program. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.