* 2147751
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: How important are sea-level feedbacks in stabilizing marine-based ice streams?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Regina DeWitt, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 57,084.00

Among the largest uncertainties in projections of 21st century sea-level rise is
whether and how the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets may collapse as global
temperatures increase. One aspect of this uncertainty concerns how the solid
Earth responds to melting ice in the form of post-glacial rebound, that is,
uplift of crust after the weight of the ice has been removed. This project will
examine the behavior of the Earth beneath the ice sheet that covered northwest
Scotland during the Last Glacial Maximum, 20,000 years ago. As the earth warmed
following the Last Glacial Maximum the ice sheet shrank and around 17,000 years
ago a portion of the ice sheet over northwest Scotland experienced a “collapse”
or period of fast retreat. The research will use records of past sea levels to
document the behavior of the Earth beneath the front of this retreating ice
sheet to determine if it rebounded (uplifted) fast enough to help stabilize the
retreating ice sheet. There will also be numerical experiments to recreate the
behavior of the Earth and ice sheet during this time period and compare these
model experiments with measured records of past sea level changes across
Scotland. These comparisons will permit new insights into the behavior of
retreating ice sheets and provide better constraints on the history and size of
the ice sheet that once covered northwest Scotland. The project will conduct a
three-week in-residence summer camp for students from high schools with large
minority populations to introduce them to the varied dimensions of Earth
Science. The purpose of this research is to investigate the importance of sea-
level feedbacks in stabilizing marine-based ice sheets during their retreat. The
proposed investigation will combine new late Pleistocene/Holocene relative sea-
level constraints to be collected from raised shorelines, existing offshore
marine cores, and isolation basins from across northwestern Scotland, to refine
the glacial isostatic adjustment models for the British Isles. The proposal will
also investigate sea-level feedbacks at a more local level and at the scale of
the Late Pleistocene ice stream that once flowed through the Minch of
northwestern Scotland using a more specialized ice-sheet model. This model,
coupled with results from an improved “global” scale glacial isostatic
adjustment model for the British Isles, will be used to understand the
sensitivity of the former Minch ice stream to more local variables (e.g. mantle
rheology, lithospheric thickness, ice sheet geometry, etc.). Three hypotheses
will be tested: 1.) Sea-level feedback did not provide a stabilizing influence
for the Minch Ice Stream during its retreat following the Last Glacial Maximum;
2.) along indented ice-sheet margins, sea-level feedbacks are governed not by
the local ice front but by regional isostatic adjustment; and 3.) the influence
of sea-level feedback in stabilizing marine ice streams is a function of the
rheology of the Earth beneath it.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.