* 2147292
* FAI: A Human-Centered Approach to Developing Accessible and Reliable Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Marine Carpuat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,993.00

This Fairness in AI project aims to develop technology to reliably enhance
cross-lingual communication in high-stakes contexts, such as when a person needs
to communicate with someone who does not speak their language to get health care
advice or apply for a job. While machine translation technology is frequently
used in these conditions, existing systems often make errors that can have
severe consequences for a patient or a job applicant. Further, it is challenging
for people to know when automatic translations might be wrong when they do not
understand the source or target language for translation. This project addresses
this issue by developing accessible and reliable machine translation for lay
users. It will provide mechanisms to guide users to recognize and recover from
translation errors, and help them make better decisions given imperfect
translations. As a result, more people will be able to use machine translation
reliably to communicate across language barriers, which can have far-reaching
positive consequences on their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project contributes advances in natural language processing and interaction
design for a bot that can be added to any text-based conversation, where it can
play a role similar to an interpreter. The bot will guide users to write
appropriate inputs for machine translation, help users understand outputs, and
intervene when it detects miscommunication and conversational breakdowns. The
design of the bot will follow a human-centered design process, consisting of
need-finding studies, iterative system development and deployment, and user
evaluations via controlled experiments. On the back-end, the bot will rely on
quality estimation models that automatically detect translation errors to
produce useful guidance for end-users. The data, models, and design
recommendations generated by this project will advance computational research in
multiple ways. It will lead to new machine translation quality estimation
techniques that take into account the impact of errors on end-users; it will
expand the scope of explainable artificial intelligence research to encompass
the considerable risks and harms caused by language generation tools, and it
will generate new interface design that assists lay users' sense making of
artificial intelligence systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.