* 2147017
* Episodic memory retrieval as attention turned inward
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gordon Logan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2025
* USD 670,000.00

Attention and memory are intricately linked in many kinds of human performance
across fields such as education, industry, the military, sports, and everyday
life. These processes are major sources of individual differences that are often
implicated in psychological and neurological disorders. This project offers new
insights into the linkage, focusing on the selective nature of attention and
memory retrieval, and testing the conjecture that memory retrieval is perceptual
attention turned inward. The research develops new experimental procedures that
apply methods for studying perceptual attention to the understanding of memory
retrieval. It provides new measures -- of the sharpness of the focus of
attention on memory, and the ability to resist distraction from competing
memories -- that are not available in current methodologies and which are not
addressed in extant theories. The research tests new mathematical theories of
selective attention and memory retrieval that specify how memory lists are
represented and how retrieval processes can access items in the list
selectively. The theories show that attention and memory retrieval rely on the
same mathematical principles. Computer simulations based on these principles
reproduce critical patterns of human behavior. The primary goal of the research
is to develop empirically supported computational models that provide deeper
insights into the cognitive and neural basis of the interaction between
attention and memory. Understanding the computational principles facilitates
integration and comparison with current theories of attention and memory that
address other phenomena, like memory encoding or dividing attention between
inputs or tasks. The materials, code, and data generated by this project are
openly available to everyone. A broader goal of the research is to provide a
strong empirical and theoretical basis for applied research in education and the
workplace and to provide new theory-based measures of individual differences and
clinical disorders. The broadest goal of the research is to disseminate the
acquired knowledge to a wide range of audiences, from lay people to scientists,
through accessible publications and participation in workshops and summer
schools. The beneficiaries included undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups, who engage in all aspects of the research process, thus encouraging them
to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes new
empirical connections between attention and memory by adapting the Eriksen
flanker task (which is primarily used to study perceptual attention) to measure
selective memory retrieval. The new episodic flanker task measures the sharpness
of the focus of attention on memory and the ability to resist distraction from
flanking items. It requires subjects to remember a list of items (e.g., RFCKGL)
and presents a probe display that cues a single item (e.g., ##C###). Subjects
are asked to indicate whether the cued item was in the same position in the
memory list. The sharpness of their focus on memory is measured by presenting
non-matching items from the list that differ in their distance to the probed
item (e.g., ##K### vs. ##L###). Nearby items that fall within the focus of
attention are harder to reject than distant items outside the focus. Resistance
to distraction is measured by presenting flanking letters that match (e.g.,
RFCKGL) or mismatch (STCPXV) the memory list and subsequently observing how
effectively subjects can ignore the flankers. Performance is better when cued
and flanking letters “point” to the same response and is worse when they point
to opposite responses. Flanking letters that match the target improve
performance for “yes” responses but impair performance for “no” responses;
flanking letters that mismatch the target impair performance for “yes” responses
and improve performance for “no” responses. The size of the improvements and
impairments reflects the ability to resist distraction. This research
establishes new theoretical connections between attention and memory by adapting
computational models of memory retrieval to the episodic flanker task,
interpreting their retrieval cues as spotlights of attention focused on memory,
and asking whether their spotlights predict the observed distance and
compatibility effects. It interprets three memory models (noisy coding, position
coding, and item coding) as examples of three classic approaches to selective
attention (space-based, object-based, and template-based, respectively),
connecting a broad range of memory theory and attention theory. The proposed
research claims that retrieval and attention are different names for the same
computations, explained by the same underlying mathematics. The research
evaluates this claim with a broad range of items, from letters and words to
colors and pictures, with a range of timescales that encompass both short-term
and long-term memory, and with a broad range of tasks that tap the same
representations, relating serial recall and cued recall to cued recognition in
the episodic flanker task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.