* 2147186
* RUI: SG: Field and Laboratory Tests of Pyrogenic Organic Compounds in Australian Stalagmites as a Novel, High-Resolution Paleofire Proxy
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Rhawn Denniston, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,785.00

The massive fires that burned across many parts of Australia in 2019-2020 are
part of a global trend. Rising temperatures, coupled in some cases with
prolonged droughts and fire suppression efforts, have created conditions
conducive to unusually intense and widespread fires, including across many parts
of the western United States. While exceptional for the century, it is unclear
how unusual this fire activity is over long-term Earth history. In order to
better place modern fire activity into a longer-term context, it is necessary to
develop reconstructions of burning that occurred prior to the satellite era
(1979-present). Records of ancient fire have been developed from burn scars on
tree rings, from charcoal in lake sediments, and from fire-derived compounds
deposited on and stored in glacial ice. In tropical Northwest Australia, it is
not possible to recover such data. The goal of this project is to develop
methods to recover fire-derived compounds from stalagmites in caves in that
region. Results are expected to provide a clearer understanding of the utility
of stalagmites as a novel record of past burning, and allow its application to
other fire-prone regions, including the western United States. The project will
also provide opportunities for undergraduate student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fire plays a critical role in the ecology of the
tropics, but fuel loads, sources of ignition, and background climate conditions
are often markedly different now than they were a century or more ago.
Addressing the extent to which fire regimes are changing is complicated by the
sparsity of high-resolution, long-term records of fire frequency and intensity
spanning far beyond the instrumental era. Understanding the frequency and
intensity of fire activity prior to the arrival of European pastoralists and
during intervals of climate distinct from the modern era (e.g, the Little Ice
Age: CE 1450- 1850) is critically important for managing current fires,
estimating cascading effects of fires on plant and animal diversity, and
maintaining ecosystem resiliency. This study aims to refine a novel paleofire
proxy capable of addressing these limitations: pyrogenic organic compounds
(including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, PAHs) in stalagmites. Previous
research by the PI and collaborators has revealed that stalagmites from a
tropical Australian cave preserve changes in the type and abundance of pyrogenic
compounds over time, with these shifts consistent with recent fire activity
proximal to the cave. Burning of biomass produces PAHs, which are then
transported into the underlying cave by monsoon rains, and incorporated into
stalagmites as they crystallize from dripwater. While these results are
extremely promising, the biochemical and hydrological mechanics of the cave
system need to be further scrutinized before this method can be applied more
widely. Toward that end, the PI and collaborators will perform field and
laboratory experiments: (i) measurements of organic compounds such as PAHs in
soil and cave dripwater prior to, immediately following, and a year after a
prescribed burn over the cave site, (ii) replication of pyrogenic organic
compound distributions in a coeval stalagmite sample, and (iii) comparison of
the paleofire signals in a 20th century stalagmite to remote sensing data and
records of fire derived from historical documents. This work will also provide
training to several undergraduates at Cornell College in field and laboratory
methods, a critical step in advancing their careers as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.