* 2147677
* Facility improvements to establish capacity for coral reef resilience research assessing genetic adaptation and physiological acclimatization
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Gretchen Goodbody-Gringley, Central Caribbean Marine Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 445,585.00

Corals form the architectural framework for tropical reefs, supporting the most
productive and biologically diverse marine ecosystems on Earth. Because coral
reefs are especially vulnerable, it is important to understand how organisms and
populations can respond to ocean warming either through range expansion,
physiological acclimatization, or genetic adaptation. At the Central Caribbean
Marine Institute in the Cayman Islands, data collected continuously over the
last 22 years offers a long-term ecological record of the&lt;br/&gt;reefs and
provides insight into the recent performance of the local reef ecosystem and
impacts of global stress events, such as coral bleaching. This long-term dataset
can provide unique insight and evidence of resilience capacity of coral reefs in
the region and potentially globally. This award will leverage this research
history with infrastructure to study the physiological and molecular mechanisms
that drive resilience of coral reef systems. It will provide a much-needed
opportunity for scientists to disentangle anthropogenic and climate influences
on coral reef evolution, adaption, and resilience at all levels of the
ecosystem, from species and community levels to genomic and microbial levels.
The new infrastructure consists of an outdoor mesocosm in which environmental
parameters can be modified independently for manipulative experiments, and an
adjacent molecular laboratory that will enable preservation, extraction and
processing of experimental samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research on
the mechanisms driving coral reef ecosystem and organismal adaptation and
evolution during climate stress and extreme will be advanced by the capacity to
experimentally manipulate environmental conditions, such as light and
temperature, as well as access to a molecular facility to process and preserve
samples for genomic comparisons. Resources that enable manipulative experiments
and molecular analyses, will attract visiting researchers to examine questions
related to reef resilience and adaptation in collaboration with resident
scientists at CCMI. Public outreach and educational programs serving
undergraduate and graduate level students will be expanded by the new
infrastructure. For more information about CMMI, please visit
https://reefresearch.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.