* 2147122
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding Multiscale Mechanics of Cyclic Bending under Tension to Improve Elongation-to-Fracture of Hexagonal Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Scott Rose, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 351,884.00

At the core of various strategies to reduce consumption of fossil fuels in the
transportation industry is the goal to reduce structural weight, generally
termed ‘lightweighting’. Certain metals, such as titanium and magnesium, have
crystal structures known as hexagonal closed-packed (HCP), which contribute to
superior strength-to-weight ratios. However, HCP metals often do not have the
required ductility to form them into the desired shapes at room temperature.
Instead of heating the material, with the accompanying expense, this Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project will
implement, characterize, and model a novel incremental forming process called
‘continuous bending under tension’ (CBT). The goal of the project is to double
the formability of HCP metals at room temperature. By working with GOALI partner
Boeing, the team will solve forming problems that are of immediate value to
industry while enabling the lightweighting of aerospace structures. Furthermore,
the modeling and materials characterization tools will be encapsulated in open-
source software for free access to the entire scientific community. The students
involved in the research will gain knowledge and understanding of industrial
challenges through internship opportunities. An essential part of the project
will be the instigation of an outreach program called Capstone Connect. An
online forum will be created specifically for senior high-school students to
connect with academic and industrial specialists as they tackle their final year
Capstone projects. Not only will students gain deeper insights into engineering
design projects, but the interactions will enlighten them concerning future STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the ability to increase elongation-to-
failure (ETF) in steels, for example, via CBT has been demonstrated, application
to HCP metals has been limited. Furthermore, a deeper understanding of the
mechanics behind the improved ductility is required to both optimize CBT process
conditions and to transfer the underlying ideas into practical forming
operations. This project will utilize high resolution digital image correlation
(HRDIC) and high-resolution electron backscatter diffraction (HREBSD) to observe
local slip activity, strain gradients, dislocation rearrangement, substructure
development and associated back stresses that play a role in the remarkable
increase in ETF during CBT. The experimental campaign will serve to inform and
validate a novel non-local crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) model at the
critical mechanism length-scale, enabling understanding of mechanics in CBT to
improve ETF of HCP metals. This combined experimental and modeling effort will
provide unprecedented insights into CBT, and the practical success of the
project will be demonstrated via the forming of a leading-edge titanium
component with Boeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.