* 2147571
* Collaborative Research: Rodingites as Recorders of Tectonic Processes from the Seafloor to Convergence: A case study of the Dun Mountain Ophiolite Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Michelle Gevedon, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2025
* USD 94,017.00

The hydration of ultramafic rock (called serpentinization) is a fundamental
Earth process that influences the rheology of materials and thus how rocks
deform, localize strain, and behave seismically. In addition, serpentinization
affects geochemical cycling of key elements such as hydrogen, carbon, and sulfur
and therefore influenced the evolution of life. Serpentinization is a widespread
process most common at the boundaries of tectonic plates. By understanding the
conditions (pressure, temperature, deformation, fluid source) and timing of
serpentinization, one can place constraints on major tectonic processes
occurring at plate boundaries, such as continental rifting, seafloor spreading,
subduction, and strain-localization along strike-slip faults. Unfortunately,
determining the pressure-temperature-deformation-fluid-time (P-T-d-f-t)
histories of serpentinites themselves has long been challenging; therefore the
team will determine the P-T-d-f-t histories of rodingites, rocks associated with
serpentinites, as a proxy to place constraints on the timing and conditions of
serpentinization in order to interpret the tectonic evolution of plate
boundaries. This multi-disciplinary project invokes a tiered mentorship
structure from full professors to assistant professors to graduate and
undergraduate students. This work will support student education and scientific
training by partial funding of multiple students at the graduate (Ph.D. and
M.S.) and undergraduate levels, as well as a minority student summer internship
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will determine the conditions
and timing of rodingitization (and associated serpentinization) of the Dun
Mountain Ophiolite Belt in the Nelson region of New Zealand to place constraints
on the tectonic evolution of the ophiolite. Despite New Zealand being the type
locality of rodingites, limited work has focused on their tectonic setting of
formation with interpretations ranging from formation on the seafloor to post-
emplacement on land due to either crustal fluids or fluid focusing along late
faults. The team will test the hypothesis that the rodingites from the Dun
Mountain Ophiolite formed during seafloor hydrothermal alteration or in the
overlying forearc mantle wedge during the mid-Permian. In contrast, the
rodingites from associated serpentinite mélanges formed during subduction and/or
exhumation via interaction with slab-derived fluids along the plate interface
and will be of slightly younger age. The team will also test the hypothesis that
minimal rodingitization occurred post-emplacement. They will determine the
conditions and timing of rodingitization of the Dun Mountain Ophiolite Belt by
using phase equilibria modeling to determine the P-T conditions of
rodingitization, combined with the new and novel techniques of U-Pb
geochronology and Ca and Sr isotope composition of andradite garnet in the
rodingites to determine the timing of and fluid source responsible for
rodingitization, respectively. Field structural and microstructural data will
help in evaluation of timing of rodingitization, particularly with multiple
generations of rodingites related to different tectonic fabrics (e.g.,
preservation of undeformed igneous textures; penetrating fabric within both the
rodingite and host serpentinite). As the applications to U-Pb geochronology and
Ca and Sr isotope composition to rodingites are limited, the team will first
reconstruct the tectonic histories from well-known localities on the seafloor
(fast-spreading ridge and passive rifted margin) and in the Western Alps
(exhumed subducted metamorphic terrane) to provide proof of concept. They will
then determine when rodingitization within the Dun Mountain Ophiolite Belt
occurred and how these metasomatic event(s) record the tectonic history of the
Dun Mountain Ophiolite Belt.&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is provided by
NSF EAR Tectonics and OCE Marine Geology and Geophysics
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.