* 2147647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Influences of Physiological Stress on Microbiome, Metabolism, and Health in Nurses
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Clare Super, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 07/31/2023
* USD 32,500.00

The gut microbiome, or the community of microorganisms residing in the human
digestive tract, is affected by stressful conditions and can influence
cardiometabolic health. This research project investigates the ways in which
human-microbiome-health interactions are sensitive to different work conditions
through focusing on nurses, frontline workers who experience the metabolic and
energetic stress of prolonged shift work conditions. This project seeks to
understand the health risk factors associated with frontline labor and results
may inform nursing practices. Individual personal health information are shared
directly with nurse participants, and results are shared with Nurse Scientists
and leaders at the project’s hospital research site, empowering this site to
potentially offer better health outcomes for nurses. This project also creates
cross-disciplinary training, data-sharing, and publishing opportunities for
undergraduate students, nurse scientists, nursing leaders, and nurse
participants. Most project collaborators are scholars from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nursing is commonly
associated with extremely stressful conditions and poor cardiometabolic health
outcomes, including coronary heart disease (CHD), metabolic disorders, obesity,
and gastrointestinal complaints, especially in rotational/night shifts and in
high stress hospital environments. This project compares biomarker and survey
data from a cohort of nurses as they engage in differing types of shift work.
Using a cross-sectional sample survey of nurses, the investigators measure both
shift and non-shift nurses’ indicators of microbial diversity/composition,
inflammation, intestinal permeability, and metabolism. Survey data are used to
record diet, activity level, socioeconomic status, demographics, and shift-work
conditions to assess how these factors may mediate metabolic and microbial
outcomes. Biological samples and questionnaires are collected from a focused
group who have not engaged in rotating shift work in over a year, starting in
their first month of shiftwork, followed by monthly sampling for four months. It
is predicted that gut microbiome composition among shift work and non-shift work
nurses will differentiate as nurses begin shiftwork. Ultimately, the results of
this project aim to illuminate one of the ways in which frontline shift labor
may become embodied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.