* 2147012
* BIORETS: BioInteractions
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Liz Diaz-Vazquez, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The Department of Biology at the University of Puerto Rico Rio Piedras Campus
proposes a Resarch Experience for Teacher Program focused on the overarching
theme of Biological &amp; Biomolecular Interactions; hence BIORETS:
BioInteractions. The long-term goal of BIORETS: Biointeractions is to improve
middle and high school students’ scientific literacy and positive attitudes
towards STEM. This will be achieved by engaging teachers in a professional
development program that is focused on immersion in biological research and the
development of standards-centered curriculum material based on their research
experience. The program’s design will provide an ecosystem of support for
teachers’ professional development where teachers are at the center of all the
interactions within it. Teacher participants will engage in a broad range of
research activities: from molecular biology to macroecology. In addition,
teachers will participate in various seminars and workshops to ensure they
successfully engage in their research projects and have the support to implement
curricular materials of their design. These workshops fall into the following
categories: scientific process, instructional design, and action research.
Teachers will be encouraged to integrate elements of differentiated instruction
in the design of the curricular materials to promote the inclusion of students
with learning disabilities. The project has been conceptualized in collaboration
with the Puerto Rico Department of Education; thus, it inherently provides a
broad impact to low-income, Hispanic students at under-performing schools. A
manual with all the curricular materials produced by the project will be shared
via the Internet and the Puerto Rico Department of
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to provide research experiences to
science teachers emerges from traditional science teacher preparation programs
that lack apprenticeships in research. It has been shown that teachers that
participate in research experiences increase the use of evidence-based practices
in their classrooms and student achievement in science. In addition to research
experiences, BIORETS: BioInteractions aims to foster teachers' use of action
research as a means for critical reflection on their science teaching and
empowerment. The project’s rationale is that if teachers receive a professional
development experience that increases their STEM research and pedagogical
skills, they will be empowered to make decisions that improve student STEM
learning and student attitudes towards STEM. Hence, BIORETS: BioInteractions
will investigate: 1) How do research experiences (scientific and/or action
research) contribute to teacher empowerment to teach science in the classroom?
and 2) Do students develop scientific literacy and is this reflected in a change
in their attitudes towards math and science? Mixed methods following an
explanatory sequential design will be used to address teacher empowerment.
Surveys will be administered to measure teachers’ research/scientific literacy
skills as well as teacher empowerment. A focus group will be conducted after
teachers participate in the program and have answered pre/post survey questions.
A quantitative correlation design will be used to address if students from
teacher participants develop scientific literacy and change their attitudes
towards math and science. Statistical correlation analysis will be used to
explain the relationship between these scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.