* 2147313
* DDRIG: An Historical Study of Rare Earth Metals, Geohistories, and Commercial Geography
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Claire Sabel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 15,750.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the relationship between the
earth sciences, imperialism, and extractive industries in the early modern
period (c. 1600-1750). It uses the global trade in precious stones as a case
study, focusing on the major maritime trade route for gemstones from the
sixteenth to eighteenth centuries. Gems have been of immense social and
scientific value in diverse cultures for millenia, but by the beginning of the
seventeenth century, unprecedented imperial ambitions created new global markets
for the gem-trade. Through maritime commercial travel, previously inaccessible
parts of the globe could now be empirically investigated, changing the methods
and materials for understanding the earthâ€™s composition. Findings will
contextualize the history of geology in imperial expansion, the influence of
mineralogical traditions in shaping the modern earth sciences, and the role of
commerce in cross-cultural scientific exchange. More broadly, this project
demonstrates the role of industry and economy in shaping the scientific
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historical archival research will be conducted
in four centers of the seventeenth century gem-trade. Primary sources include
the archives of the Dutch and English East India Companies, which document the
activities of miners, artisans, and merchants dealing with gems. These documents
will be analyzed to understand how interactions between those who worked with
gems and those who studied them influenced knowledge of the composition and
distribution of mineral deposits at a global scale. By evaluating the reliance
of seventeenth century scientific inquiry on commercial sources, the project
seeks to answer the extent to which growing interactions between pertinent
regions were a significant factor shaping geographical, geo-chemical, and
geological knowledge in the early modern era, and how relationships between
science, states, and industry shaped subsequent developments in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.