* 2147727
* Collaborative Research: Engaging Engineering Graduate Program Directors in Shifting the Default to Trauma-Informed Frameworks of Care
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Alexandra Strong, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2024
* USD 139,883.00

This collaborative research project will address the growing mental health
crisis that affects over 40% of graduate students by exploring how graduate
program directors (GPDs) can make trauma-informed care a programmatic default.
GPDs can shape departmental procedures, enact institutional policies, and
disrupt power dynamics between faculty and students. In other words, GPDs are
central to improving and sustaining graduate students’ mental health and
wellbeing. As such, this project will construct a curriculum with GPDs to aid in
implementing trauma-informed practices to a large audience of GPDs. The project
outcomes will support the improvement and development of proactive interventions
to support positive mental health and wellbeing in graduate engineering
programs. Improving the systems that support graduate student mental health in
engineering programs will enhance recruitment and retention at all levels of
engineering education, which in turn addresses the national need of training
engineers to address grand challenges. The project results will also raise
awareness of graduate mental health in engineering programs by preparing faculty
in leadership positions to change the climate in graduate programs directly.
These changes will serve as evidence-based models that increase the adoption of
practices to support mental health and promote student
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the mental health
crisis by focusing on the role of GPDs in integrating frameworks of care that
consider the full range of traumas graduate students have experienced or could
experience. The results of this investigation will characterize the roles of
engineering GPDs and inform the development of methods to train a community of
GPDs to implement evidence-based practices that foster care. This project will
use a two-phase research design to address three research questions (RQ): RQ1:
What are the characteristic roles of engineering graduate program directors in
fostering cultures of care in their programs? RQ2: How do the systemic
structures within higher education impact engineering graduate program
directors’ implementation of trauma-informed frameworks of care? RQ3: What
professional development program features can support engineering graduate
program directors’ perceived ability to integrate trauma-informed frameworks of
care in their approach to supporting graduate students? Phase 1 will leverage
sequential mixed methods through a national survey followed by semi-structured
interviews to characterize the roles of engineering GPDs and how programs
leverage care practices. Phase 2 will build on these characterizations to
collaboratively develop an evidence-based professional development framework for
creating trauma-informed systems of care within engineering graduate programs.
We will integrate a group coaching professional development approach with
collaborative inquiry to explore the lived experiences of the GPDs participating
and enable their attempts to foster care in their programs. The research design
will expand existing theories for implementing trauma-informed frameworks of
care to promote positive mental health and wellbeing within engineering graduate
education. The results will inform the practices that faculty and instructors
can use to realize the broad impact of trauma and recognize students
experiencing, coping, and reacting to trauma. Four broader impacts will emerge
from this project: (1) A characterization of GPD roles in engineering that
researchers can use to accelerate other educational innovations in graduate
engineering education, (2) A prototype developed and disseminated in
collaboration with GPDs and an advisory board containing licensed professional
counselors that can empower and enable GPDs to respond to students experiencing
trauma and to minimize the occurrence of new trauma, (3) Structural changes to
support students that have or will experience trauma, so they can return to deep
learning and increase their likelihood to persist, and (4) Faculty who can
better support systemically minoritized students through the implementation of
care practices that respond to students’ identity-driven
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.