* 2147983
* Ocean process-driven sediment transport in submarine canyons  along the northern Cascadia margin: Morphological control of triggers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrea Ogston, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 554,149.00

“Ocean process-driven sediment transport in submarine canyons along the northern
Cascadia margin: Morphological control of
triggers”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Submarine canyons act as a major
highway between the coastal and deep ocean, transporting enough water,
nutrients, and sediment to have a global impact on geology, biology, and
climate. Just like canyons on land, submarine canyons are large, eroded valleys,
but they are not carved by rivers. Instead, submarine canyons are carved by
downslope-flowing currents of sediment and water akin to an avalanche.
Scientists are challenged in predicting the onset and distance traveled by these
flows. This project aims to identify the physical processes in these flows off
the coast of Washington and learn how differences in canyon structure can affect
the flows generally. A set of seafloor instruments in two submarine canyons will
be installed to record sediment gravity flows as they pass through them. These
data are quite rare and greatly aid understanding of flow mechanics and enable
development of numerical models that predict where and when flows occur. Six
seafloor instrument packages will be maintained in Astoria Canyon and Quinault
Canyon, both fed by the Columbia River, for a complete year. Sediment cores will
be collected from both canyons, where event-layers from past sediment-gravity
flows will be identified and analyzed for their composition and historical
frequency. The researchers predict that river floods and marine storm events
(large waves, strong winds) can trigger major sediment gravity flows in these
canyons today, but differences in canyon terrain trigger sediment-gravity flows
under different conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Submarine canyons are present along
nearly every continental margin and are the sites of globally significant ocean
mixing, sediment transport, and nutrient exchange between the coastal and
abyssal environment. Earth’s submarine canyons are maintained by density-driven
flows of water and sediment, but the mechanisms that trigger flows—and their
downslope flow evolution—are still not well understood. This project examines
the pathways of sediment through two canyons along Cascadia Margin which are
morphologically distinct yet share the same fluvial source, the Columbia River.
This study’s experimental design includes a targeted instrument deployment,
comprehensive seabed coring survey, and hydrodynamic modeling of sediment
gravity flows. The project is intended to advance knowledge of canyon
sedimentary processes under modern high stands in sea level and constrain the
role of morphology and oceanographic disturbance in initiating seabed
resuspension and density-driven flow. Seafloor sediment loading from fluvial
sources, triggering of flows by bathymetric focusing of wave and current energy,
and synchronous downslope transport across distant canyon systems will be
studied as functions of canyon morphology in Astoria and Quinault Canyons. The
investigators predict that sedimentary deposits in relatively deep-water canyon
environments may be created via oceanic triggering, and aim to place
quantitative constraints on the downslope limit of such flows. They also predict
that processes in differing canyon morphologies result in deposits that are both
regionally synchronously and asynchronously emplaced at
depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.