* 2147083
* BIORETS Biological pathways to adaptability, interactions among the genome, epigenome and environment.
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Jeanne Serb, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 599,937.00

A fundamental concept in biology is that life on Earth changes over time. The
Iowa State University Research Experience for Teachers (ISU BIORETS) program
aims to help teachers and their students better understand how organisms adapt
or fail to adapt to a changing environment by promoting scientific literacy and
curiosity, which impacts attitudes towards public policy and its implementation.
Never has there been a time where science, education, and action have been more
critical in the stewardship of the planet. Teachers play a crucial role in
enhancing scientific literacy, but studies show that many lack confidence when
teaching how organisms adapt to changing environment and research processes in
this area of science. The ISU BIORETS program addresses this issue by providing
teachers, particularly those underrepresented in STEM fields and those who teach
students from marginalized populations, with authentic, hands-on summer training
in university research laboratories. Helping the educators develop their content
knowledge and curriculum development skills will build their teaching
proficiencies. In turn, their students will wrangle over real scientists'
questions to convey the cumulative nature of science - that new data adds to a
more complete understanding. In addition to summer training for teachers, the
program will build innovative, on-going relationships among university
researchers, teachers, and their students throughout the school year, offering
teachers and students opportunities to make valuable scientific contributions
towards solving real-world problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISU will
partner with four Iowa school districts and an area education agency to conduct
an RET site based on investigating how organisms adapt to changing environments.
Teachers will partner with host university faculty for six weeks in the summer
to address major research questions regarding adaptability. Plant and animal
study systems in the hosts' labs will advance fundamental biological concepts,
while addressing the plant-awareness deficit. Conceptual integration across
different biological levels will be developed and reinforced during weekly
teacher/faculty meetings. Relationships between faculty mentors and teachers is
year-long, with two day-long teacher-cohort activities during the school year,
individual coaching, follow-up visits by faculty to high schools, and student
visits to ISU. Biweekly professional development programming will help teachers
translate research experiences into classroom practices and develop new
curriculum that encourages student experimentation and dilemma-based learning.
Where possible, deliverables will have options for both in-person and virtual
activities. A focus on plant biology will engage and recruit diverse students
into the plant sciences. Teachers and students will benefit through 1) increased
content knowledge and curriculum development; 2) expanded educational and career
opportunities for students, especially from underrepresented, economically
disadvantaged, or rural populations in STEM disciplines; and 3) recruitment of
teachers from school districts with high enrollment of underrepresented
populations and students who receive free and reduced lunch. These benefits
advance the goals of the Next Generation Science Standards and enhance US global
competitiveness through increased scientific awareness and world-class
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.