* 2147884
* Canyons Influence on Cross-shelf Exchange - When Dense Water Goes Down, Warm Water Comes Up
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,083,600.00

This project will examine the dynamics of the cross-shelf exchange in a slope
canyon induced by dense shelf water descending into the canyon. The case to be
examined in the Antarctica region is of global significance because the offshore
flowing dense water forms Antarctic Bottom Water and thus affects the global
meridional circulation, while the onshore heat transport induced by the return
flow drives glacial ice melt and therefore contributes to sea level rise. These
important processes will be investigated through a combined laboratory and
numerical approach. The project will explore the leading order dynamics
controlling the cross-shelf exchange of momentum, heat and tracers when dense
water descends a canyon. Key locations to measure dense shelf water offshore
transport and offshore water onshore transport will be identified to provide
guidance to future field campaigns. This proposal will support the Ph.D.
research of a graduate student, and other students will be involved through the
PIsâ€™ active lab-groups. The experimental work will utilize the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory at WHOI. In Years 1 and 3, the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory Open Week event will target undergraduate and graduate students,
postdocs, K-12 students. This event will host 10 hands-on demonstrations and
displays. Material from this project will be used in educational activities by
the Co-PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary numerical modeling revealed two
unexpected flows in the Antarctic coastal region. The first is a current on the
continental shelf east of the canyon, which contributes to the cross-shelf
exchange by transporting a third of dense water across the shelf-break upstream
(from the perspective of the Kelvin wave propagation) of the canyon. The second
is the onshore intrusion into the canyon of deep offshore water, some of which
is able to reach the coast. The project will combine numerical modeling with
laboratory tank experiments to test two hypotheses: first, that a substantial
fraction of dense water generated on the shelf over the head of a canyon flows
onto the upstream shelf and eventually moves offshore into the slope sea on the
upstream side of the canyon; and second, dense water descending down a canyon
induces an onshore return flow of deep offshore water in the canyon. It is also
hypothesized that this onshore flow originates on the continental slope
downstream of the canyon and exits the canyon onto the continental shelf
upstream of the canyon. The Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) will be used
to simulate the formation and subsequent transport of Dense Shelf Water (DSW)
generated in a coastal region, as well as the motion of ambient water, in an
idealized continental shelf and slope system. Idealized laboratory experiments
using a rotating glass tank with a very similar set up as the numerical
simulations will be used. These experiments will test whether the assumptions
and parameterizations used in the numerical model are influencing the dynamics
of interest. In addition, agreement between the laboratory and numerical results
will provide confidence that the relevant dynamics are correctly captured in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.