* 2147791
* PFI-TT: Achieving efficient production of visible light from semiconductor nanocrystals in water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Ming Tang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2023
* USD 188,182.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a nanocrystal-based light absorber
that converts near infrared (NIR) to visible light in biologically friendly
aqueous media. This project addresses unmet needs in the life sciences where the
deep targeted delivery of light to tissue is needed because it is currently
impossible deliver violet light deep inside living mammals without surgery or
using a very intense laser that exceeds the mammalian pain threshold. This
project will advance the development of a prototype system. The ability to
deliver violet light non-invasively centimeters below the skin will facilitate
new ways to detect oxygen (hypoxia) and create inexpensive light sources for
point-of-care (POC) diagnostics. Potential commercial applications include
mapping neural networks, mitigating pain, artificially controlling the circadian
rhythm, alleviating depression, and imaging physiological processes in
preclinical research. Apart from impact in these large and growing billion-
dollar markets, this innovation will enable new directions in the diverse
academic fields of neuroscience, light-sheet imaging and circadian rhythm
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will establish novel
methods for stabilizing hydrophobic nanocrystals and molecular antennas in
water. The goals are to realize state-of-the art photon upconversion quantum
yields with this hybrid platform in aqueous media, as opposed to previous
records in organic solvent. Research objectives include establishing a kinetic
or thermodynamic barrier that isolates the semiconductor nanocrystals and
molecular emitters from their aqueous surroundings while preventing quenching by
ambient oxygen. The nano- or micro-vesicles or emulsions proposed here will be
stabilized by fine-tuning the relative ratios of various components and their
differing solubilities. The spin-triplet excited state necessary for high photon
upconversion quantum yields will be protected against undesired quenching by
oxygen with chemical barriers or additives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.