* 2147718
* Acquisition of a Tabletop Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive Spectrometer by the Earth Science Department at Vassar College, a PUI
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Laura Haynes, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 169,374.00

Acquisition of a Tabletop Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with an Energy
Dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer (EDS) for research, teaching, and public outreach
has been granted to the Vassar College Earth Science Department. Scanning
Electron Microscopes are powerful instruments used for imaging natural and
manufactured materials beyond the capabilities of traditional light microscopes.
Our department will use the SEM-EDS to support new research in understanding
past climate and ocean change, in the evolution of mountain belts, and past
volcanic eruptions, providing research opportunities for undergraduates at every
stage of their college experience. PI Haynes will investigate how microscopic
fossils called foraminifera record ocean acidification events in the geologic
past. These shells of these creatures are ubiquitous in the geologic record and
help to ground-truth the impacts of large warming events on the Earth system and
its ecosystems. This SEM will form a significant portion of PI Haynes’ research
toolkit, supporting her establishment as an early-career scientist and providing
opportunities for undergraduate research in her laboratory. The SEM-EDS will
also be used at all levels of our curriculum; for example, students will have
the instrument available to them as a tool to be used for final projects of
their own design, providing primary research experience. Finally, new
programming will be designed in our department’s Geological Museum that will
help co-create new exhibits with SEM imagery collected with our local community
members. We aim to increase the impact of our local museum to generate interest
and connection with Earth Science topics and the Vassar community at large as
well as marginalized members of the Poughkeepsie community. This award will
support two summer undergraduate research assistants to design and implement
these efforts in local science communication. We believe that this programming
will significantly increase the impact of our local museum and create a regional
hub for natural history education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A newly acquired
Phenom-XL Tabletop Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with an Energy Dispersive
X-Ray Spectrometer (EDS) will be used for research, teaching, and public
outreach in the Vassar College Earth Science Department. In PI Haynes’ lab, the
SEM will be used to assess the mineral structure, preservation, and morphology
of fossils and microfossils, primarily foraminifera. Using sediments collected
from the International Ocean Discovery Program’s recent Expedition 378, PI
Haynes will investigate the record of climate and ocean change recorded by
foraminifera microfossils during rapid warming events of the Eocene epoch (45-57
Ma). The SEM will be utilized to 1) address primary questions in the evolution
of foraminifera morphology, taxonomy, and physiology, and 2) diagnose whether
and to what degree shell diagenesis and contamination biases geochemical records
of past ocean acidification. In Co-PI Walker’s lab, the SEM-EDS system will be
used to investigate clay mineral formation and geochemistry. Co-PI Menking’s
research aims reconstruct the terrestrial paleoclimate history as recorded by
lake sediments, notably in sediments of the Pleistocene Lake Estancia and lakes
from central New York, using this instrument to investigate changes in sediment
composition as well as determine diatom taxonomy, two important indicators of
past environmental change. In addition, the investigators will use the
instrument to characterize microplastics and in reconstructing volcanic eruption
histories via zoning and microbubbles in minerals. This award received
cofounding from the Marine Geology and Geophysics (MGG) program in the Ocean
Science division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.