* 2147529
* Seismicity of peridotite alteration
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Robert Sohn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 452,768.00

The Earth's mantle is a layer of silicate rock found in between the crust and
the outer core that represents ~67% of its mass and ~84% of its volume. Mantle
rocks are rarely observed on the Earth's surface because they are covered by the
crust. Yet, the upper part of the mantle, which is composed of peridotite, is
commonly exposed on the seafloor, and occasionally exposed on land in geological
features called ophiolites. When peridotite is exposed to, and reacts with,
water, it undergoes chemical reactions that change the composition of both the
rocks and the water. This process, known as alteration, results in carbon being
transferred from the water to the rocks. Peridotite alteration is thus a natural
process that sequesters carbon in the Earth's interior. This project uses data
from a unique seismic experiment - conducted at the world's largest ophiolite in
Oman - to determine how fast this natural process sequesters carbon. The project
provides support to a post-doctoral associate at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. It fosters international collaboration with the Sultana of Oman,
Czech Republic, and the UK. Its outcomes are directly relevant to applications
in engineered CO2 capture and enhanced geothermal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peridotite alteration is a fundamentally important
process for a spectrum of geoscience topics. These include arc volcanism,
earthquake processes, the carbon cycle, and chemosynthetic biological
communities. Although fully altered peridotites (serpentinites, listvenites,
soapstones) are commonly observed in outcrops, it is unclear how this can happen
because alteration reactions are typically self-limiting. In most geological
systems alteration products armor reactive surfaces and reduce pore space, which
eventually halts the alteration process. It has been proposed that reaction-
driven cracking - due to volume increase during serpentinization and carbonation
of mantle rocks - is the key process that perpetuates alteration by creating
and/or maintaining permeable pathways for continued fluid flow. In principle,
this process should generate very small cracking events with volume change
(isotropic) focal mechanism components. But such events have never been observed
in situ. Here the team acquired a unique seismic dataset with short inter-
element spacings (order meters) and 1 kHz sampling at a site of ongoing
peridotite alteration to study its seismogenic character. They determine if the
very small earthquakes detected by the seismic network represent cracking from
peridotite alteration. They interpret the results in the context of the multi-
disciplinary studies (hydrology, petrology, microbiology) conducted at the study
site. The results provide new insight into the complex set of processes that
occur when water interacts with peridotite. These processes occur over vast
expanses of the Earth's solid surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.