* 2147997
* Constraining multi-scale interactions between slabs and mantle flow within Western Pacific subduction zones
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Adam Holt, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2025
* USD 228,990.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate descends beneath another, are
responsible for forming some of the Earth's most dramatic mountain ranges - and
for some of its deadliest earthquakes and volcanoes. In the underlying mantle,
where the descending plate is referred to as a “slab”, it is surrounded by
hotter material which behaves as a fluid over geological time. The pattern and
speed of mantle flow around the slab governs directions and magnitudes of forces
acting on it and on the overlying plates. These forces play an important role in
driving plate deformation, including mountain building and earthquakes, but they
cannot be observed directly. They must be estimated, using sophisticated
mathematical models. In this project, Holt and his team will develop such models
and run several sets of calculations to investigate mantle flow and its effect
on slabs and plates in the Western Pacific region. This region was chosen
because there is abundant data that can be used to test the model calculations,
and because the geometry of slabs and plates is complex (and hence interesting).
Integrating a model with this complexity into a global-scale mantle flow model
presents an immense technical challenge which has already been partially met by
Holt. His group's new models will first address how much mantle flow may differ
from estimates given by older, simplified models. After they have been adjusted
to be consistent with geological and geophysical data from the Western Pacific,
the models will shed new light on mantle flow and forces on plates in this
complex region. The PI and team will develop and freely share software tools,
opening the door for other groups to model similarly complex, earthquake-prone
regions (e.g., the Caribbean and Southeast Asia). This project will support a
graduate student and an early-career professor. The models and outputs will be
used for teaching model visualization and data analysis to Geodynamics students
at the University of Miami. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
research project is developing a mechanical framework for interactions between
the mantle and lithospheric plates, with a focus on the geometrically complex
Western Pacific. This framework will be developed by using a suite of global
subduction models to predict the mantle flow regime and associated forces in the
vicinity of the main Western Pacific slabs (e.g., Kuril-Japan, Ryukyu-Nankai,
and Izu-Bonin-Mariana). After the team compiles a database of Western Pacific
observables sensitive to mantle dynamics, global numerical models incorporating
highly resolved Western Pacific slabs and weak plate boundaries will be run to
quantify the mantle flow and viscosity fields consistent with these
observations. The team will also use a suite of targeted numerical tests to
examine how the flow-field and associated forces are impacted by both global-
scale flow and mantle flow localization (due to a power-law viscous rheology).
Three inter-linked questions related to lithosphere-mantle flow interactions
will be addressed. At a regional scale: Does mantle out-flow from beneath the
Philippine Sea Plate (PSP) occur and produce forces that dictate Western Pacific
subduction observables? Does this out-flow, which occurs through narrow gaps
between slabs, require flow localization due to power-law creep? At a global
scale: Do forces imposed by large-scale mantle flow strongly impact the Western
Pacific slabs (e.g., do they produce the very shallow dip of the Japan slab)? In
addressing these questions, this study will provide transferrable insight on the
relative contributions of complex slab geometries and global-scale mantle flow
to subduction zone mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.