* 2147136
* Collaborative Research: BIORETS: Authentic research experiences for teachers at Long-Term Ecological Research sites: climate change and biodiversity across ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Joseph LaManna, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 222,051.00

The Authentic Research Experience for Teachers at NSF’s Long Term Ecological
Research sites (ARET@LTER) project engages high-school teachers in conducting
field and laboratory research focused on the impact of emerging environmental
stressors such as floods, droughts, and heat waves, on local biodiversity across
diverse ecosystems. Pairs of teachers will be recruited from schools with large
populations of students from marginalized groups in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) and stationed at each of three LTER research
locations. Over an 18-month period, pairs of selected teachers will work with
faculty and graduate students to conduct research and compare their experiences
with colleagues stationed at other LTER sites through virtual meetings and
chats. This cohort approach will allow teachers to support and learn from one
another. The three included LTER sites span diverse critical habitat types on
Earth including the Arctic (Arctic LTER), temperate montane forests (Andrews
LTER), and marine coastal ecosystems (Santa Barbara Coastal LTER). A capstone
in-person experience at the National Center for Ecological Analysis and
Synthesis will further expose teachers to the practice, process, and community
of today's networked and data-intensive science. Teachers will engage their
students in authentic science learning activities based on their RET experience
and develop a Data Nugget or similar data product based on their authentic
research experience which can be used by any of the RETs in the project as well
as across K-12 and undergraduate classrooms through the freely available Data
Nuggets website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to train
teachers in the techniques involved in global change ecology, how scientists
study and describe the impacts of climate change on biodiversity, and to explore
ways for teachers to share this experience and these data with their students.
The project is a collaboration between scientists and teachers, with both
science and education enriched in the exchange of ideas and practice. The
project has the potential for broad reach and impact on teacher practice and
student engagement and learning and reaches multiple communities across the U.S.
that serve students traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The project’s
broader impacts fall into five categories: change in teacher practice;
engagement and achievement of students historically excluded in STEM; improved
understanding of classroom context for scientists; development of long-term
partnerships between teachers and scientists; and development and dissemination
of data products at local, regional, and national
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.