* 2147869
* I-Corps: A machine learning approach to reduce musculoskeletal disorders-related injuries among workers performing labor-intensive repetitive tasks
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Nipesh Pradhananga, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that may provide a task-specific optimal ergonomic
solution to reduce the risk of musculoskeletal disorders-related injuries (MSDs)
among workers performing labor-intensive repetitive tasks. The total cost of
MSDs in the US is between $45-54 billion a year, which is around $15,000 per
injury. The technology has a wide range of applications in industries like
construction, moving services, grocery stores, assemble lines, cleaning
services, and warehouses where labor-intensive repetitive tasks are prevalent.
Workers exposed to MSD-related injuries suffer a loss in quality of life, missed
wages, and increased health expenses. This proposed technology may help them
live a healthier and better life. Managers supervising workers may be able to
maintain the work schedule and quality of work because of reductions in health
issues on site and reduced need to train new workers to replace the injured
ones. The companies deploying the workers potentially may observe increased
productivity and decreased workers compensation-related claims. The proposed
technology also may be useful to the general public by improving the ergonomics
of their day-to-day manual repetitive tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a software technology utilizing a
machine-learning algorithm to predict unique actions and moments induced in
different body joints to compute a “safe working procedure” for labor-intensive
repetitive activities. Human skeletal tracking technology, such as a depth-
sensing camera, is used to collect postural data of workers performing their
tasks. This real-time posture data serves as the input for the machine learning
model. The common practice in industry is to comply with the minimum safety
standards prescribed by a regulatory body. Contrary to the practice, the project
implements a novel method to identify the maximum achievable level of safety on
site, the “Safety Frontier,” which may serve as a higher benchmark in monitoring
safety in labor-intensive repetitive tasks. In addition, the project identifies
“Sustainable Safety,” an optimal ergonomic solution that may be achieved and
sustained under normal working conditions. The introduction of these safety
levels may advance the understanding of safety dynamics and provide a holistic
approach to analyze safety of workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.