* 2147955
* RINGS: WISECOM - Wireless Integrated Sensing, Learning and Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nuria Gonzalez Prelcic, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2025
* USD 793,985.00

Future wireless networks will integrate sensing and communication functions. The
sensing capabilities can come from the sensors of the devices in the network.
The radio communication signal itself can also be used for sensing, especially
when operating at high carrier frequencies, with high bandwidths and large
antenna arrays. Examples are cellular networks supporting automated vehicles or
industrial robots equipped with radar, lidar or cameras. This project advances
the fundamental technologies, from a hardware and software perspective, to
enable integrated sensing, learning and communication (ISLAC) wireless networks,
capable of obtaining and communicating accurate information about the
environment, relevant for the users and for the network operation itself. The
sensing accuracy provided by these technologies is critical, both to support a
given use case, and to enhance the resilience of the network, enabling a fast
respond to failures or mis-configurations. The outcomes of this project will
improve cellular connectivity for people and devices, by providing higher data
rates, with more reliability, in a way that embraces machine learning and the
wealth of sensor data also being deployed in such networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish the potential of integrated sensing, learning
and communication networks to enhance their own resilience, this project
develops: (a) the core enabling technologies for ISLAC networks, including
hardware and signal processing algorithms for joint sensing and communications;
(b) mathematical tools to measure resilience accounting for the particular
propagation features and network operation at millimeter wave (mmWave) and sub-
Terahertz (sub-THz) bands; (c) learning strategies that exploit sensing
information to improve network adaptability; and (d) user-centric algorithms
that exploit sensing information to improve network autonomy and increase. The
developed strategies will be evaluated using a framework based on a combination
of ray tracing, experimental measurements and models that mix the digital,
physical, and virtual worlds. This methodology will enable the evaluation of the
developed technologies in several relevant scenarios supported by cellular
networks, including automated vehicles, automated factories, and immersive
reality settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.