* 2147818
* The Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Latinx College Graduates
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Daisy Reyes, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 155,725.00

This project investigates the social and economic effects of the COVID-19
pandemic on first-generation Latinx college graduates aged 25 to 40. Latinx
youth are increasingly enrolling in and graduating from college, often with the
hope of achieving economic mobility. Yet, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Latinx
individuals were more likely to work essential jobs, were unemployed at higher
rates, and faced higher death rates, compared to other racial and ethnic groups.
This qualitative project considers how Latinx millennial college graduates
navigate and are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including their well-being,
economic mobility, and family arrangements. Interviews with 61 Latinx college
graduates consider how factors such as race, familial income and wealth,
citizenship and immigration status, and the need to provide for oneâ€™s family,
intersect and are shaped by the COVID-19 pandemic. By building on two prior
waves of interview data, the project contributes to understanding of the
mechanisms that shape social and economic mobility over the life
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the third wave of a longitudinal
study of Latinx millennial first-generation college graduates. The first wave
was collected from 60 Latinx college students at three colleges between 2008 and
2010. The second wave of 61 interviews, conducted in 2018 and 2019 before the
COVID-19 pandemic, included participants from the first wave alongside a new
sample of alumni. Approximately 73% of participants in the second wave were from
the original sample. The study population is diverse, ranging in income, post-
secondary education, student loan debt, homeownership, and marital and parental
status. Over half of the study population provide some level of financial
support to parents and extended family. Wave 3 of the study investigates the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the same college graduates. This research
will contribute to understanding of how the COVID-19 pandemic affected the
largest ethnic minority group in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.