* 2147046
* Collaborative Research: ANT LIA: Connecting Metagenome Potential to Microbial Function: Investigating Microbial Degradation of Complex Organic Matter Antarctic Benthic Sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrew Steen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2025
* USD 137,045.00

Microbes in Antarctic surface marine sediments have an important role in
degrading organic matter and releasing nutrients to the ocean. Organic matter
degradation is at the center of the carbon cycle in the ocean, providing
valuable information on nutrient recycling, food availability to animals and
carbon dioxide release to the atmosphere. The functionality of these microbes
has been inferred by their genomics, however these methods only address the
possible function, not their actual rates. In this project the PIs plan to
combine genomics methods with cellular estimates of enzyme abundance and
activity as a way to determine the rates of carbon degradation. This project
aims to sample in several regions of Antarctica to provide a large-scale picture
of the processes under study and understand the importance of microbial
community composition and environmental factors, such as primary productivity,
have on microbial activity. The proposed work will combine research tools such
as metagenomics, meta-transcriptomics, and metabolomics coupled with chemical
data and enzyme assays to establish degradation of organic matter in Antarctic
sediments. This project benefits NSFs goals of understanding the adaptation of
Antarctic organisms to the cold and isolated environment, critical to predict
effects of climate change to polar organisms, as well as contribute to our
knowledge of how Antarctic organisms have adapted to this environment. Society
will benefit from this project by education of 2 graduate students,
undergraduates and K-12 students as well as increase public literacy through
short videos production shared in YouTube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose
to advance understanding of polar microbial community function, by measuring
enzyme and gene function of complex organic matter degradation in several ocean
regions, providing a circum-Antarctic description of sediment processes. Two
hypotheses are proposed. The first hypothesis states that many genes for the
degradation of complex organic matter will be shared in sediments throughout a
sampling transect and that where variations in gene content occur, it will
reflect differences in the quantity and quality of organic matter, not regional
variability. The second hypothesis states that a fraction of gene transcripts
for organic matter degradation will not result in measurable enzyme activity due
to post-translational modification or rapid degradation of the enzymes. The PIs
will analyze sediment cores already collected in a 2020 cruise to the western
Antarctic Peninsula with the additional request of participating in a cruise in
2023 to East Antarctica. The PIs will analyze sediments for metagenomics, meta-
transcriptomics, and metabolomics coupled with geochemical data and enzyme
assays to establish microbial degradation of complex organic matter in Antarctic
sediments. Organic carbon concentrations and content in sediments will be
measured with δ13C, δ15N, TOC porewater fluorescence in bulk organic carbon.
Combined with determination of geographical variability as well as dependence on
carbon sources, results from this study could provide the basis for new
hypotheses on how climate variability, with increased water temperature, affects
geochemistry in the Southern Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.