* 2147967
* Collaborative Research: Phenocryst or not? Using a stratovolcano's crystal cargo to explore crustal-scale magmatic systems, Koma Kulshan (Mt. Baker), Northern Cascade Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Hannah Shamloo, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2025
* USD 277,473.00

The goal of this proposal is to address fundamental questions in volcano science
related to how and when volcanoes erupt through a geochemical and mineralogical
study of lavas erupted from Koma Kulshan (Mt. Baker) in northern Washington
State. The United States has several volcanically active regions that contain
“very-high-threat” volcanoes, including Koma Kulshan. While situated in a highly
populated area, Koma Kulshan remains relatively understudied. This proposal
investigates the processes that lead to eruptions at Koma Kulshan and the
associated timescales, to better inform a response to, and aid in, hazard
mitigation plans in the event of a future eruption. This work will also provide
place-based learning opportunities for students from marginalized groups in STEM
through the Summer Koma Kulshan Field Experience, a week-long summer field
experience for pre-majors from Washington State institutions including Northwest
Indian College, Whatcom Community College, and Yakima Valley College.
Additionally, three PIs with complementary scientific expertise and diverse
identities at different career stages will lead this collaborative project and
will provide a framework for multi-tiered research mentoring across peer
institutions in the state of Washington for undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines an investigation of lavas
and tephra deposits erupted from Koma Kulshan over the past ~100 ka. It provides
an integrated approach combining proven petrologic techniques (i.e., mineral
chemistry and textures and thermobarometry) with methodologies that are breaking
new ground (i.e., machine learning, diffusion chronometry, and reconstructed
volatiles in melt inclusions). The resultant data will be used to reconstruct
the architecture of magma storage in arc crust and quantify the timing of magma
storage and ascent prior to eruption–key factors required for eruption event
trees and hazard mitigation plans implemented by the Cascades Volcano
Observatory. Kulshan lavas provide a unique sample set ideal for this study as
previous work has identified distinct crystal clots and co-crystallizing
assemblages that represent different parts of a transcrustal system tapped upon
eruption over 10s of thousands of years. This work provides the opportunity to
test how transcrustal magmatic systems evolve through time and improves our
understanding of arc volcanoes globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.