* 2147832
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of decoupled algal-biofloc aquaponics technology for deployment in food deserts
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Brendan Higgins, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2025
* USD 575,730.00

There is heightened interest in the idea of deploying aquaponics technology (the
fusion of aquaculture with hydroponic vegetable production) in food deserts. At
its best, aquaponics allows local people to produce their own fresh fish and
produce in a sustainable manner: the wastewater from the fish is used to provide
water and fertilizer to the plants. However, there are significant technological
and social barriers that have hindered adoption of aquaponics by marginalized
populations living in food deserts. Barriers include 1) systems that are prone
to instability without advanced technical knowledge, 2) fish and produce quality
that do not meet consumer quality demands (e.g. muddy fish flavor), and 3) food
safety issues given that pathogens in the fish wastewater can contaminate the
vegetables. Failure to address these three issues will continue to place
aquaponics systems (and the corresponding nutritional and environmental
benefits) out of reach of marginalized populations. The objective of this
project is to improve understanding of how aquaponics design decisions affect
stability, pathogen dynamics, and product quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of this project is that algal biofloc and decoupled systems
will exceed the performance metrics of bacteria-centric biofloc and coupled
systems (85% of current systems) in terms of 1) system stability and ease of
operation, 2) nutritional and flavor profiles, and 3) pathogen management when
placed in the hands of novice users. This project will allow rigorous testing of
integrating algal- biofloc and decoupled plant production into small-scale
aquaponics systems, both independently and in combination. The test systems will
be operated by high school students in East Alabama (after hands-on training) in
a synergistic school-university partnership. The university team has extensive
experience conducting research on aquaponics systems and algal-bacterial
treatment of waste, and engages frequently in educational and outreach programs
with novice users. The three specific research aims are to: (Aim 1) Test the
integration of algae and decoupling into biofloc aquaponics to improve stability
and ease of operation for novice users (high school students). The hypothesis is
that integration of green algae into the biofloc and deployment into a decoupled
aquaponics system will improve system stability (nitrification capacity) and
reliability (plant and fish survival). (Aim 2) Determine the contribution of
algal biofloc to improved nutritional quality and flavor profile of aquaponics
products. The hypothesis is that integrating Chlorella algae into the biofloc
will increase the omega-3 fatty acid profile of fish, antioxidant content of
vegetables, and improve the fish flavor profile by displacing opportunistic
bacteria and cyanobacteria species that generate muddy flavors. (Aim 3) Quantify
the impacts of algal biofloc and decoupling on indicator pathogens in
aquaponics. The hypothesis is that the presence of algal taxa like Chlorella in
the biofloc and use of decoupled systems will reduce the presence of indicator
pathogens. While students and teachers will run the different aquaponics
systems, Auburn University and the Bashan Institute of Science will conduct
advanced chemical, microbiological, and genomic analyses of the systems.
Students, after formal parental informed consent, will evaluate system ease-of-
use and flavor of products through surveys. Improved understanding of microbial
dynamics in aquaponics can translate broadly to other areas of aquaculture,
nutrient recovery, and waste management. Improved understanding of how design
choices impact user experience may translate to research on other scalable food
production technologies. The project is designed to lead to enhancement of
education of high school student participants who live in low-income communities
with limited food access. Approximately 225 students will engage in hands-on
learning by operating the aquaponics systems, allowing them to learn and apply
knowledge of agriculture, biology, chemistry, nutrition, and engineering.
Potentially, these students can impact the future of sustainable food
production: the skills that they learn should extend to a wide range of career
and education pathways. It is expected that reaching them in their formative
years will result in measurable changes in self- perceptions regarding STEM
topics, which will be assessed through survey
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET/ENG
Environmental Sustainability program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.