* 2147450
* Residential Segregation, Health-Promoting Organizations, and Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Kathryn Anderson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 191,062.00

People who live in segregated neighborhoods are often sicker and die younger.
Yet, the reasons for these poor health outcomes are not well understood. This
study examines the relationships among neighborhood segregation, the presence of
health-promoting organizations, and the health outcomes of residents. Health
care providers, supermarkets, gyms, and other health-promoting organizations
play an important role in community vitality, and the health and well-being of
residents. This project traces the spread of these types of organizations across
different types of urban areas over time. The research also examines how the
availability of health-promoting organizations affect families’ use of and
satisfaction with health care services. The study advances understanding of the
relationship between segregation and public health, informing decision-making
and interventions in public health and city planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
two-part study examines: 1) the distribution of community organizations and
service providers across urban neighborhoods; and 2) how that distribution
affects residents’ health-related outcomes. First, using restricted micro-data
from the United States Census Bureau and Centers for Disease Control (CDC),
researchers examine the distribution of health-promoting community organizations
over time across neighborhoods in metropolitan areas in the U.S. from 1990 to
2020. A longitudinal approach enables analysis of how changes in neighborhood
composition relate to the number of health-promoting organizations over time.
Second, the study uses restricted survey data from the National Survey of
Children’s Health paired with neighborhood-level contextual data to analyze how
families use health care services, how that is patterned by what is available to
them in their communities, and how this impacts satisfaction with their health
provider and overall health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.