* 2147094
* AF: Small: New Techniques for Optimal Bounds on MCMC Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Eric Vigoda, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2025
* USD 487,371.00

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms are a widely used tool in a variety
of scientific fields for sampling problems. Understanding the convergence rate
of Markov chains to their equilibrium distribution is crucial for the efficiency
and accuracy of scientific studies utilizing MCMC algorithms. This project
focuses on the design and analysis of fast algorithms for randomly sampling from
distributions defined on exponentially large combinatorial sets. This is a
fundamental task that arises in a variety of scientific fields; some common
examples include: Bayesian inference which is a key tool in machine learning,
computer vision, and evolutionary biology; the study of the equilibrium state of
idealized physical systems in statistical physics; and the design of algorithms
for counting and sampling problems in theoretical computer science. The
education plan of this project includes an interdisciplinary summer school at
the University of California Santa Barbara to train graduate students on recent
developments in the research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
introduce new techniques for proving optimal convergence rates of Markov chains.
The focus is an exciting new technique known as spectral independence, which
measures the pairwise influences in graphical models or spin systems, and
implies optimal mixing time bounds for a variety of Markov chains. This project
will enhance the technique by strengthening the implications of spectral
independence and extend its applicability by presenting new tools for
establishing spectral independence. These improved techniques will yield new
connections between various algorithmic approaches for approximate sampling and
counting problems. In addition, this project will formalize connections between
the computational complexity of approximate counting problems on general graphs
with statistical physics phase transitions on trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.