* 2147630
* 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Multifunctional Materials &amp; Structures: Imparting Intelligence in and through Self-Learning Materials &amp; Structures; Ventura, CA; 23-28 Ja
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Martin Dunn, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide financial support to the 2022 Gordon Research Conference
on Multifunctional Materials and Structures: Imparting Intelligence in and
Through Self-Learning Materials and Structures to be held in Ventura,
California, 23-28 January 2022. This conference seeks to address fundamental
scientific issues associated with hierarchical multifunctional material systems
from the molecular scale to the structural scale, with principal considerations
to intelligence and self-learning. The potential societal benefits and impact of
multifunctionality are materials sustainability and energy resource management
through material sustainability, recycling, and upcycling; safer systems through
adaptive and self-aware capabilities, and improved energy efficiency through
mass and/or volume reductions, energy recapture, and ambient harvesting. The
conference will seek a broad balance in the speakers, discussion leaders, and
attendees including young and established scientists and engineers, national and
international representation from academic, industry, and government
institutions/groups, and gender and racial diversity. Funding through this award
would increase the number of graduate students and postdoc participants to
prepare the next generation of scientific leaders in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the ongoing series of biennial conferences on
multifunctional materials and structures, the focus of this conference is on
intelligence and self-learning. Researchers will address key scientific issues
associated with envisioning, designing, and creating synthetic multifunctional
materials and structures with intelligence and self-learning. They will identify
gaps and present potential solutions on the integration of these novel
functionalities into engineering structures, e.g., how to optimize the disparate
roles of interfaces and the design and fabrication approaches. The conference is
being organized by leading researchers in this emerging field with deep ties to
the worldwide community of scientists and engineers engaged in multifunctional
research. The conference outcomes are expected to include novel concepts and
mechanisms for achieving intelligence and self-learning, as well as new
collaborations and ways of collaborating across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.