* 2147399
* Numerical Modeling of Reconnection-Generated Transients in the Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Benjamin Lynch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 620,904.00

The origin and evolution of the solar wind and the initiation of eruptive solar
flares and their resulting coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are fundamental
building blocks of the solarâ€“heliospheric connection and crucial for space
weather forecasting. This work will advance discovery while promoting teaching,
training, and learning and will enhance the infrastructure for research and
education through networks and partnerships. The project will support a
postdoctoral fellow and facilitate summer research projects for undergraduate
students. Results from the project will be disseminated broadly as the PI,
postdoctoral scholar, and undergraduate students will present their results at
national and international scientific meetings (e.g. the NSF SHINE Workshop), in
colloquia and seminars, and in peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of the key results from the last decade of in-situ observations of
interplanetary magnetic flux ropes at 1 AU is that the size distribution of
large-scale CME flux ropes and the ubiquitous small-scale flux ropes in the slow
solar wind apparently show two distinct populations while remote sensing
observations indicate tremendous variation of coronal conditions during their
formation. This work is a comprehensive, multidisciplinary investigation into
the multi-scale nature of solar eruptive structures. The main Science Objectives
are to determine: (1.) How solar and heliospheric magnetic flux rope properties
vary over their range of their spatial and energy scales and how the local and
global topologies of coronal source regions influence the reconnection formation
mechanism(s) of eruptive transients and their resulting magnetic structure; (2.)
The fundamental similarities and differences between streamer blob flux ropes,
flare reconnection plasmoids, flux rope and quasi-flux rope eruptions from
pseudostreamers, and classic, large-scale CMEs from streamer blowouts and
stronger-field active regions; (3.) How each of these populations of flux rope
transients interact with their overlying/adjacent flux systems, the open-closed
field boundaries, and the ambient solar wind outflow. Each of the Science
Objectives will be addressed with a combination of state-of-the-art, high-
performance numerical modeling along with detailed analysis of multi-spacecraft
remote sensing and in-situ observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.