* 2147237
* ADVANCE Partnership: #MeTooPoliSci Leveraging A Professional Association to Address Sexual Harassment in Political Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Nadia Brown, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 10/31/2023
* USD 199,708.00

The University of Nevada Las Vegas will lead a collaborative ADVANCE Partnership
project with colleagues at the University of Maryland College Park, University
of Massachusetts Amherst, Purdue University, Georgia State University and the
American Political Science Association (APSA) to implement a project to address
sexual harassment in Political Science. The project will support the wider
adaptation of empirically-tested interventions such as department climate
studies, upstanding bystander training, department-level facilitated dialogues,
and policy changes that support an improved climate. The project capitalizes on
the power that professional associations have to model, facilitate, and
incentivize change in the climate and culture of the disciplines they serve
through a substantial partnership with the APSA. The project has the potential
to reach across the entire discipline into the 125 PhD-granting departments and
approximately 1,125 BA and MA departments of political science. This discipline-
wide approach is truly national in scope, and this program will be shared with
other disciplines as a model for other professional organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main output of this project will be the Climate
Toolkit to incentivize and empower political science departments to: improve
awareness and practices; achieve significant, measurable improvements in the
overall climate in academic departments; and increase department-level attention
to broader inclusion issues. The project will result in new understanding of 1)
interinstitutional incentivization of organizational change, 2) the prevalence
of sexual harassment across academic department cultures, 3) the efficacy of
bystander training for effecting changes in institutional cultures 4) diological
approaches to improving workplace climate, and 5) the relationship between
improved workplace relationships and the ability to adopt equity-focused policy
through shared governance structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support to collaborations among STEM professional societies and
academic and non-academic non-profit organizations designed to broaden the
implementation of evidence-based equity strategies and have a national or
regional reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.