* 2147467
* Collaborative Research: Macrophages: Guardians of amphibian skin antifungal defenses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 676,623.00

Fungal infections are a growing wildlife concern because of their devastating
effects on biodiversity and ecosystem health. For example, the chytrid fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) infects amphibian skin resulting in the
disease chytridiomycosis, which is a leading cause of worldwide amphibian
declines and extinctions. Due to its recent appearance, broad host range, and
continuing spread into new geographic areas, Bd is regarded as an emerging
pathogen. Swimming Bd zoospores colonize the keratinized skin of adult
amphibians and the keratinized mouthparts of tadpoles. These invading zoospores
develop into urn-shaped zoosporangia in which new zoospores develop and swim out
to infect other areas of the skin or new hosts. Unlike other fungal infections
that progress to distal organs, Bd remains confined to the skin, causing death
by interfering with the essential ion transport across the skin, thereby leading
to cardiac arrest. As macrophage-lineage cells, such as Langerhans cells, are
integral to skin surveillance and the ensuing immune responses, these cells are
undoubtedly important to the antifungal defenses against the skin-localized Bd
infections. In turn, the differentiation and functionality of all vertebrate
macrophages depend on the colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), which
is ligated by CSF-1 and the unrelated interleukin-34 (IL-34) cytokines. We
previously showed that the Xenopus laevis frog macrophages differentiated by
recombinant (r)CSF-1 and rIL-34 possess markedly distinct capacities to
recognize and respond to various pathogens. Through these NSF-funded studies, we
will examine how these functionally dichotomous frog macrophage subsets
contribute to frog Bd susceptibility and resistance. This project will
incorporate students at all levels, the PIs will host annual workshops that
explore the challenges and opportunities for women and minorities in sciences
and public attention will be drawn to the growing threat of Bd through pedagogy
and a new collaborative website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The differentiation of
Langerhans cells depends on IL-34 while the roles of CSF-1 in these processes
remain to be fully defined. Pertinently, enriching X. laevis skin
CSF-1-macrophages results in greater Bd susceptibility whereas frogs with more
skin IL-34-macrophages exhibit significantly greater resistance against this
pathogen. As such, the central hypothesis guiding our studies is that an
effective immune response to Bd in the skin depends on an “alarm response” from
chytrid-invaded skin cells, which in conjunction with IL-34-macrophages, results
in recruitment of other effectors. Conversely, an impaired frog immune response
to Bd stems from failure of the skin-resident macrophages and skin epithelial
cells to mount appropriate responses due to the production of immunosuppressive
factors by the fungus, the infected keratinocytes, and/or resident
CSF-1-macrophages. The objectives of our studies are: to define the interactions
between amphibian macrophage subsets and Bd; to define the effects of Bd on the
interactions between frog macrophages and lymphocytes; and to define the
cellular interactions within the frog skin in the context of Bd infections. The
in-depth understanding of immune interactions between frog macrophages and Bd
granted by our studies, will provide a much-needed perspective into the
effectiveness and limitations of the frog immune responses to this deadly
fungus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.