* 2147305
* FAI: BRIMI - Bias Reduction In Medical Information
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Shiri Dori-Hacohen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,994.00

This award, Bias Reduction In Medical Information (BRIMI), focuses on using
artificial intelligence (AI) to detect and mitigate biased, harmful, and/or
false health information that disproportionately hurts minority groups in
society. BRIMI offers outsized promise for increased equity in health
information, improving fairness in AI, medicine, and in the information
ecosystem online (e.g., health websites and social media content). BRIMI's novel
study of biases stands to greatly advance the understanding of the challenges
that minority groups and individuals face when seeking health information. By
including specific interventions for both patients and doctors and advancing the
state-of-the-art in public health and fact checking organizations, BRIMI aims to
inform public policy, increase the public's critical literacy, and improve the
well-being of historically under-served patients. The award includes significant
outreach efforts, which will engage minority communities directly in our
scientific process; broad stakeholder engagement will ensure that the research
approach to the groups studied is respectful, ethical, and patient-centered. The
BRIMI team is composed of academics, non-profits, and industry partners, thus
improving collaboration and partnerships across different sectors and multiple
disciplines. The BRIMI project will lead to fundamental research advances in
computer science, while integrating deep expertise in medical training, public
health interventions, and fact checking. BRIMI is the first large scale
computational study of biased health information of any kind. This award
specifically focuses on bias reduction in the health domain; its foundational
computer science advances and contributions may generalize to other domains, and
it will likely pave the way for studying bias in other areas such as politics
and finances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRIMI has the following objectives: (a)
identifying and analyzing bias and language misuse online; (b) advancing the
understanding of how misinformation spreads amongst different populations; and
(c) triaging health topics with the biggest harms, and creating and
disseminating triage guidelines to public health officials and practitioners.
BRIMI will develop novel artificial intelligence approaches both to establish
health information inequities empirically, and to reduce them. The methods used
include large-scale online and social network data collection and a content
analysis approach to annotating complex health data; supervised, semi-supervised
and transfer learning to detect biased and false health information; controversy
and misinformation analysis using community detection, stance detection and
claim detection; and intervention design methods based on best practices in
public health. The awardâ€™s research contributions will include: (a) novel
metrics to computationally define biased health information and characterize its
dissemination online and in social media, including specifically within
divergent population groups; (b) utilizing transfer learning and semi-supervised
approaches, in order to generalize solutions developed on and for medical
language to lay language; (c) analyzing disagreement within and across
populations on health information, which in turn requires improvement in stance
detection and claim matching approaches; and (d) novel computational approaches
to triage and prioritize misinformation for the purposes of
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.