* 2147554
* Collaborative Research: The Drivers and Role of Immigration in the Dynamics of the Largest Population of Weddell Seals in Antarctica under Changing Conditions
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Nancy Chen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2027
* USD 32,071.00

Part 1: Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This is a continuation of a long-
term population dynamics study (1978-present) using an intensive mark-recapture
tagging of Weddell seals in Erebus Bay, Antarctica. Past work has become a
global model for population studies of large animals. Results have documented
strong annual variation in reproduction, abundance, and population composition.
This program will add components to evaluate the demographic role of immigrant
mothers, evaluate possible drivers of annual variation in overall population
dynamics, assess genetic differences between immigrant and locally born mothers,
and document patterns of gene flow among seal colonies in the Ross Sea region.
These new aspects will focus on understanding of population structure, function,
and genetics and provide key information for predicting how the seal population
will respond to environmental change. The addition of genetic approaches will
advance available data for multiple groups in multiple countries working on
Weddell Seals. This work includes an early career scientists training program
for faculty university graduate and undergraduate students and well as a defined
program for data sharing. The research is paired with active education and
outreach programs, social media, websites, educational resources, videos and
high-profile public lecture activities. The informal science education program
will expand on the project’s successful efforts at producing and delivering
short-form videos that have been viewed over 1.6 million times to date. In
addition, the education program will add new topics such as learning about seals
using genomics and how seals respond to a changing world to a multimedia-
enhanced electronic book about the project’s long-term research on Weddell
seals, which will be freely available to the public early in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical description &lt;br/&gt;Reliable
predictions are needed for how populations of wild species, especially those at
high latitudes, will respond to future environmental conditions. This study will
use a strategic extension of the long-term demographic research program that has
been conducted annually on the Erebus Bay population of Weddell seals since 1978
to help meet that need. Recent analyses of the study population indicate strong
annual variation in reproduction, abundance, and population composition. The
number of new immigrant mothers that join the population each year has recently
grown such that most new mothers are now immigrants. Despite the growing number
of immigrants, the demographic importance and geographic origins of immigrants
are unknown. The research will (1) add new information on drivers of annual
variation in immigrant numbers, (2) compare and combine information on the vital
rates and demographic role of immigrant females and their offspring with that of
locally born females, and (3) add genomic analyses that will quantify levels of
genetic variation in and gene flow among the study population and other
populations in the Ross Sea. The project will continue the long-term monitoring
of the population at Erebus Bay and characterize population dynamics and the
role of immigration using a combination of mark-recapture analyses, stochastic
population modeling, and genomic analyses. The study will continue to provide
detailed data on individual seals to other science teams, educate and mentor
individuals in the next generation of ecologists, introduce two early-career,
female scientists to Antarctic research, and add genomics approaches to the
long-term population study of Erebus Bay Weddell seals. The research will be
complemented with a robust program of training and an informal science education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.