* 2147220
* Research Community Development Grant: Summer Training Program to Expand the Al and Data Ethics Research Community
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ronald Sandler, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 359,249.00

This award supports the development of an intensive, interdisciplinary summer
program to provide training for the next generation of AI and data ethics
researchers by targeting doctoral students with a background in ethics.
Participants will receive additional training in the philosophy and ethics of
technology alongside technical training, enabling them to collaborate with AI
practitioners and researchers to better integrate social and ethical
considerations into AI. Program participants will learn from and be mentored by
leading experts in machine learning, autonomous robotics, AI and information
ethics, technology law, and other disciplines and apply their new knowledge to
solve important problems in the development of AI. This project’s primary aim is
contributing to societal capacity to responsibly develop and implement AI by
helping to build a diverse community of AI ethics experts who will shape and
build the field of AI ethics going forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AI and Data
Ethics Training program will have three core objectives. It will increase
participant’s content mastery needed to perform quality research in this area;
it will provide professional development opportunities to prepare participants
to conduct interdisciplinary, impactful research that reaches beyond the
academy; and it will foster a collaborative and diverse community of AI and data
ethics researchers. The program will accomplish these objectives through a
seminar on foundational topics and current issues in AI and data ethics led by
an interdisciplinary team of experts, interdisciplinary faculty support on
research projects related to AI and data ethics, and participation in inter-
generational and interdisciplinary mentoring groups. The training program also
includes professional development workshops on how to approach public-facing
scholarship, develop grant proposals, build collaborations with partners outside
of academia, and practice inclusive mentoring, as well as an expert speaker
series where researchers share cutting edge work, discuss career pathways, and
develop connections with participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-
funded by the Ethical and Responsible Research (ER2)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.