* 2147821
* CNS Core: Small: UbiVision: Ubiquitous Machine Vision with Adaptive Wireless Networking and Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Tao Han, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 265,726.00

Penetration of technologies such as wireless broadband and artificial
intelligence (AI) is propelling a rapid adoption of network cameras across the
household, industrial, and commercial sectors. These cameras such as
surveillance cameras, dash cameras, and wearable cameras can capture voluminous
amounts of visual data that can be turned into valuable information for public
safety, autonomous driving, service robots, augmented/mixed reality, assisted
living, etc. To reach the potential, new methods are needed for efficiently and
effectively extracting, transferring, and sharing useful information from
ubiquitous cameras while preserving user privacy. This project uses techniques
and perspectives from wireless networking, computer vision, and edge computing
to analyze and solve the problems in ubiquitous camera systems, fosters
interdisciplinary research, provides a unique training program for undergraduate
and graduate students, and has a high potential to introduce transformative
technologies that enable new real-life products and services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to realize ubiquitous machine vision
(UbiVision) and enable efficient utilization of networked cameras for
information extraction and sharing. Toward this end, three fundamental research
problems are investigated: 1) how to dynamically manage highly coupled resources
and functions across multiple technology domains: camera functions, network
resources, and computation resources on edge servers; 2) how to design adaptive
and efficient machine vision algorithms for resource-constrained smart cameras;
and 3) how to engineer reliable machine learning frameworks for robust vision
analysis on edge servers. First, a new model-free end-to-end resource
orchestration method is designed to improve the efficiency of wireless
networking and computing by combining the merits of conventional optimization
and emerging machine learning techniques. Second, a novel universal convolution
neural network (CNN) and corresponding CNN optimization methods are developed
for efficient multi-task feature learning on smart cameras. Third, a teacher-
student network learning paradigm is innovated to develop memory and computation
efficient machine vision algorithms that are able to achieve robust performance
under various adverse conditions caused by varying network conditions and
limited server computation budgets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.