* 2147340
* Using a dynamic earthquake simulator to investigate controls on slow-slip events, subduction earthquakes, and their interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Benchun Duan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 446,535.00

Advanced geodetic and seismic instrumentations during the past two decades have
revealed various slip behaviors along subduction zones. In addition to large
earthquakes with slip of up to tens of meters over seconds to minutes that cause
strong ground shaking and/or damaging tsunami along coastal areas, slow-slip
events occur quietly with a few to tens of centimeters of slip over days to
years that can only be detected by sensitive instruments. Observations show
complex interactions between slow-slip events and subduction earthquakes. What
factors and processes controls these different slip behaviors and their
interactions along subduction zones? Physics-based numerical models are arguably
the most useful tool to address this problem. Previous models have been largely
built separately for either slow-slip events or large earthquakes along
subduction zones, limiting their abilities to explore the interactions of the
two. In this project, the researchers will use and further develop a dynamic
earthquake simulator to quantify physical factors and processes that control
slow-slip events, subduction earthquakes and their interactions in one unified
framework. This research will advance our physical understanding of observed
features in the two phenomena and their interactions. As slow-slip events occur
more frequently, improved understanding of these events and their roles in the
occurrence of large earthquakes can be directly used to assess future seismic
and tsunami hazards along subduction zones worldwide, including the Cascadia and
Alaska subduction zones. High-performance computing systems will be intensively
used in this project, advancing their usage in natural hazards research and
reduction. This research will set a stage for future efforts to assimilate
available geodetic and seismic observations to develop region-specific, physics-
based models for seismic and tsunami hazards analysis and mitigation. The
project will train future scientists to pursue these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to use physics-based models to
explore physical factors and processes that control slow-slip events, subduction
earthquakes and their interactions. The investigators will use and further
develop a dynamic earthquake simulator that can capture both spontaneously
dynamic rupture propagation and other quasi-static processes of earthquakes
cycles, including nucleation, postseismic and interseismic processes. The
dynamic earthquake simulator is based on a finite element method and thus can
handle geometrically complex faults in heterogeneous geologic media, including
shallowly dipping subduction interfaces with subducted seafloor features. Slow-
slip events and subduction earthquakes will emerge spontaneously over multiple
earthquake cycles and can be captured accurately in our multicycle dynamic
models. Therefore, physical factors and processes that control slow-slip events
generation and characteristics, subduction earthquakes generation and their
interactions can be quantified. The investigators plan to select the northern
Hikurangi margin as the focus area of this research. They will also explore the
southern Hikurangi margin and the Japan trench at the later stage of the
project. By reproducing observed features of slow-slip events, historical
earthquakes, and their interactions in the selected case studies, the
investigators will quantify factors and processes that dominate these different
slip behaviors and their complex interactions. Findings from this research can
be used to assess seismic and tsunami hazards along subduction zones
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.