* 2147222
* DDRIG: Telemedicine and In-person Practices for the Measurement of Pain
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Owen Whooley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 01/31/2024
* USD 13,749.00

This project asks how the shift to telemedicine platforms has affected the
quality of care for chronic pain patients within the Veterans Healthcare
Administration. This project will inform health care practices by revealing how
telemedicine has changed pain assessment, documentation, and treatment. Lessons
learned from this study will have relevance for other healthcare organizations
that utilize telemedicine for pain assessment. This project considers the
medical implications of transforming qualitative, subjective experiences, such
as pain, into quantitative data that create clinical accountability. This study
illuminates how technological practices like telemedicine are re-defining the
creation of medical knowledge, the parameters of expert jurisdiction, and
organizational protocols. It will be of interest to patients, health-care
providers, policy makers and administrators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will analyze patient data pre- and post-COVID through an examination of
electronic medical records by comparing in-person and remote care. The project
aims to identify how practices—such as measuring pain, documenting pain status,
prescribing medication, or recommending alternative treatment modalities—are
affected by the migration to telemedicine. In doing so, it assesses how the
increased use of telemedicine has challenged common assessment and treatment
protocols used by health providers. In tandem, interviews with clinicians will
trace when and how health care providers decide to bring patients into the
clinic for in-person assessment, rather than relying on telemedicine alone. This
study will provide an analysis of the need for creating continuous care plans
that bridge distinct delivery platforms. The findings from this project will
help policymakers and administrators to support clinicians during both in-person
and remote visits for pain care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.