* 2147714
* Tracking ascent rates in an open-vent volcano: Testing textural and geochemical ascent speedometers
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Philipp Ruprecht, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2024
* USD 268,254.00

Volcanic eruptions are sourced from magma chambers in the crust. At what depth
magmas are stored and how fast they move to the surface prior to an eruption is
of great importance to assess the hazards associated with individual volcanoes.
Open-vent volcanoes are particularly hazardous for their lack of unrest signals
prior to an eruption. This project specifically focuses the 2018 eruption of the
open-vent volcano Mt Veniaminof on the Alaska Peninsula, which poses substantial
risk to local communities and aviation through ash emissions. Volatile elements
that exsolved on ascent (especially H2O) are the drivers of explosive eruptions.
Thus, constraining the volatile element budget in these magmas as well as how
fast the volatiles are lost provide important constraints for eruption models
and the eruptive behavior of this and similarly behaving volcanoes. A variety of
techniques are used to estimate magma ascent and in this study, those techniques
will be compared to improve their robustness and test their underlying
assumptions. In addition to the scientific benefits, this project will foster
collaboration between the USGS/AVO and the academic community, while this
collaboration will ensure that existing data sets and samples will continue to
be exploited. The Alaska Peninsula is a focus site of geologic research
(GeoPRISMS) and our work will complement ongoing geophysical research activities
(Amphibious Array). Volatile element data is of importance for geophysics and
will inform crustal and upper mantle seismic and magnetotelluric studies. The
project supports a collaboration with journalism colleagues to improve science
communication and help build a new generation of science-literate journalists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay between magma ascent and textural evolution
of basaltic andesites of the 2018 Veniaminof eruption will be studied. Existing
estimates for magma ascent rates during the 2018 eruption derived from
microlites, will be compared against independently determined ascent rates from
melt embayments hosted in olivine. To interpret the embayment and textural
record, we will also collect melt inclusion volatile data to constrain the
volatile element budget in the crustal storage region prior to ascent. The work
includes a series of analytical techniques (Raman, x-ray computed tomography,
SIMS, FTIR, EPMA, LA-ICPMS) to fully characterize and correct the volatile
budget. Fundamental assumptions related to embayment studies will be tested: 1)
the uniformity of ascent rates among embayments, 2) changes over the course of
an eruptive episode, 3) the effect of embayment necking. The project will be
complemented with the development of a thermodynamic model that captures the
driving forces for crystallization and dissolution through the calculation of
chemical affinities along any preferred P-T-X-time
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.