* 2147043
* OPUS: The Biotic Challenge Hypothesis, an Eco-evolutionary Mechanism for Tropical Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Thomas Sherry, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/29/2024
* USD 178,307.00

The staggering diversity of tropical organisms and their species interactions
have inhibited generalizations about how this diversity arose and how species
coexist. Generalizations based on simple communities and ecological models fail
to scale-up adequately to encompass the most species-rich terrestrial
assemblages, especially those in the New World tropics (Neotropics). Review of
the vast diversity of traits among neotropical insect-feeding birds and their
prey inspired the Biotic Challenge Hypothesis, which asserts that as tropical
habitats accumulated diverse species over tens of millions of years, intense
competition and predation necessitated the evolution of many unique and
specialized adaptations. How this process might have increased the evolution of
new traits and species, and also the fragility of tropical systems, is
inadequately articulated. This project posits that interactions among species,
especially predation and competition for resources are essential to
understanding the evolution of hyper-diverse tropical communities and current
threats. A key broader impact of this project will be to explore why tropical
species are so sensitive to global change threats and thus require more
effective conservation and management strategies. Other broader impacts include
the creation and dissemination of a publicly available database, training
students with diverse backgrounds, and production of materials for a range of
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biotic Challenge Hypothesis integrates two
evolutionary species interactions, coevolutionary arms races between predators
and their prey, and diffuse competition involving dozens of often
phylogenetically unrelated species. These interactions necessitated feeding
specializations to find, subdue, and process prey; and energetically
conservative physiologies. A tradeoff (cost) of these specializations is poor
dispersal ability, augmenting both geographic differentiation within species and
speciation rate, the latter positively reinforcing tropical species diversity.
This project will explore in detail how the dynamic interactions among
predators, prey, and competitors has driven diversification in many animal and
plant assemblages, including birds and their insect prey, tropical plants and
their enemies, and plant-animal mutualisms. The most important broader impact is
a book that elaborates the causes and consequences of the Biotic Challenge
Hypothesis, especially as it relates to the evolution of ecological
specialization and poor dispersal. Both of these outcomes exacerbate the
sensitivity of tropical species to many global change impacts including
declining insect populations. Other broader impacts include training an
undergraduate and an early graduate student to produce a database of avian prey
data, on which many inferences in the book are based; and disseminating the
findings and concepts to broad audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.