* 2147139
* DDRIG: An Historical Study of the Circulation and Growth of Medical Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Joan von Germeten, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,563.00

This research delves into the networks of Jewish physicians and surgeons who
endured trials by the tribunals of the Holy Office of the Spanish Inquisition
based in the Americas. The goal is to uncover how these practitioners circulated
medical knowledge in the 17th-century Spanish Empire as they faced surveillance
and prosecution by the Inquisition. In addition to the research conducted, these
funds will also contribute to a digital humanities database project called Jews
and Early Modern Medicine in the Atlantic World (JEMMAW). This webpage will
feature timelines, maps, archival images, bibliographies, contextual
information, and links to archival sources relevant to each practitioner. JEMMAW
is intended as an open-access academic resource for the history of medicine,
knowledge circulation, and the history of science in the Americas. It is
designed for use by students of all levels as well as high school and college
teachers. Archival research and analysis of collected documents serves as the
primary methodology of data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on three questions: First, how did the popular policing and social
‘otherizing’ relied upon by the Inquisition hinder or otherwise affect the
creation and circulation of medical knowledge? Second, did the Jewish nation
function as a means of knowledge circulation for Jewish and crypto-Jewish
medical practitioners? And lastly, How does the America’s position within
narratives of history of science and history of medicine inform our
interpretation of past medical practice? This research emphasizes the lived
experiences and persecution of surgeons who lived within societies of popular
policing, who still managed to produce and circulate valuable medical and
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.