* 2147796
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Support and Stress Among Religious Migrants
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Thomas, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 7,588.00

Migration is a stressful process, with unique stressors emerging before, during,
and after migration. For religious migrants, people in their congregations are
important sources of support. However, providing the support necessary to cope
with the stressors of migration may be complicated if what constitutes support
differs between the giver and the receiver. The purpose of this dissertation
research is to compare religious migrant and non-migrant understandings of
social support and whether their adherence to local expectations of social
support is associated with stress (perceived stress as well as hormonal
measures). By approaching migration from both a biological and a cultural
perspective, this project provides clarity with respect to the impact of chronic
stressors among migrants. It also broadens the participation of women in STEM,
as it provides training for a woman graduate student in lab and field work. The
findings of this research will be disseminated broadly to participant
communities and academic and non-academic audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher applies a biocultural approach to understandings of migrant religion
and post-national theory to answer the questions: 1. Do migrants and non-
migrants of the same religion understand social support the same way? 2. In what
ways are migrant understandings of social support similar to or different from
those currently described in scientific scholarship? 3. How does secular and
non-secular education influence how migrants and non-migrants understand social
support? 4. Is the degree to which a migrant or non-migrant gives and receives
culturally appropriate social support associated with stress (perceived stress
as well as hormonal measures of stress)? To answer these questions, the
researcher employs methods that measure the presence of shared cultural norms
(cultural consensus) as well as individual adherence to these norms (cultural
consonance). Cortisol, a hormone associated with stress and accessible in hair,
is used to measure biological stress. The combination of these theoretical
approaches and methods provides a novel approach to understanding the migrant
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.