* 2147632
* Engineering for One Planet: Scaling for Impact Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2023
* USD 390,516.00

The Engineering For One Planet (EOP) Scaling for Impact Workshop will convene a
diverse group of educators, engineers, and other stakeholders to explore and
expand new approaches to scaling the EOP initiative. The EOP initiative seeks to
transform the national engineering curriculum to include environmental
sustainability as a core value in the profession. Its vision is that all
engineers will be equipped with the skills, knowledge, and understanding to
protect the planet and the life it sustains. This workshop will enable
VentureWell and The Lemelson Foundation to increase awareness and attract new
supporters to implement the EOP vision on a national scale. It aligns with the
NSF EEC division's objectives for the creation of 21st century engineers and the
discovery of new revolutionary technologies that are more
sustainable.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;VentureWell, in partnership with The Lemelson
Foundation, will host a 1.5 day convening to identify, explore, and develop a
roadmap for scaling and sustaining the reach and impact of the EOP initiative.
Critical information about the most promising ways to advance the initiative
will be learned through assembling a large group of participants (from multiple
sectors and disciplines that represent a variety of identities and experiences)
and facilitating a series of in-depth discussions designed to elicit ideas and
recommendations for expanding the EOP initiative beyond its current group of
champions. VentureWell will lead and manage all project activities, while The
Lemelson Foundation will act as a strategic partner and leverage the significant
expertise and community it has built through the initiative.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The collective goal of this convening is to generate recommendations
and fuel action to transform engineering education so that all students
encounter environmental sustainability principles as an integrated part of their
education and are equipped with the tools needed to incorporate these principles
into their future research, careers, and innovations. To accomplish this, the
EOP Scaling for Impact Workshop will: 1) ensure participants understand the EOP
and its vision for reshaping engineering education; 2) develop priorities and
recommendations for refining the EOP Framework (a guide for professors to
integrate environmental sustainability into their curriculum); 3) ensure that
JEDI (justice, equity, diversity and inclusion) practices are embedded into the
EOP scaling efforts; 4) strengthen existing collaborations and fostering new
relationships among participants; and 5) identify approaches and recommendations
that will inform the design of a five-year roadmap for an EOP Collective Impact
Initiative. These efforts will enable the achievement of the EOP vision with
maximum impact and scale. The convening will generate insights pertaining to the
institutionalization of curricular change; approaches and mechanisms for
engaging priority stakeholders and constituents; the engagement of individuals
from underrepresented groups; how the EOP Framework should be revised to
incorporate JEDI; and metrics and approaches that can be used to assess progress
toward the EOP vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.