* 2147629
* Innovative Fungi Fiber Reinforced Soil for Sustainable Soil Improvements
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 378,751.00

This project aims to explore an innovative bio-mediated fiber reinforced soil
concept that can significantly improve soil erosion resistance. Soil erosion by
stream or wind causes significant environmental and economic consequences. The
estimated cost of soil erosion on the US farmland is as high as $44 billion per
year. Wind-induced soil erosion associated with construction or mining
activities, i.e., dust, negatively impacts air quality and consequently the
health of workers, their communities, and the environment. Soil erosion around
bridge foundations (i.e., bridge scour) is the No. 1 cause of bridge failures.
Improvement of soil erosion resistance requires enhancing the inter-particle
bonds, which is commonly achieved by use of chemicals such as lime or cement.
Such treatments, however, are not sustainable since the production of these
chemicals consumes nonrenewable resources and produces significant carbon
footprints. This innovative research will leverage fibrous fungi, a
microorganism abundant in soils, to achieve environmentally-benign, sustainable
soil improvement by: 1) reinforcing the soil microstructure with the fungi-
induced bio-adhesion and fiber network, and 2) leveraging the hydrophobic nature
of fungi fibers to reduce the interfacial erosive shear stress induced by
flowing water. The project will provide graduate and undergraduate students
opportunities to work on an interdisciplinary research topic. The recruitment
efforts will emphasize involving female and minority students. The research will
be incorporated into instructional materials. The project outcomes will be
disseminated via a variety of outreach activities on the Case Western Reserve
University campus and in collaboration with local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand the multiscale
interactions between fungi and soils, and therefore, offer insight on how fungi-
soil interactions can be tailored to improve soil erosion resistance. The
research objectives of this research include: 1) the study of topological
interactions between fungi and soil, fungi adaptation to soil microstructure and
response to bio-stimuli to design tactics to tailor the growth of fungi fibers
in soil; 2) the understanding of the physico-chemical interactions between fungi
and soil particles to guide the development of models describing the effects of
fungi fiber on soil engineering behaviors; 3) the assessment of the effects of
fungi on soil macroscopic performance properties, such as the soil aggregation,
fiber reinforcement, soil water characteristics, and transport properties and
how these improve the soil erosion resistance. The research will generate
foundational knowledge on fungi-soil interactions and quantify their impacts on
the soil engineering properties. It will break new ground in biomediated
geotechnical engineering for sustainable soil
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.