* 2147909
* RINGS: Object-Oriented Video Analytics for Next-Generation Mobile Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Ravi Netravali, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 682,026.00

Over the past few decades, cellular networks have evolved to deliver improved
performance across increasingly heterogeneous components spanning the network
edge (e.g., user devices) to base stations to traditional cloud backends. A key
motivator behind these advances is to enhance the support for edge applications,
especially video analysis (VA). Yet VA applications are currently not structured
to fully leverage those advances. A primary issue is the lack of structured
frameworks to develop and run VA applications, which in turn prevents the
deployment and optimizations required to take advantage of all that cellular
networks (and their edge-cloud hierarchies) have to offer. To tackle this
limitation, the proposed work advocates for a re-designed VA software stack that
explicitly ties VA operations and requirements to the resources, interfaces, and
vantage points that each platform element in a mobile edge-cloud hierarchy
brings. To achieve this goal, the project takes a bottom-up, three-pronged
approach that involves (1) developing a new object-oriented query language for
VA applications that makes the aforementioned characteristics explicit and
observable, (2) leveraging those features to develop a suite of resource-aware
optimizations to VA computations that can operate under diverse (and restricted)
edge constraints, and (3) designing a novel task placement engine that
automatically adapts and operates VA applications across edge-cloud
hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to the widespread use of VA applications
in sectors spanning traffic control, to autonomous vehicles, to disaster relief,
the proposed research promises benefits to a large part of the population. The
key improvements will come along two axes – (1) replacing painstaking manual
analysis with automatic determination of the appropriate interactions between VA
applications and emerging mobile networking infrastructure, and (2)
democratizing the use of edge networking infrastructure – and will target two
different groups. On the one hand, the proposed frameworks will simplify the
creation of cutting-edge VA applications for developers by automatically
deciding what public edge infrastructure to use and how to use it most
effectively (in terms of cost, accuracy, and performance). On the other hand,
the developed systems will assist network operators in identifying the most
fruitful resource enhancements and helpful information about the platform to
expose to application elements. The project also involves outreach efforts to
attract students from populations currently under-represented in computer
science. Key to these efforts is magnifying the interdisciplinary nature of
edge-based VA applications that span mobile systems and networks, computer
vision, programming languages, and machine learning. The software and research
artifacts designed as part of this project are released on a regularly-
maintained, public website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.