* 2147946
* RINGS: Intelligent and Resilient Virtualization of Massive MIMO Physical Layer
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Lin Zhong, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 801,572.00

NextG network systems rely on virtualization to move away from specialized,
dedicated equipment to cloud and edge datacenters, to reduce cost and accelerate
innovation. So far such virtualization efforts have met with very limited
success, making inroads largely with 4G/LTE small cells. This is because 5G and
beyond employ compute-intensive technologies such as massive multiple-input,
multiple output (MIMO) and low-density parity-check (LDPC) code to deliver the
unprecedented network performance. Massive MIMO not only demands massive
computational power itself, but also proportionally increases that of LDPC. Not
surprisingly, existing commercial massive MIMO solutions all rely on
specialized, dedicated hardware such as FPGA and application-specific integrated
circuits. Massive MIMO remains the largest barrier toward virtualized mobile
networks. The goal of the proposed project is to overcome this technical barrier
and virtualize the massive MIMO physical layer for NextG network systems. In
doing so, the project will expedite the adoption of massive MIMO, resulting in
more capable, more efficient, and more cost-effective mobile networks. Through
our ongoing collaborations with industry leaders, the project will timely
transfer technologies into practice. It also provides a meeting ground for
software systems and wireless communication research and creates timely content
for teaching Computer Science majors about the wireless physical layer. The
project will provide a platform to engage undergraduate students and high-school
students in computing research, especially women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets the following scientific
contributions. (1) Design and implementation of the massive MIMO physical layer
that scales up on a many-core server efficiently and intelligently. We will
combine the efficiency of static and elasticity of dynamic task scheduling and
devise latency-driven, automated schemes for optimal resource provisioning. (2)
Distributed design and implementation that can utilize compute resources
integrated over a local-area network, beyond a single server. We will leverage
programmable switches to minimize the impact of the network and to utilize
commodity servers as well as accelerators to achieve scale, cost effectiveness
and energy efficiency beyond the reach of a single many-core server. (3) Elastic
design and implementation that match up to dynamics in mobile network workload,
simultaneously achieving high resilience, low cost for the network operator, and
high utilization for the cloud provider, in a multi-tenant environment. We will
explore serverless computing and develop it further to better meet the stringent
latency requirement of the massive MIMO physical
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.