* 2147657
* CRII: SaTC: Data Privacy for Strategic Agents
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Rachel Cummings, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 40,667.00

This project lays the groundwork for understanding how existing tools for
privacy-preserving data analysis interact with strategic and human aspects of
practical privacy guarantees. When strategic individuals have privacy concerns
about the use of their data, they may modify their behavior to ensure less, or
perhaps more favorable, information is revealed. The project's novelties are an
interdisciplinary approach, which combines tools from algorithm design, machine
learning, and economics. The broader significance and importance of this work is
to provide a critical step for society's ability to collect useful data and to
interpret data via existing algorithms. As more personal data are collected,
stored, and used in algorithmic decision making, these results are useful in the
legal and policy landscape of personal data management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has two main technical thrusts. First, this
project studies how privacy technologies can be designed and deployed to manage
privacy concerns of strategic individuals. This yields insight into the design
of optimal privacy technologies for strategic individuals in practical
application areas. Second, this project develops data analysis techniques for
settings where data are generated by privacy-aware individuals. This yields
tools for the design and analysis of algorithms to efficiently learn and
optimize from a strategic individual's data. This project also includes a
significant educational and outreach component, including curriculum
development, mentorship of students, and workshop
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.