* 2147809
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Platform Approach to Evaluate Spring Bloom Timing and Carbon Export Processes in the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kenneth Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 472,642.00

Approximately one quarter of carbon emissions each year is taken up by the
worlds’ oceans, which play a critical role in the global carbon cycle. As the
oceans continue to respond to climate change, it is important to understand the
carbon cycle and how it will change as well. In the surface waters of the ocean,
phytoplankton take up carbon through photosynthesis, and a small fraction of
this material then sinks to the deeper ocean in a process referred to as the
“biological pump.” Current estimates of the global biological pump are similar
in size to the amount of global carbon emissions, but uncertainties in these
estimates are very large. This project will focus on understanding the role that
marine phytoplankton in the North Atlantic Ocean play in the carbon cycle. The
project will employ coordinated use of state-of-the-art, remote observational
tools, namely biogeochemical profiling floats and ocean color observations from
satellites. New techniques will be developed to maximize the information that
can be glean from these observations and constrain biological carbon fluxes out
of the sunlit upper ocean and through its deeper interior layers over basin-
wide, seasonal, and annual scales. Finally, the performance of existing,
satellite-based models of these biological fluxes will be evaluated in
comparison with analogous estimates made from biogeochemical profiling float
data, which can help to fill in satellite observing gaps below the surface and
during periods of heavy cloud cover. The proposed effort will provide training
and mentorship to a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher. Outreach
will be conducted through the 2021 Education And Research: Testing Hypotheses
(EARTH) Workshop: A successful, ~15-year collaborative effort between MBARI and
the Monterey Bay Aquarium to assist educators with incorporating ocean science
information and real-time data into the classroom. To enhance diversity and
inclusion in ocean science, a first-generation college student will be selected
to participate in the 2021 MBARI Summer Intern Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Persistent and spatially-distributed in situ observations
are needed to develop, and continuously train, more accurate models and remote-
sensing algorithms to reduce the uncertainty (currently &gt;100%) in estimates
of the biological pump magnitude. The goals of the proposed effort are to
develop, implement, and compare robust methods for quantifying biological carbon
sequestration by leveraging the complementary information provided by bio-
optical and chemical sensors on profiling floats deployed in the North Atlantic
Ocean. This project will dovetail with several larger observational programs
(EXPORTS, PACE, and pending Global Biogeochemical Argo) and leverage committed
NOAA and NASA funding to deploy four biogeochemical profiling floats. Results
from the analysis of float data will also be compared with estimates derived
from satellite observations to assess the influences of 1) subpolar spring bloom
timing and magnitude; and 2) more efficient subtropical carbon export processes,
on the amount of carbon annually sequestered by the biological pump. Evaluating
carbon production, recycling, and export from different perspectives (e.g.,
chemical, optical, and remote sensing), will capitalize on the strengths of
different sensors and platforms using a combination of standard and novel
methods. Quality-control of the data from ~300 existing and four newly deployed
profiling floats in the North Atlantic will result in a valuable resource for
other investigators. Data handling and processing tools developed during this
project will be made publicly available to reduce barriers to entry for other
scientists and students interested in analyzing large volumes of BGC float and
ocean color data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.