* 2147164
* Tracing lithium enrichment in the McDermitt caldera system by melt/fluid inclusions and in situ oxygen isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Philipp Ruprecht, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2025
* USD 325,107.00

This project aims to study how lithium concentrates during supergiant volcanic
eruptions, eventually forming lithium ore deposits. Lithium is a critical
element that is essential to support the rapid development of rechargeable
batteries used by electric vehicles and to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Understanding the mechanisms of lithium transfer in the Earth’s crust is
therefore of great importance to address the global demand for lithium. This
research project will study the McDermitt volcanic caldera (Nevada/Oregon) which
hosts one of the most important lithium deposits in the United States. By
studying microscopic inclusions of solidified silicate melts trapped in volcanic
rocks (“melt inclusions”), Drs. Harlaux and Ruprecht will determine the chemical
composition of the magmas that generated a catastrophic eruption at McDermitt
about 16 million years ago. This research work will help to better understand
how magmas become enriched in lithium and can produce high-temperature lithium-
rich vapors during magma outgassing, eventually forming lithium deposits after
collapse of the caldera floor. A doctoral student at the University of Nevada,
Reno, will conduct the research project with students from underrepresented
demographic groups in STEM specifically encouraged to apply. Results will also
be shared through public outreach activities with a broader audience. This
project will benefit directly to Nevada’s economy and to society in general for
investigating the mineralization potential for lithium in other volcanic
calderas in the western United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geochemical
cycle of lithium (Li) in the Earth’s crust yielding the formation of Li-bearing
clay deposits hosted in volcanic calderas is at the center of this project.
Enrichment of Li in caldera-forming systems is thought to result from either
magma fractionation followed by degassing of Li-rich magmatic fluids possibly
mixing with meteoric groundwaters, or remobilization of Li during post-magmatic
leaching of volcanic glasses by meteoric fluids without hydrothermal
contribution. Considering that most volcanic calderas are not mineralized with
Li, the question arises whether leaching of volcanic rocks by meteoric water
alone is sufficient, or Li-rich hydrothermal fluids are required to provide
sufficient Li for the subsequent formation of intracaldera Li clay deposits.
This research project will focus on the McDermitt volcanic caldera
(Nevada/Oregon) that produced voluminous evolved peralkaline and peraluminous
magmas and Li-bearing clays that formed after the caldera collapse. By studying
melt and fluid inclusions hosted in igneous phenocrysts from diverse Miocene
volcanic rocks (ca. 16.7-16.0 Ma) exposed in the McDermitt caldera, Drs. Harlaux
and Ruprecht will determine how Li is progressively enriched in the silicate
magmas and partitioned into the magmatic volatile phase during magma outgassing
and cooling of the magmatic system. The in-situ chemical and isotopic
composition of melt inclusions and the host quartz phenocrysts will be analyzed
by EPMA and LA-ICP-MS for major and trace elements, respectively, and SIMS for
oxygen isotopes. This analytical work will allow to investigate Li enrichment
during the long-lived (ca. 1 Ma) lifetime of the McDermitt magmatic system and
the remobilization of Li by hydrothermal fluids released through the caldera
floor and along its margins during magma degassing immediately after
collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.