* 2147334
* Standard Research Grant: Toxic Docs 2.0 Research Infrastructure Project
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* David Rosner, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 232,148.00

The past two decades have seen a veritable explosion in information technology
innovations that allow for large-scale, mass digitization of documents. Toxic
Docs leverages these innovations to provide users with access to the worldâ€™s
largest database of material on toxic substances (lead, asbestos, dioxin, PCBs,
polyvinyl chloride, silica, and more). These include internal memos; unpublished
scientific studies; boardroom minutes; and public relations documents. Almost
all the material in Toxic Docs was previously inaccessible but has been
unleashed in high-stakes legal litigation, then made public by our database.
Users include academic researchers, environmental health scientists,
journalists, and policy analysts. It is open to all and free of charge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This iteration of Toxic Docs builds on the previous one in
five ways. First, it continues expanding the collection. It is processing
millions of additional pages of documents on asbestos and talc; PCBs; and
silicosis and regularly receives more material. Second, a companion site, Toxic
Tools, will offer users additional ways of probing the material in addition to
full-text search. These include a named entity recognition tool that pries out
common names, organizations, and places; a geography parser that fishes out
documents related to locales; and a network guesser that infers relationships
among people mentioned in documents; among others. Third, a new Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) wing will use responses from public records requests to
build our collections. Finally, an Application Programming Interface (API) will
allow users interested in working with plain-text versions of our data to do so.
Toxic Docs provides the raw data necessary to construct fresh narratives about
the new world of 21st-century environmental health risk. Its openness allows
users to make their own objective judgments on how these substances came to
circulate so widely in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.