* 2147640
* EAGER: Hyperdimensional computing with geometric algebra
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jan Rabaey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

In the modern era of big data, a crucial challenge is to discover useful
information that is buried in highly redundant, seemingly irrelevant,
incomplete, or even corrupted data sets. Such information is often contained in
certain low-dimensional structures hidden within the high-dimensional space of
the data, or may only depend on a small subset of the data. How to extract this
information efficiently and automatically remains an open problem. This project
brings together two emerging areas of research — hyperdimensional (HD) computing
and geometric algebra (GA) — to tackle this problem from a new stand point by
investigating the data representation and the intrinsic geometry of the data.
This research is also the first in a systematic quest to uncover the potential
of using the high-dimensional generalization of complex numbers in analyzing and
discovering patterns in large-scale sensing data. The success of this research
can help advance the capability of other machine learning models, such as deep
neural networks, which are mostly based on real numbers today. It also brings a
powerful mathematical tool (GA) which is mainly known in the physics community
into the machine learning community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HD computing is a
brain-inspired framework for machine learning and artificial intelligence that
is based on representing quantities or symbols as high-dimensional vectors and
manipulating vectors with simple operations. In recent work by the
investigators, it was shown that by using complex-valued vectors in HD computing
it is possible to encode images in such a way that patterns can be effectively
recognized by a factorization of HD vectors. To build on this direction, they
are exploring the use of geometric algebras which generalize complex numbers to
any n-dimensional space. The following thrusts form the core of this research:
(1) explore ways of mapping data into the geometric algebra space; (2)
investigate how to integrate geometric algebra with the operations of HD
computing; (3) apply these methods to real application domains such as multi-
microphone speech recognition or distributed sensing to evaluate their efficacy
and computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.