* 2147189
* Inviscid Limits, Uniqueness, and Anomalous Dissipation in Hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hakima Bessaih, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 124,477.00

Turbulence, the complex, irregular and chaotic motion of fluids, is a ubiquitous
and fundamental mechanism for the transfer of momentum and energy across spatio-
temporal scales. Although the deterministic equations describing the dynamics of
fluids are well-established and their numerical solution has revealed much about
the turbulent behavior of fluids, their analysis is challenging, and basic
results remain elusive. The use of probabilistic tools offer complementary
approaches that naturally incorporate the uncertainties of the actual state of
the fluid and random perturbations due to external forces. This project will
leverage state-of-the-art tools in probability, stochastic analysis, and
dynamical systems, to study the basic fluid dynamics models and some of its
variants, which are relevant to physics, engineering, and atmosphere-ocean
dynamics. Emphasis will be given to study the effect of random forcing on these
systems, gain further understanding on the energy transfer across scales, and
the possibility of obtaining basic existence and uniqueness results using the
probabilistic framework, which remain elusive in the deterministic approach. The
project will also provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
to participate in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
studies several mathematical problems stemming from the challenges of turbulence
theory and involves stochastic analysis, dynamical systems, and partial
differential equations. The goal is to understand the link between the Euler and
Navier-Stokes equations, their stochastic versions, and the phenomenological
laws of turbulence. The advantage of the stochastic approach is the major
simplicity of balance laws between mean rates of energy injection, dissipation,
and flux. Due to the rich structure of these stochastic models, some results on
uniqueness and stability of some approximations of three-dimensional viscous and
inviscid fluid flows could be proved while their deterministic counterpart is
lacking. The smoothing effect of the noise on the associated dynamical system
will be used. The study of the inviscid limit problem will be tackled for a
better understanding of the direct energy cascade for the three-dimensional case
and the inverse energy cascade for the two-dimensional case. Some inviscid
limits for some geophysical models with anisotropic viscosity will be
investigated as well. Theoretical issues, such as existence, uniqueness, and
ergodicity of invariant measures, will be complemented by numerical simulations.
This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Applied
Mathematics program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.