* 2147052
* DDRIG: Networked Infrastructures in Vulnerable Coastal Communities: A Historical and Ethnographic Inquiry
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Steven Jackson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,632.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant supports a research
project that examines the impact of increasingly severe storms and rising sea
levels on network infrastructures, such as the Internet and other digital
communication channels. The research study is located in south Louisiana, where
efforts to expand and maintain network connectivity are happening against the
backdrop of sea level rise and increased intensity of storms. In particular, the
researchers will study how recent federal and state policy initiatives that aim
to broaden broadband access play out in a place shaped by environmental and
social inequality. The research aims to connect issues of environmental and
digital inequality as a way to understand how to create more equitable and
sustainable network infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study addresses
the following research questions. How and to what extent are histories of
extraction and regional infrastructural development reflected in current network
infrastructures? How are practices of maintaining and expanding network
infrastructures in vulnerable coastal communities shifting to respond to the
impact of drastic environmental changes? What are alternative approaches to
maintaining and expanding network infrastructures in vulnerable coastal
communities? To address these questions, the researchers use historical,
ethnographic, and design research methods to understand and map out historical
connections between environmental inequality and digital inequality, to
understand practices that maintain and develop network infrastructures within
vulnerable coastal communities, to develop approaches and practices for STS and
computing research scholars that re-envision network infrastructures. The
research will contribute to building new understandings of the impact of such
changes on network infrastructures among policy makers, computing practitioners,
and local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.