* 2147939
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemical Assembly at the University of Nebraska
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Mark Griep, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2025
* USD 387,249.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
award at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, located in Lincoln, NE, supports
the training of 10 students over 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024,
offering undergraduate participants the opportunity to carry out original
research projects in the areas of biochemistry, chemistry, chemical biology,
chemical education research, and chemical engineering. To create a welcoming and
inclusive environment, each participant is assigned a graduate student mentor
who works with them on an almost daily basis to learn about the methods and
literature. Participants learn about science communication, careers in the
chemical industry, the graduate school application process, and how to
disseminate research results through publications and presentations to a variety
of audiences. For instance, participants will spend time describing their
research to participants in the Upward Bound Math Science (UBMS) program for
economically disadvantaged high school students, helping to inspire high school
students to pursue science related degrees, propagating the impact of this REU
site. In a commitment to broadening participation in STEM, this program supports
women and students from underrepresented groups. By the completion of this
program, students develop complex analytical and communication skills and have a
deeper knowledge of science and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
REU site offers a range of research projects in chemical assembly, including
neuropeptide-receptor interactions, catalyzed hydrogenation of carbon dioxide,
RNA folding and ligand binding, laser spectroscopy of halide perovskite
semiconductors, rapid analysis of drug-protein interactions, electrochemical
sensors using biomolecules, chemical education research into the student use of
evidence to support chemical arguments, adaptive surfaces, metabolomics, organic
radicals for MRI contrast agents, and the synthesis of 2D materials such as
graphene. Students develop communication skills by presenting written, oral, and
graphic interpretations of their work to an array of audiences including the
UBMS high school students, REU students from other programs, graduate student
mentors, faculty members, and on social media to reach the public. Participants
take three field trips to explore industrial careers, learn about careers in
academia, and are trained in the responsible conduct of research, including
workshops on safety and authorship ethics. Best practices gleaned from this site
are shared with the wider REU community through presentations at national
meetings to disseminate evidence-based, effective methodology more
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.