* 2147564
* I-Corps: Polar Host Materials for Lithium-Sulphur (Li-S) Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Ruigang Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of high performance and long-life lithium sulfur batteries. The
development of advanced electrical energy storage systems promises to have a
significant impact on renewable energy resources and reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions in the coming years with a goal of achieving carbon neutrality.
Lithium sulfur batteries are thought to be good candidates for electrical energy
storge systems due to their higher energy density and reduced cost from the use
of sulfur. However, a key limitation of commercializing lithium sulfur systems
on a large scale is polysulfide shuttling leading to a rapidly fading capacity.
This proposed technology aims to commercialize surface engineered polar cerium
oxide host materials to immobilize the polysulfides to provide long-life and
high-performance in lithium sulfur batteries. The lithium sulfur battery with
highly redox active cerium-based oxide hosts makes it competitive with the
current lithium-ion battery with improved energy density and lower cost. The
commercialization of lithium sulfur batteries may have a global impact for
applications in portable electronics, electric vehicles, and energy storage
infrastructure such as power plants and grid-level devices for intermittent
renewable energy storage from solar and wind
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of surface engineered and catalytically active polar oxide-based dual host
materials for immobilizing polysulfides in lithium sulfur batteries. Polysulfide
shuttling occurs when polysulfide molecules from the cathode dissolve into the
liquid electrolyte and shuttle across the separator to react with and corrode
the lithium anode. The proposed polar cathode host materials with tuned surface
structure and defects prepared via hydrothermal synthesis and chemical etching
surface engineering may effectively trap lithium polysulfides, promote the
catalytic conversion of polysulfides, and significantly enhance the capacity and
cycling performance of lithium sulfur batteries with reduced cost due to the use
of earth abundant sulfur. These surface-engineered and catalytically active
polar oxide host materials also may allow battery manufacturing companies to
mitigate the shuttle effect and commercialize lithium sulfur batteries with
significantly improved electrochemical performance to fulfill the requirements
at substantially reduced prices, giving them a competitive advantage, and
enabling future advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.