* 2147810
* Collaborative Research: Integrating AI Learning into Middle School Science through Natural Language Processing
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Mehmet Celepkolu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 746,167.00

This project responds to the growing recognition that learners of all ages
should have the opportunity to engage with and learn about artificial
intelligence (AI). Of AI's many subfields, natural language processing (NLP) is
one of the fastest growing. NLP focuses on how to automatically understand
spoken or textual data, and billions of these textual or spoken exchanges are
recorded online every day. Historically, using NLP required extensive coding
expertise and a deep understanding of machine learning, but recent advances and
work by the project team have laid the foundation for bringing authentic,
situated NLP learning into middle school classrooms. The project foregrounds how
to teach NLP with ethics and ethical reasoning applied to relevant local issues
and will investigate how to integrate AI learning through NLP into middle school
science on weather systems and cycles through problem-based learning. The
research team will carry out participatory co-design with teachers and will
provide potentially transformative experiences to twelve teachers and over one
thousand students, leveraging existing partnerships within a multi-district,
two-state effort in Florida, and Indiana in diverse schools with approximately
50% African-American students and the majority of students eligible for free or
reduced lunch. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will
investigate the ways in which teacher professional development and participatory
co-design can be tailored to support teachers' competencies and sense of
preparedness to bring authentic, problem-based NLP experiences into science
classrooms. For students, the projectâ€™s hypothesis is that these innovative
experiences will foster competencies and attitudes toward STEM careers. The
project is guided by the following research questions. (1) (a) What aspects of
participatory co-design are helpful for supporting science teachers' development
of AI education and NLP proficiencies? (b) In what ways can existing
professional development strategies support AI-integrated science learning? (c)
What new strategies emerge throughout the process? (2) (a) What kinds of AI-
integrated science learning activities emerge from participatory co-design with
teachers? (b) What specific adaptations are necessary to ensure activities are
personally, locally, and culturally relevant for students? (3) How does
integrated NLP and science support learner competencies (knowledge and skills in
NLP and science) and ethical reasoning?; and (4) How does integrated NLP and
science support students in establishing high quality engagement and fostering
positive attitudes toward STEM careers (interest, identity, and intention to
persist)? The project will investigate these questions using a mixed-methods
design: qualitative data from teachers and students will include narrative
accounts, observations of teaching practices, and interviews with teachers about
their preparedness and self-efficacy for teaching AI-integrated science;
quantitative data will include knowledge and skills assessments for AI-
integrated science administered to both teachers and students. The project's
deliverables will include (1) empirical findings from the above research
questions and (2) an innovative NLP curriculum integrated into NGSS standards-
aligned middle school science. The curriculum will be the outcome of iterative
refinement over three years of the project through co-design with teachers. This
curriculum, accompanying materials, and learning environment will be made
publicly and freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.