* 2147080
* BIORETS: Global Change Ecology at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Karen McDonald, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 557,548.00

The Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program at the Smithsonian
Environmental Research Center (SERC) will provide middle school teachers from
Anne Arundel County Public Schools and Prince Georgeâ€™s County Public Schools in
Maryland and District of Columbia Public Schools in Washington, DC with hands-on
participation in research on global change. The teachers will study a variety of
topics, including ecosystem conservation, climate change, biological invasions,
and biodiversity to understand how ecosystems are changing. Through the program,
teachers will be trained in a range of current scientific research techniques.
This will increase their understanding of the scientific process, result in
meaningful learning experiences, and provide them the support to begin
implementing authentic research and data analysis in their classrooms. The
teachers will engage with hundreds of students each year, providing high quality
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) resources and access to a
large network of STEM professionals to inspire their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent centuries, humans have dramatically
altered the planet through habitat fragmentation, increased greenhouse gases,
species introductions, excess nutrient loading, and native species extirpation.
Determining and ultimately mitigating the consequences of these global
transformations is a major goal in ecology, and the primary focus of the
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program at the Smithsonian Environmental
Research Center. The environmental issues of the 21st century are complex and
require a multi-disciplinary approach. Through the program, teachers will be
trained in many subfields including ecology, chemistry, genetics, and
quantitative ecology, resulting in rich experiences and scientific impacts.
After their summer experiences, teachers will have increased their understanding
of and comfort with current research practices and techniques and have the
support to begin implementing authentic research and data analysis practices in
their classrooms. More than half of the students in the target school districts
are students of color, and large portions of the students are considered
economically disadvantaged. Students from these demographics often have less
access to high quality STEM teaching and learning materials. By engaging
teachers from these districts in hands-on research and preparing them to better
integrate the authentic science practices in their classrooms, not only will the
teachers benefit from increased environmental science knowledge and self-
efficacy, but their students and school communities will benefit as well. The
teachers will engage with hundreds of students each year, providing high quality
STEM resources and access to a large network of STEM professionals to better
inspire and engage their STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.