* 2147101
* Limits to Evolvability Define the Maximal Sustainable Niche of Generalists
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jeremy Draghi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 523,102.00

One of the most important ways that species can evolve is by changing their
niche—the range of environments in which they can thrive and reproduce. The
breadth of a niche can expand or contract as a species adapts to changing
environments, and quantifying this evolutionary process will help us to
understand why ecosystems are so rich and diverse, and to predict how species
might adapt to changing habitats. This project will use mathematical theory and
computer simulations to uncover basic rules of nature that govern evolutionary
change of the niche. Specifically, we aim to model how species might juggle the
burdens of adapting to multiple changes across their range of habitats, and to
predict when habitat change might drive a species toward a narrower niche. We
will also work with high-school teachers to develop and distribute new ways of
using computer simulations to help students learn how species compete and
coexist in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposal uses theory, including both
analytical and numerical methods, to quantify connections between a population’s
capacity to evolve and its niche breadth. Our central hypothesis is that
interference among the adaptive responses to multiple environments limits a
population’s ability to exploit a broad niche, even in the absence of genetic
trade-offs. To test this hypothesis, we will first model eco-evolutionary
feedbacks during a short-term bout of adaptation in a generalist population in
two environments; we hypothesize that linkage, hard selection, and strong
feedbacks between fitness and population size will favor the evolution of
specialization. We will then analyze the long-term evolutionary behavior of
specialists on fitness landscapes that permit cost-free generalists; we
hypothesize that barriers to evolution of generalism will effectively ‘lock in’
the results of niche reduction, trapping populations at the suboptimal landscape
peak of specialism. Finally, we propose to connect these pieces by exploring
models of niche evolution in scenarios in which environments continually change
due to either extrinsic factors or antagonistic coevolution. Together, these
aims combine evolution at short and long time-scales to provide a testable,
predictive framework connecting the rate of adaptation to long-term outcomes at
the community level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.