* 2147431
* I-CORPS: Assessing the commercial potential of reactive biofilm surfaces-based waste treatment technology
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of wastewater treatment technology aimed at managing nitrogen in
liquid waste streams with carbon and energy efficiencies. Wastewater treatment
plant managers are under intense pressure to manage nitrogen in their effluents
because of surface water vulnerability to nitrogen pollution. With extreme
droughts around the globe, protecting surface water becomes extremely important.
Further, the proposed technology is aimed at managing the nitrogen cycle in the
environment, which is one of the 14 grand challenges identified by the National
Academy of Engineers. The technology builds upon the fundamental science of
reactor design and promises to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions from wastewater
treatment plants. The proposed technology supports the management of clean water
while encompassing environmental sustainability through wastewater treatment
designed with energy-efficiency and carbon neutrality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a nitrogen management technology
for wastewater treatment that incorporates energy and carbon efficiency. The
proposed technology integrates anaerobic ammonia oxidation (ANAMMOX) with
methane gas coupled heterotrophic denitrification (Denitrification And Methane
Oxidation; DAMO) in granular biofilms to provide a compact and energy-efficient
nitrogen management process. The proposed technology may accomplish low nitrogen
in the final effluent and use dissolved methane gas to support denitrification,
thus mitigating the challenges of greenhouse gas emissions (reduced carbon
footprints). The proposed next steps are to evaluate the lab-scale prototype and
develop a cost analysis plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.