* 2147833
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of Digital Real Estate Technologies on Housing and Home in the US
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Matthew Zook, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2023
* USD 12,425.00

This project will investigate how the development of digital real estate
technologies have affected social and economic dimensions of real estate
transactions in US cities. Real estate transactions are increasingly affected by
the data curated by digital real estate platforms and the algorithms underlying
the presentation of data to home buyers. This digital transformation potentially
affects the availability of financial instruments and the knowledge that home
buyers acquire in the process of making real estate transactions. Importantly
there may be differences and social justice issues relevant in how data are
processed and curated for home buyers between and within cities. The objective
of this research is to understand the disparate impacts of the digitalization of
real estate transactions as well as the role of partnerships between city
governments and the private sector in real estate markets. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore how the design and use of data on web
based real estate platforms creates new social and economic relationships to
housing and home. This project will address whether these platforms create wider
access to affordable housing, especially in terms of race and gender by drawing
on concepts and theories from urban geography. The project will specifically ask
how digital real estate platforms play a role in the financialization of
housing, what knowledge users of digital real estate platforms acquire from
these platforms and whether there are differential experiences by users from
different socio-demographic groups. Interviews and focus groups with key actors
in the real estate transaction process will be used to gain an understanding of
the design and development of digital real estate platforms. Both archival
research and participant observation will be used to additionally triangulate
the findings from interviews and focus groups. Results will be disseminated to
scholarly communities, through social media and through a
podcast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.