* 2147747
* New Particle Formation in the Marine Boundary Layer: The Frequency, Mechanism, and Impact on Cloud Condensation Nuclei
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jian Wang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 457,778.00

This project combines existing observational data with updated model simulations
to address current knowledge gaps regarding new particle formation, particularly
new particles being formed in proximity to clouds in the marine boundary layer.
This work provides a much-needed integration of various observational datasets
with state-of-the-science simulations and has the potential to fill existing
knowledge gaps and advance our understanding of how clouds are formed. Clouds
over the ocean are particularly important with regard to solar radiation and the
energy budget so research examining cloud processes over the ocean will enhance
our understanding of our atmosphere and our climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes three primary tasks. The first task seeks to identify the
conditions under which new particle formation (NPF) occurs and the main drivers
of NPF within the marine boundary layer (MBL) via analysis of existing field
measurements including airborne and surface (ground site and research cruise)
observations. The observational datasets are pulled from field campaigns across
the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The second task seeks to investigate the
mechanism behind MBL NPF via state-of-the-science simulations using the large
eddy simulation (LES) formulation of the WRF-Chem model constrained by the field
observations from the first task. Finally, the third task will run additional
WRF-Chem simulations under representative conditions in order to quantify the
impact of MBL NPF on cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and cloud microphysics and
the resultant regional impact on MBL clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
includes support and training for a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.