* 2147923
* Collaborative Research:  Mantle dynamics and plate tectonics constrained by converted and reflected seismic wave imaging beneath hotspots
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 214,451.00

Since its formation billions of years ago, Earth has been slowly cooling via
convection, where warmer material rises to the surface and cold tectonic plates
plunge deep into the interior. Understanding this process is important for a
wide range of problems, such as determining the factors that drive plate
tectonics to sustaining deep water and carbon cycles that stabilize the
atmosphere/hydrosphere and climate throughout Earth history. This is
particularly relevant for society, both because plate tectonic processes are the
driving forces behind hazards such as earthquakes and volcanoes and also because
our climate and atmosphere make Earth habitable. This project studies large
scale convection in the solid Earth by using earthquake data recorded at distant
seismic stations in regions of upwelling. Upwellings are notoriously difficult
to constrain. The focus will be on three end-member cases: 1) Hawaii, the
classic example where deep upwelling occurs beneath ocean lithosphere, 2)
Yellowstone, the classic example of deep upwelling that occurs beneath a
continent, and 3) the equatorial mid-Atlantic Ridge, which is typically assumed
to be a location without deep upwellings. The project will use classic
techniques and also some newly developed approaches to better constrain the
scale of the upwellings and their pathways. An outreach program will increase
diversity in the Earth Sciences via public engagement and education and training
of students and early career researchers. The outreach portion includes visits
to core discipline classrooms at Morgan State University, a historically black
university, with an established connection with two faculty members there. The
goal of the visits and the materials is to increase awareness of career
possibilities and also the societal relevance of the Earth Sciences. The
approach is modeled on the success of the "Google in Residence" program that
successfully placed Google engineers on HBCU campuses. Eventually a wider range
of Earth scientists will be included by developing an archive of materials that
can be scaled and adapted according to needs and also best-practice advice, both
of which will be made publicly available to the broader scientific community.
The project also provides training for undergraduate students, a graduate
student, and a post doc in cutting-edge methodologies and use of seafloor
seismic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthâ€™s convective system is important for
understanding the evolution of the planet, including everything from the factors
that drive and enable plate tectonics to sustaining deep water and carbon cycles
that stabilize the atmosphere/hydrosphere and climate over billions of years. It
is generally accepted that cool mantle sinks back into the Earth, e.g., at
subduction zones, and hot mantle rises, e.g., beneath hotspots and mid ocean
ridges. Although mantle tomography has resolved many seismically fast anomalies
associated with subduction, imaging upwellings has proven more challenging,
potentially because seismic waveforms have difficulty resolving thin slow
conduits. Thus, the exact dimensions, locations, characteristics, origin depths
and magnitudes of these thermal anomalies are poorly known, as well as their
chemical and physical interaction with the surrounding mantle, such as in the
transition zone and uppermost mantle. Similarly, the degree to which upwellings
change in size and/or are deflected during their ascent and how they vary among
tectonic environments is uncertain. Converted and reflected wave imaging of the
transition zone discontinuities and the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary
should provide tighter constraints. However, there are some discrepancies in
studies using these methods regarding hotspot character and location, perhaps
because they have used different methodologies and approaches with different
sensitivities in different locations. This study will examine this issue
systematically at a varied suite of tectonic environments. The planned approach
will use the complementary sensitives of converted and reflected seismic phases
to image the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary and transition zone
discontinuities beneath three key regions that are representative of the range
of tectonic environments where variability in upwelling characteristics might be
expected. These include the iconic hotspot of Hawaii near the center of an old
oceanic plate, the classic example of Yellowstone hotspot beneath a continental
interior, and finally the mid-Atlantic Ridge where deep upwellings are not
predicted by classic models. Analyses will include P-to-S imaging of the
transition zone discontinuities and S-to-P imaging of the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary, both sensitive to vertical changes in shear wave
velocity, and also use S-reflections, which have the added advantage of high
depth resolution. A systematic approach will allow comparisons among the regions
and anisotropic testing and F-K full-waveform modelling will be performed to
determine the influence of anisotropy and/or focussing/defocussing for any
apparent discrepancies. Once a full range of possibilities is defined from the
seismic waveforms, inversions for Earth properties based on experimental and ab
initio constraints will determine the properties that can explain the
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.