* 2147956
* Tailoring the Properties of Molecular Assemblies via Noncovalent Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Shuford, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 353,871.00

Molecular scale noncovalent interactions pervade biological, materials, and
chemical systems. Although relatively weak on an individual level, they can have
a strong impact on molecular structuring and dynamics when acting in concert.
The effects of hydrogen bonding are well-known, while the analogous interaction
in some halogen-containing molecules, termed halogen bonding, is far less
studied. The extent that halogen bonding can direct the assembly of
supramolecular structures with specific material characteristics is
undetermined. Through the proposed studies, a new modeling paradigm will be
developed that aims to provide unique chemical insight regarding the
connectivity between the molecular-level and larger-scale material properties.
This work is significant because it will identify molecular signatures in
halogen bond donors and acceptors that control the assembly of these building
blocks into supramolecular structures, thereby advancing our understanding of
what dictates the material properties and providing a chemical route to modulate
the observed behavior. The predictive approach represents an entirely new way to
think about designing suprastructures with desired properties from the bottom up
using noncovalent interactions as the assembly mechanism. The tunability of
halogen bonds makes it possible to adjust the interaction strength on a fine
level, allowing for additional control over assembly formation. Once the data-
enabled optimization procedures are implemented, it will be possible to create
assemblies with desired properties for particular tasks, which will represent a
significant advance in functional materials design. Moreover, the general
approach is not specific to a particular property and could be adapted for any
application involving similar donor/acceptor building blocks. Controlling
material assembly will enable vast new functionalities and catalyze
transformative advances across a number of fields. Concurrent with the research,
the teaching and outreach activities will educate the next generation of
scientists on functional materials and engage a diverse student population on
STEM topics, including historically underrepresented groups and those with
learning disabilities. This project addresses the basic science knowledge gap
associated with directed assembly, and it is consistent with the NSF mission of
supporting fundamental research, tightly integrated with science education and
community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this
proposal is to develop molecular assemblies, bound by halogen bonds and other
noncovalent interactions, with characteristics that facilitate more efficient
chemical and environmental processes. It is hypothesized that tuning the
strength and nature of halogen bonding between the molecular components will
enable the ability to direct assembly formation and tailor the structural,
electronic, and optical properties of the system. Modeling studies will guide
bottom-up materials design using molecular-level building blocks to generate
supramolecular structures and control their function. Molecular quantum
chemistry and atomistic simulation will be used to produce a predictive
formalism that is well suited for future integration of advanced optimization
algorithms. Specific aims include the following: (1) Characterize the molecular
properties of halogen bond donors and acceptors to ascertain the effects of
geometry, atomic substitution, and functionalization; (2) Assess stability,
quantify halogen bonding strength, and determine the nature of noncovalent
interactions in donor/acceptor units; and (3) Direct the assembly of extended
two- and three-dimensional halogen bonded networks with tailored structural,
electronic, and optical properties. These aims align with the overarching
objective of directed assembly of supramolecular structures with desired
characteristics, while concurrently addressing research that enables more
efficient chemical processes, improves environmental sustainability, and
advances the design of functional materials with tailored properties. These
studies will provide predictive capabilities for a particular class of
donor/acceptor networks; however, the underlying principles of directed assembly
are highly relevant to other materials and biological systems. Thus, the
proposed research is of great fundamental importance and impactful to many
scientific fields in chemistry, biology, physics, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.