* 2147781
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Past and Future of Mississippi River Hydroclimatology to Constrain Risk via Integrated Climate Modeling, Observations, and Reconstructions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sylvia Dee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2025
* USD 472,024.00

The Mississippi River drains a continent, gathering water from as far as
Pennsylvania and Montana and discharging it into the Gulf of Mexico. The
channeling of so much water into a single river naturally raises the stakes for
flooding, and the river has one of the most extensive flood mitigation systems
in the world. But there are limits to the protection afforded by the current
system and we do not know if it will prove adequate as climate warms. The effect
of warming on flood risk is determined by a balance between competing effects:
warming by itself would likely reduce discharge by increasing the amount of
moisture that evaporates from the land rather than running off into streams.
Warming also reduces snowpack, leading to a reduction in the springtime
streamflow resulting from snow melt. On the other hand warmer air generally
holds more moisture, which leads to increases in both mean and extreme
precipitation, thus increasing flood risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects
seeks to determine the net effect of these competing influences on Mississippi
River discharge, which serves as a broad-brush proxy for flood risk. Much of the
work involves assessments of Mississippi discharge in climate models,
particularly the Community Earth System Model (CESM), which uses a River
Transport Model (RTM) for the Mississippi. Preliminary results show river
discharge increasing dramatically (by perhaps 130%) over the 21st century under
a high greenhouse gas emissions scenario (RCP8.5) but remaining within
historical norms under lower emissions (RCP4.5). This contrast suggests that the
balance between streamflow increases from precipitation and decreases from
evaporation and snow melt could be temperature dependent, with precipitation
winning out at higher levels of warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
considers the factors driving Mississippi discharge over the last millennium
using a combination of weather and streamflow observing networks, paleoclimate
reconstructions, and ensembles of present-day and last millennium climate model
simulations. Recent work by the Principal Investigators (PIs) suggests that the
warm period of the Medieval Climate Anomaly featured lower discharge than the
Little Ice Age, a result that is generally captured by CESM simulations of the
last millennium. The result is also in keeping with the moderate warming
scenario for the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal
interest due to the focus on flood risk, and the PIs are working with
stakeholders including the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Mississippi River
Cities and Towns Initiative to understand the practical significance of their
results and provide decision support. The project also involves education and
outreach, supporting summer research experiences for high school students and
working with the Girl Scouts of America to encourage girls and young women to
consider careers in science. The project provides support and training to a
postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.