* 2147634
* Collaborative Research: Hydrothermal vent systems mediate the formation and fate of refractory aromatic carbon in the deep ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sasha Wagner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2025
* USD 467,853.00

Oceanic dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is one of the largest reservoirs of
reduced carbon on Earth. Most of this DOC is housed in the deep ocean, where it
cycles extremely slowly. Radiocarbon dating shows that the oldest components of
oceanic DOC are condensed aromatic compounds. These compounds are also presumed
to be unreactive and persistent. This project will investigate whether mid-ocean
ridge hydrothermal vents are a source for this fraction of deep ocean DOC,
through a field campaign at the well-studied East Pacific Rise 9°N hydrothermal
site. Results of this work will advance the understanding of slowly cycling
aromatic carbon pools in the abyssal ocean and its sediments, which controls the
sequestration of carbon on short and geologic timescales. The project involves
three early career researcher investigators, a postdoctoral investigator, and
two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries of
(nano)particulate graphite in venting fluids and marine-like isotopic signature
of condensed aromatics in oceanic bottom waters suggests a hydrothermal source
for those condensed aromatics and warrants further consideration. The proposed
research builds upon this previous work by asking: Do hydrothermal vent systems
control the formation and distribution of the refractory aromatic carbon that
persists in the deep ocean? To answer this question, samples will be collected
from hydrothermal vent fields along the well-studied East Pacific Rise 9°N
segment to target three main objectives: 1) quantify and characterize aromatic
carbon and inorganic geochemistry along a hydrothermal continuum from a range of
focused and diffuse fluid temperatures, 2) determine whether thermally altered
marine organic matter is the main source of refractory aromatic carbon emitted
by hydrothermal vents, 3) provide a preliminary model of the hydrothermal
fluxes, dispersal, and fate of particulate and dissolved refractory aromatic
carbon in the deep Eastern Pacific Ocean that can be validated and refined with
future work. Using multiple analytical proxies to quantify and characterize
graphite and soot-type molecules emitted across a broad geochemical range of
venting fluids will allow for the determination of which hydrothermal conditions
are favorable for the production of refractory aromatic carbon. By studying
organic-inorganic interactions, novel datasets for elucidating linked
biogeochemical processes will be produced. Complementary isotopic and molecular
measurements will reveal whether hydrothermal aromatic carbon is sourced from
the thermal alteration of preexisting marine organic matter, challenging the
previously-held assumption of a mantle-derived CO2 source. Assessment of off-
axis water and sediment transects will confirm whether condensed aromatic carbon
that persists in the deep ocean and its sediments is hydrothermal in
origin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.