* 2147905
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Mass balance constraints on in situ and ex situ drivers of open ocean iodine cycling and paleo proxy applications
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dalton Hardisty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2025
* USD 332,486.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. This
project would add a study of iodine cycling to a U.S. GEOTRACES expedition to
the South Pacific and Southern Ocean. Iodine geochemistry is widely applied as a
tracer of oxygen availability and carbon cycling in ancient seawater and is a
key regulator of tropospheric ozone. However, fundamental constraints on the
role of local biogeochemical versus regional physical mixing processes in
governing large-scale distribution of iodine (in the form of iodide and iodate
species) in the ocean are lacking. This study would be the first investigation
aimed at constraining the relative impact of these important processes on iodine
across an ocean basin. The project would support graduate and undergraduate
students. The lead investigator and the graduate student would participate in
science communication activities to Greater Lansing K-12 students through the
Michigan State University Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
utilize the GEOTRACES GP17-OCE meridional Pacific transect from Tahiti to Chile
to conduct the first basin-scale mass balance of iodine, quantifying
biogeochemical and physical mixing processes governing iodine cycling evolution
across key gradients. Specific objectives include: (A) determine the relative
contributions of vertical mixing and productivity and nutrient variations toward
maintaining euphotic, meridional iodine speciation gradients; (B) budget the
roles of water mass mixing and iodine redox transformations during the
downwelling and circulation of high latitude near-surface water masses, most
prominently the Antarctic Intermediate Water. The two proposed mass balance
studies include iodine speciation measurements from vertical profiles along
targeted intervals of the transect and computational constraints on water mass
abundances via an Optimum Multi-Parameter Analysis. Importantly, the project is
uniquely poised for success because the GP17-OCE transect captures gradients in
and already prioritizes tracers for vertical/horizontal mixing and water mass
age. Together, these parameters will place first order constraints on the role
of primary production in driving iodine redox transformations in oxic, euphotic
waters and quantify rates of change across the proposed basin-scale
spatiotemporal gradients associated with biogeochemical and physical mixing
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.