* 2147390
* Teacher Experiences Advancing Mathematics and the Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Megan Fung, California Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 12/31/2027
* USD 816,965.00

The project aims to serve the national need for a strong workforce of middle and
high school STEM teachers who are equipped to teach STEM using evidence-based,
culturally relevant instructional methods. At the national level, new teacher
attrition rates are a significant problem – which is exacerbated in the STEM
disciplines – and fewer than 18 percent of teachers identify as persons of
color. This puts children from groups traditionally underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines at a disadvantage, as research shows that exposure to same-race
teachers has positive influences on academic performance and post-secondary
aspirations of students. Thus, research has shown that diversity within the
teaching workforce, as well as culturally relevant curricula, positively impacts
K-12 students’ future academic and career success. This project aims to recruit
a diverse cohort of aspiring teachers from among undergraduate students who are
majoring in STEM, as well as STEM professionals who are considering teaching
careers. Aspiring teachers will receive specialized training,
Scholarships/Stipends, and mentoring, as well as start-up funds and support
during their first year of teaching.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at
California Lutheran University includes partnerships with the Oxnard Union High
School District and the Ventura Country STEM Network. Project goals include to:
1) recruit STEM undergraduates, recent STEM graduates, and career STEM
professionals into the teaching profession; 2) provide robust, intensive
academic and practical preparation in culturally relevant pedagogy, including
age-appropriate instructional methods, to STEM students and professionals who
are content/discipline experts but lack the methodologies and skills to teach a
diverse community of young learners; 3) create a teacher pipeline from
preparation to employment in a high-need local educational agency (school
district); and 4) foster an atmosphere of inclusiveness through continuing
education and networking to support and retain teachers. The project aims to
produce 24 STEM teachers with mathematics and science degrees over five years.
This project capitalizes on local academic and professional resources and relies
on research that shows that teacher residency models nationwide have been proven
to attract a higher proportion of people of color than the national average and
boost success in retention. In addition to the financial support through
Scholarships/Stipends, the project intends to provide specialized preparation in
teaching STEM using subject-specific pedagogy, culturally relevant pedagogy,
professional development, mentoring, startup funds, and networking. The
project’s evaluation intends to investigate the modes of recruitment of STEM
undergraduate students and STEM professionals into teaching which prove to be
productive. It is also intended to examine the impact of cultural competency in
pre-service training on teachers’ ability to better engage students. The impact
of STEM-focused professional development/continuing education on work
satisfaction will also be assessed. Results of the project are expected to
provide evidence for local decision-makers on successful means by which to
recruit and retain competent STEM educators for their schools. This Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.