* 2147852
* SBIR Phase II:  Development and Design Verification of a Reusable, No-Touch Catheter System
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Souvik Paul, CATHBUDDY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,699,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to advance a novel, reusable,
intermittent, urinary catheterization system from a functional prototype to the
final production-equivalent device. By progressing the system through additional
design improvements and FDA submission, the goal of this project is to enable
the product to reach the hands of individuals who require intermittent catheters
to urinate. Current intermittent urinary catheter use is fraught with
complications including frequent urinary tract infections, expensive supplies,
and large material footprints, as well as the generation of a significant amount
of plastic waste. This project seeks to improve the current catheter landscape
by allowing for commercialization of a reusable catheter system that will reduce
contact contamination during insertion, reduce plastic waste, and enable
widespread use of high-quality urinary catheters by decreasing the per-use cost.
Through these improvements, healthcare costs associated with intermittent
catheterization can be dramatically decreased. Additionally, based on frequent
interactions with individuals who catheterize and suffer from impaired
dexterity, the design of the system will incorporate the needs and ideas of
people who are often ignored during innovation within the current
catheterization space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will finalize the design of a novel, reusable,
intermittent urinary catheterization system and portable reprocessing device as
well as advance the system towards commercialization. Intermittent urinary
catheterization is a technologically static field that has not changed
significantly since the 1970s, with minimal improvements in urinary tract
infection risk, supply cost, and environmental waste reduction. While the
associated SBIR Phase I project established proof-of-concept catheter
reprocessing, the Phase II project will include optimization and more advanced
microbiologic efficacy testing. This assessment will focus on specifically
addressing concerns regarding lubrication and compactness brought up during SBIR
Phase I customer discovery activities, as well as multiple reuse
reprocessing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.