* 2147250
* Student Data in the Post-Pandemic University
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Gil Eyal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 04/30/2025
* USD 198,744.00

This project is a qualitative study of how data shape and are shaped by
students. It will focus on how students understand and react to data collection.
In particular, the project will address how social differences affect students'
interactions with data technologies. Results from the research will inform
policy recommendations to counter potential disparate and unequal effects of
data collection and use. The results will be applicable in education contexts as
well as other societal domains. Findings will be made available in academic
venues as well as policy and student-facing documents intended to improve
students' awareness and comprehension of data collection on campuses. The
outcomes of this project will be of interest to educators, scientists,
administrators, students, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will recruit undergraduate students to participate remotely in surveys and in-
depth interviewing to investigate how students understand the collection and
application of their data on campuses, along with how their experiences with
data relate to social differences. Results of the project will be applicable to
other forms of data surveillance beyond higher education which have become
prevalent in everyday life. The research will also contribute to a growing body
of scholarship in STS, anthropology, and sociology on interactions between data
and people, in which data increasingly impact people’s lives through decision-
making and predictive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.