* 2147848
* The Law and Reproductive Health, 2010-2020
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Louise Roth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 432,912.00

This project analyzes the relationship between laws and reproductive health
outcomes. Between 2010 and 2020, state laws that regulate contraception,
abortion, and midwifery care, alongside national health care rules and
regulations, changed dramatically. The project builds a new database of state
laws focused on reproductive health and investigates the effect of laws on
women’s and infants’ health and well-being. The project also collects and
analyzes qualitative data from hospital obstetric departments and from birth-
rights lawyers to better understand the human and organizational experiences of
health care reform. Understanding how the legal environment contributes to
maternal and infant health is critical for informing decision-making, reducing
social inequalities in the quality of health care, and developing interventions
that improve public health and save lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-
methods study investigates the relationships between the state and federal legal
environment and birth and infant outcomes between 2010 and 2020. The proposed
research analyzes the relationships between laws and birth outcomes in three
ways. First, the project uses multi-level models to understand how state laws –
those that govern contraception, abortion, midwifery, prenatal substance use,
health insurance, and adverse medical events – together with the changing
federal legal environment, affect infant and maternal health and mortality. The
study also analyzes effects of laws on racial-ethnic disparities in birth
outcomes. Second, the study draws from existing qualitative data to better
understand, through the eyes of hospital administrators, how the legal
environment affects hospitals. Third, in-depth interviews with birth-rights
lawyers provide data on how state laws influence legal cases involving pregnant
women. Findings from the project contributes to sociological theory and research
on the law and on maternal and infant health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.