* 2147104
* Factual guilt, perceived guilt, and race: How defense attorneys make plea recommendations in real-world circumstances
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 166,614.00

The vast majority of criminal cases in America today – upwards of 95% – are
resolved through plea bargaining, a negotiation resulting in an agreed-upon
resolution to the case, saving the State and the defendant the time and expense
of a lengthy trial. But a growing number of exonerations and an expanding body
of literature point to troubling flaws in the informal and swift plea process.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms of plea-bargaining decisions, including
how race affects plea decisions, is critical if we are to preserve the
fundamental rights of defendants and the integrity of our criminal justice
system. Examining and identifying the role of defense attorneys – who are
realistically at the heart of the plea decisions – and exploring how real-world
circumstances affect their plea recommendations will guide the development of
sound plea bargaining policies and will support practitioners in their pursuit
of justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of four studies will isolate variables
that frequently occur in the real world of defense attorneys and plea
bargaining, and study attorneys’ predictive accuracy (i.e. how accurately they
predict jury verdicts) and plea recommendations. Attorneys will review a
hypothetical criminal case file containing various pieces of evidence and will
be asked to make plea recommendations based on the case file. Mock jurors will
view a corresponding video of a mock trial containing the same evidence as the
case file viewed by participating attorneys. However, the contents of the
attorney case file will be manipulated to reflect real-world scenarios. The
first study will manipulate evidence (pointing to guilt/innocence) and the
defendant’s assertion of guilt/innocence, to better understand which carries
more weight in the eyes of a defense attorney: evidence or a client’s assertion.
The second study will examine how direct indications of guilt or innocence, in
conjunction with a defendant’s assertion of guilt or innocence affects plea
recommendations and attorneys’ beliefs about guilt status. The third study will
address the question of how incomplete access to case files affects plea
recommendations. Since plea decisions are often made quickly, with a time limit,
this study will aim to understand how defense attorneys decide whether to
recommend a plea offer without having seen all the facts of a case. Finally, the
fourth study will explore how inadmissible evidence influences attorneys’ plea
recommendations. This study will manipulate the presence of inadmissible
evidence such as criminal history or hearsay testimony in case files to analyze
how attorneys then differentially recommend pleas. Results from these studies
will help inform the development of a more nuanced plea-bargaining research
model than currently exists and will refine our understanding of how attorneys
make plea recommendation when faced with the constraints of the plea
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.