* 2147075
* BIORETS: Translating Authentic Microbial Evolution and Big Data Research to the Classroom
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Vaughn Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2025
* USD 599,899.00

This integrated research-education program will engage 24 high school and middle
school science teachers over 3 years in authentic microbiology research to
understand how bacteria adaptively evolve when producing biofilm. This research
training will prepare them to lead a similar experiment in their classrooms,
where students will observe and study bacteria evolving in biofilms over a week
using an innovative curriculum. Both research and teaching will be supported by
mentors in our laboratory and in their classrooms, where most students come from
underrepresented backgrounds. We will measure whether our program improves
teacher confidence in using life science experiments in their classrooms, as
well as student learning of key life science topics that are essential to
careers in biotechnology. This program will empower greater understanding by
teachers and students of how microbes evolve, a crucial topic today.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of adaptive evolution in microbial biofilms are broadly
significant and poorly understood. Perhaps the greatest mystery – why is
adaptation so fast? – provides the key advantage of our integrated research-
education program. Researchers aged 12+ conduct evolution experiments with safe
Pseudomonas bacteria to observe and study the processes of adaptation and
ecological diversification within one week. Fitter mutants often produce unique
colony morphologies caused by a single mutation. Yet it remains unknown why
certain traits are selected so rapidly. Teachers will conduct experiments to
study this problem with mentorship from a postdoctoral scholar, a PhD student,
and 4 teacher-mentors experienced in our EvolvingSTEM laboratory curriculum.
Teachers will test i) how adaptive phenotypes alter biofilm demography and
subsequent evolution and, ii) how altered surface-sensing influences
evolutionary dynamics. These experiments will advance understanding of
Pseudomonas population biology. Following their summer program, teachers will
incorporate these research questions in an established, effective classroom
curriculum already in diverse schools. Teachers will be supported by our
research team, curriculum coordinators, and community partners. We will assess
whether our program improves teacher and student attitudes towards and knowledge
of core life science topics and their relevance to applications in medicine and
applied sciences. We predict teachers will gain confidence in conducting
authentic experimentation and data analysis in their classrooms, which will
empower their predominantly URM students to develop these same skills. The focus
on evolution as a foundational concept is especially relevant today and will
remedy common misconceptions stemming from a lack of active learning
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.