* 2147011
* Diversity and Networking in Law School: Are Law Students from Diverse Backgrounds Disadvantaged?
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Swethaa Ballakrishnen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 02/28/2025
* USD 396,523.00

Interpersonal networks are an important, often invisible way through which
hierarchies emerge and get reproduced. Particularly, in seemingly merit-based
institutions, tracing these networks could reveal the unequal structures in
which diverse populations experience systemic disparities. The American legal
profession offers a useful site to track these processes of inequality because
it remains unequal despite its increasing heterogeneity. Law students, like many
professionals, are encouraged frequently to “network,” but students from a range
of diverse backgrounds – including race, gender, sexual orientation, national
status, and class – may have access to differentially resourced social networks,
or social capital. These “network inequalities” may impact the value of legal
education across differentially structured groups of students and ultimately
shape differences in student experiences and career outcomes. Whereas research
on the legal profession has highlighted the importance of social capital and
relationships to promote careers, less attention has been paid to the nature of
networks in early professional socialization. Particularly, while the research
is rife with accounts about the racial, gendered, and nationality differences
during law school and then, much later, during different career stages, not
enough is known about the temporal experience of law school as it feeds into the
transitional period between law school and the first years of professional
careers. This period is important because it tracks the emergence of a path
dependency that can serve diverse professionals differently and unequally even
as it structurally seems equitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following an earlier
longitudinal network and interview study of a cohort of first-year law students
across three law schools, the research aims to examine the same law students’
social networks with a range of actors to evaluate the importance of social ties
for the school-to-work transition in the legal profession. The project will
investigate whether observed network inequalities can account for differential
job market outcomes across diverse categories of students, as well as different
outcomes at the end of students’ law school careers. This innovative,
longitudinal dataset will provide insight into the role that network
inequalities play in shaping not only variation in experiences across different
groups of students, but ultimately the role that these structural inequalities
play in producing differential pathways into the legal profession. Further,
given the timing of the data, it will also provide a unique opportunity to
observe student experiences disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the
focus of this project is inequality in law schools and early legal careers, the
relevance of our findings may extend beyond the legal profession, as well, to
organizations struggling with similar dynamics, including non-law professional
organizations and educational organizations, for example. Specifically, these
findings may provide opportunities to create meaningful interventions that may
mitigate existing inequalities and facilitate more equal outcomes within the
legal profession and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.