* 2147320
* Preparing Early Engineers through Context, Connections and Community (PEEC3)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* PATRICK Burnett, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 04/30/2027
* USD 686,975.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
improving the academic preparation of entering engineering students and
ultimately increasing the number and diversity of engineering graduates.
Students enter community college with varied levels of preparation, particularly
in science and mathematics. The COVID-19 pandemic has likely increased this
variability, due to academic interruptions and social isolation. To overcome
these challenges, this project intends to develop a two-quarter, integrated
learning community to help prepare students to study engineering and to transfer
to four-year institutions. Plans include developing a place-based curriculum
that embraces a holistic model for academic preparation. The project will
feature cross-disciplinary collaboration of faculty in engineering, math,
physics, English and history working together to design, implement, and assess
the new curriculum. Once the curriculum is developed, a 24-student cohort will
be recruited to complete a two-quarter sequence of three tightly integrated and
team-taught courses. Quarter one will combine courses in engineering, pre-
calculus, and Pacific Northwest history and culture. Quarter two will combine
introductory design and computing, additional pre-calculus, and English
composition. The integrated two-quarter experience will blur traditional
disciplinary boundaries and incorporate multiple high-impact practices including
contextualized mathematics and English, service-learning, and a course-based
undergraduate research experience. This approach should improve learning
outcomes for participating students compared to the current a la carte model of
course offerings, and advance student progress along factors such as intrinsic
motivation, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging that are vital to student
success as engineering majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is intended to:
(1) address disparities in community college students’ academic, social, and
emotional preparation for an engineering major using a holistic approach; (2)
accelerate engagement of participating students within existing curriculum,
community, and support systems; and (3) increase course success rates, improve
program retention, and reduce equity gaps in engineering transfer preparation
and associate degree completion. Program outcomes will be assessed using a mixed
methods approach consisting of student surveys, focus group interviews, and
comparison of outcomes data to demographically matched samples of students
simultaneously progressing through the existing early engineering curriculum. In
addition, disseminating project results through the engineering education
community at regional and national conferences, the project aims to produce
modular curriculum products that could be implemented in individual courses.
Lastly, a detailed financial sustainability analysis will be conducted to
determine if retention gains attributable to the program justify the up- front
cost of this intensive curriculum intervention. The NSF program description on
Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year
Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM education
initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes innovative
and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.