* 2147505
* NSF-BSF: SaTC: CORE: Small: Evaluating Cybersecurity Precautions and Harms in Israeli Enterprises
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Tyler Moore, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 494,509.00

Even though organizations are investing heavily in cybersecurity, they often
cannot answer basic questions about the effectiveness of their investments, such
as which defenses reduce the risk of suffering an incident, and by how much.
They struggle to accurately quantify the financial costs of the harms resulting
from successful attacks. This project seeks to improve understanding of how
firm-level cybersecurity practices affect these outcomes by focusing on the case
of Israeli enterprises. By bringing together leading scholars in the economics
of cybersecurity with the Israeli National Cyber Directorate (INCD), the project
helps advance the cybersecurity of the state of Israel and its organizations.
Moreover, it advances the scientific understanding of cyber risk management
while serving as a model for future data collection and analysis undertaken in
the U.S. and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three key
research objectives. First, a series of empirical analyses examine how exposure
and security precautions of enterprises affect likelihood of experiencing a
cyber incident. The analysis leverages data from detailed firm-level surveys
carried out by Israel√≠s Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), complemented by
external measurements of enterprise cyber hygiene gathered directly from public
sources. The second research objective is to quantify the harms resulting from
experiencing an incident. For this effort, the project analyzes data gathered by
the Israeli CERT hotline that asks enterprise victims about the impacts
resulting from ransomware attacks. Additionally, CBS survey questions involving
harm are analyzed. The third research objective is to develop and analyze
longitudinal cyber risk indicators. The project team collaborates with INCD and
CBS to analyze longitudinal data obtained from readministering the survey in
subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.