* 2147073
* BIORETS: Genetics and Genomics Research Experiences for High School Teachers in the Greater Houston Area
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Richard Meisel, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2025
* USD 598,017.00

The Houston Genetics BIORETS program will provide summer research experiences in
genetics and genomics for high school biology teachers at the University of
Houston. Genetics is a core topic in high school biology curricula, and it is
foundational for many other topics in biology. Genetic literacy is also
essential for understanding biomedical, agricultural, and environmental science.
Despite this central importance, understanding of genetics consistently lags
behind other scientific concepts, which is made even worse by the growing role
that genetics and genomics plays in modern biology. The Houston Genetics BIORETS
program will address this problem by providing high school biology teachers with
valuable knowledge and experiences that will improve genetics instruction in
their classrooms. Teachers will be drawn from schools with large enrollments of
at-risk students and students from groups historically excluded from the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Houston Genetics BIORETS program aims to
improve genetics instruction in high school biology classes by achieving three
goals. First, teachers will improve their genetics and genomics content
knowledge by participating in research projects, and they will attend seminars
on topics in genetics and genomics. Second, expert teacher trainers will provide
instruction in effective pedagogical practices, including inquiry-based teaching
and culturally responsive pedagogy. Third, teachers will work with genetics
faculty and teacher trainers to develop curricular materials to use in their
classrooms, with specific objectives of improving student understanding of
concepts and awareness of genetics careers. Lesson plans will be published and
disseminated to other teachers. An external project evaluator will assess how
well each goal was accomplished and provide annual feedback for
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.