* 2147618
* I-Corps: Wearable lighting assist tool for real-time tracking and monitoring of lighting conditions and delivery of health information
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Mona Azarbayjani, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a personal circadian monitoring device for tailoring indoor
lighting conditions according to individual needs. The proposed technology may
provide a healthier environment by offering real-time tracking and monitoring of
an individual's lighting conditions and delivering health information to
increase user engagement. Wearable technology has the potential of global cost
saving about $200 billion for the healthcare sector alone in the next 25 years.
Considering the cultural and technological shift in wearable technology, the
proposed technology may enhance individual health and wellbeing in the built
environment. In addition, the proposed technology may provide a recording of the
user's lighting exposures and activity-rest patterns as well as visualizing the
degree of circadian entrainment and disruption to enhance awareness of living
conditions and health. This proposed connected support technology may ultimately
result in improving quality of life and health, and reducing healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a connected support technology by applying Deep Learning to circadian parameters
obtained from personal circadian monitoring for tailoring indoor lighting
conditions according to individual needs and desires. In contrast to existing
technologies that have a narrow focus on evaluating the biological effects of
light on human health with limited intelligence capabilities, the proposed
technology is a holistic solution to enable reliable and real-time assessment of
stimulus affecting the human circadian system. By utilizing a low-cost and
portable spectrometer and a mHealth application, the technology is designed to
monitor several health indicators such as personal light exposure, body
temperature, motor activity, and body position, simultaneously. The proposed
device is equipped with wireless communication that allows it to connect with a
cloud-based web service for storing the collected data in real-time. The data
are processed locally on the cloud-based web server by assessing the non-visual
effects of light on circadian regulation and long-term health to be visualized
on a mHealth app. Providing continuous information by long-term measurement of
the (micro)environment around the individuals may mitigate user discomfort and
energy consumption, and also may bring health and wellbeing to occupants in
existing buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.