* 2147156
* Stereoselective glycosylation via H-bond-mediated aglycone delivery
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Alexei Demchenko, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,995.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Alexei Demchenko. Professor Demchenko is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Missouri - St.
Louis. Professor Demchenko's research group is developing new methods for
accomplishing reactions that hook two sugar molecules together. These reactions,
called glycosylations, are essentially for assembling the types of carbohydrate
structures that are prevalent in a wide range of biological processes and
applications of the glycolsylation reactions being developed range from
therapeutic to diagnostic strategies. Key to the effort is work both better
understand and further develop a unique reaction pathway that was discovered by
the Demchenko group during the previous funding period. This discovery is
enabling the construction on the bond connecting the two sugars in a highly
selective manner. The project lies at the interface of organic, carbohydrate,
and mechanistic chemistry, and it is well suited for the education of scientists
at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is investigating both mechanistic and practical aspects of the H-bond-mediated
Aglycone Delivery (HAD) reaction pathway discovered by the PI's group. The goal
of the work is to completely control the stereoselectivity of the glycosylation.
With this in mind, two phenomena are being investigated. In the first, two
previously developed methods, bromine-promoted glycosylation and HAD reaction
are being combined in a manner that affords higher stereoselectivity for both
alpha- and beta-glycosylation. In the second, conformational switches are being
developed as handles for enhancing the utility of the HAD reaction. These
endeavors are strategically advancing the field of glycosciences by offering new
synthetic capabilities for obtaining challenging glycans and glycoconjugates
with better stereocontrol and higher yields. The developed methods are serving
to improve the synthesis of key targets from mammalian glycomes and microbial
glycans with potential application as therapeutic agents or diagnostic
platforms. Successful completion of the proposed research is not only advancing
the field of glycosylation, but is also making contributions to the larger
chemical, biological, and medical sciences. Integral to the success of this
program is the active participation of undergraduate and graduate students who
receive solid training in research methods and work to solve synthetic important
synthetic challenges. The vigorous training and strong publication and
presentation records that students are gaining in the PI's laboratory is
preparing them for leading positions in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.