* 2147498
* Role of Coupled Amino Acids in the Mechanisms of Enzyme Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 810,678.00

This project develops concepts that will improve our understanding of how
enzymes work. Enzymes are natureâ€™s catalysts that make chemical reactions happen
under mild conditions. The same reactions on a laboratory bench or industrial
reactor might require high temperature and/or strong acid or strong base. Yet
enzymes in every living system enable reactions to happen at ambient
temperature, or body temperature, and neutral conditions. This project will
provide valuable new information into how enzymes achieve this feat and, in
turn, inform the field of enzyme engineering. The goal is to build a knowledge
base that will enable the design of enzymes that can catalyze industrial
chemical reactions with less energy consumption and fewer by-products than
conventional processes. Several dozen students, in research laboratories and
classrooms, will be trained in computational and experimental techniques, a
training vital to the high-tech economy of the region and U.S. competitiveness
in the global economy. The project will include students from underserved
communities. All methods and programs developed, including all code and data
generated will be made freely available to the community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To achieve catalytic properties comparable to those of natural
enzymes, engineered enzymes must incorporate the same kinds of electrostatic,
chemical, and dynamic properties that occur in natural enzymes. This project
combines theory, computation, and biochemical experiments to achieve three aims.
First, a retrospective study will be performed of the pathways of evolved,
designed enzymes to establish which properties are developing, as catalytic
capabilities increase from the initial designs to the most recent, most
effective catalysts. The human enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI) is an
enzyme for which experimental results already exist to show that several of its
amino acids, including some not in direct contact with the reacting molecules,
participate in the catalytic process. PGI will be analyzed in detail to
determine how each of these amino acids helps catalysis. Finally, starting with
an enzyme of unknown function from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mt) with weak
isomerase activity but high structural similarity to the highly active enzyme
ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas putida, computational engineering will be
used to increase isomerase activity in the Mt enzyme and the activity of the
engineered Variants will be measured through direct biochemical
assay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division and
the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry (CHE)
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.