* 2147098
* RUI: Development of New Green-Chemical Catalysts Based on Rieske Dioxygenase Scaffolds Through Directed Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Jordan Froese, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2025
* USD 366,434.00

Enzymes could reduce the environmental impact of processes. A class of enzymes
found in soil bacteria enables them to thrive in petroleum-contaminated
environments. Previously uncharacterized dioxygenases will be the focus of the
project. Evolving these enzymes to expand the breadth of molecules on which they
operate is a key objective, and they will be screened for the ability to degrade
pollutants and synthesize valuable chemical intermediates. This project will
also provide contemporary education and training experiences for undergraduate
and master’s level students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rieske dioxygenases have
frequently been utilized in organic synthesis and bioremediation. Applications
are restricted by limited substrate ranges and strict product selectivity.
Directed molecular evolution will generate new Rieske dioxygenases exhibiting:
1) expanded reactivity for aromatic compounds and 2) expanded substrate range
and increased reactivity in the dihydroxylation of alkyl olefins. Enzyme
engineering will follow a “design-test-build-learn” cycle, wherein large Rieske
dioxygenase variant libraries will be produced using both rational engineering
and random mutagenesis strategies and will be screened for enhanced activity
using a “substrate multiplexing” approach. Potential contributions of this
research include A) new, sustainable catalysts with valuable applications in
organic synthesis and bioremediation; B) the first reliable, enzymatic
alternative to chemical methods for performing the asymmetric dihydroxylation of
alkyl olefins; and C) development of a blueprint for the successful engineering
of Rieske dioxygenases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.