* 2147814
* I-Corps:  Scalable quantum hardware for use in quantum computers and quantum communication industries
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Patrick Vora, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of hybrid semiconductor-superconductor structures essential for
developing future nano-devices to form the backbone of quantum technologies
including quantum computers, communication networks, and cryptography
applications. These efforts may accelerate practical and commercial applications
of quantum computing in material discovery, biology, pharma, logistics,
optimization, cybersecurity, finance, and chemistry. For example, adequately
scaled quantum computing may allow much faster development of vaccines by
simulating the complicated biological processes involved in vaccine development.
Achieving the promise of the second quantum revolution requires new tools and
methods to address the scalability challenge in quantum computers. By solving
this problem, quantum computers may reach their true computational power. The
proposed effort seeks to address this key need by focusing on combining an
integrated hardware solution with materials-focused technology to create a
solution that may be used in quantum computers and quantum communication
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of hybrid nanodevices used in the generation of entangled photons
through materials research combined with a compact and highly integrable
hardware interface for control and measurement of qubits. This effort may help
to solve one of the biggest challenges in quantum computers - scalability. More
specifically, the proximity effects in two-dimensional materials with a focus on
the superconductor-semiconductor interface is explored. The intended application
of this approach is in the creation of high-purity, on-demand entangled photon
sources for quantum information technology. This work adds a new dimension to
existing efforts in studying proximity correlations by exploring interactions
between Cooper-pairs and excitons across the van der Waals interface in a new
class of materials system. This capability is combined with scalable control and
measurement hardware that may provide a foundation for solving significant
challenges of quantum computing and quantum
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.