* 2147605
* Elucidating Molecular Design Principles for Copolymer Membranes with Solute-Tailored Selectivity for the Separations of Rare Earth Elements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alexander Dowling, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2025
* USD 475,172.00

Rare-earth elements (REEs) are essential components in modern electronic devices
and green energy technologies. For example, high flux magnets that contain REEs
are critical to the operation of hard drives, wind turbines, and electric
motors. Identifying methods to separate REEs from domestic ore deposits or
recycle them from outdated electronics is critical to maintaining a reliable
supply of these materials. The solvent extraction processes currently used to
isolate these resources consume large amounts of chemical reagents and energy
while producing large volumes of wastewaters. As such, traditional REE
separation processes are difficult to implement sustainably. Membrane
separations have demonstrated significant advantages in sustainability and
energy efficiency in numerous other applications. To translate this paradigm to
REE separations, membranes capable of distinguishing between REE ions are
needed. However, REE ions have comparable sizes and the same charge when
dissolved in solution, which makes them challenging to separate. This
multidisciplinary project integrates recent advances in the fields of membrane
science, polymer chemistry, and data science to address fundamental scientific
questions related to the interfacial and thermodynamic phenomena that allow for
the selective transport of REEs across polymer membranes. Systematic,
experimental studies will be conducted to describe how membrane nanostructure,
surface chemistry, and REE transport mechanisms are related. The fundamental
knowledge to be gained has broad implications for the molecular engineering of
selective membranes that address other critical separation challenges needed to
ensure the well-being and prosperity of the American people. For example, by
changing the membrane nanostructure and chemistry, molecular transport
mechanisms can be tailored to enable the purification of therapeutic medicines
or the treatment of drinking water. This project also helps revolutionize the
separation science landscape of the U.S. by training the next cohort of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this proposal is to engineer novel membrane systems capable of
separating REEs sustainably. Currently, there is no clear understanding of the
interfacial and thermodynamic phenomena underlying the transport mechanisms that
are capable of fractionating REE ions. Addressing this critical knowledge gap
necessitates identifying the nanostructural and chemical control factors that
govern the ability of membranes to permeate target solutes based on chemical
identity. As such, the following specific aims will be pursued to establish
quantitative structure-property relationships for the phenomena underlying
solute-tailored transport mechanisms. (1) Fabricate and characterize copolymer
membranes that are amenable to post-synthetic functionalization. This versatile
materials platform offers orthogonal control over membrane nanostructure and
chemistry such that a diverse array of interfacial and thermodynamic phenomena
can be interrogated. (2) Develop a statistical learning framework to navigate
the vast molecular design space associated with copolymer materials efficiently.
Model-based design of experiments (MBDOE) and dynamic diafiltration experiments
are proposed to identify the dominant interfacial phenomena up to 100 times
faster than Edisonian searches. (3) Utilize statistical learning to guide the
development of structure-property relationships for selective transport
mechanisms in copolymer membranes. This research program presents an opportunity
to make significant progress toward elucidating the critical relationships for
membranes capable of transporting target solutes based on chemical, rather than
steric, factors, having applications well beyond REE separations. Moreover, the
proposed work offers a new, high-throughput paradigm to characterize membranes
using dynamic experiments and MBDOE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.