* 2147117
* IUCRC Phase II University of Louisville: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EVSTS)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Glen Prater, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2027
* USD 198,318.00

University of Louisville (UL) is part of a multi-institution Industry University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable
Transportation Systems (EVSTS) that supports the U.S. automotive industry’s
effort to meet demanding federal regulations governing vehicle fuel economy and
emissions, and society’s expectations for improved sustainability. Achieving
environmental sustainability is a generational problem that represents one of
the most critical technological challenge of our time. Electricity generation
(31%) and transportation (27%) are the largest contributors to U.S. greenhouse
gas emissions. Wheeled ground vehicles, in turn, generate most of the
transportation emissions and have an increasing impact on emissions from
electricity generation. Solutions must address vehicle sustainability without
unduly disrupting an industry that is central to the nation’s economic health
and its citizens’ lifestyles. The EVSTS Center engages the automotive industry’s
critical stakeholders - vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers,
fleet operators, ground transportation infrastructure providers, and state /
local governments - in yielding transformational improvements in the energy
efficiency and environmental sustainability of ground vehicles. Scope of the
work encompasses passenger cars, trucks, and motorized non-road equipment, as
well as vehicle-level technologies and transportation system infrastructure,
reflecting the complexity and global nature of the automotive and ground
transportation industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EVSTS center leverages
collaborations among corporate, government, and academic partners to conduct and
disseminate industry-relevant research on technologies and tools that facilitate
the design, manufacture, deployment, and operation of energy efficient,
environmentally sustainable ground vehicles. Research is conducted in five
technical focus areas: 1) electrified vehicle powertrains, 2) conventional
powertrains and alternative fuels, 3) non-powertrain vehicle systems
optimization, 4) efficient / sustainable autonomous vehicles, and 5)
transportation systems and infrastructure. Specifically, UL’s site research
focus is on realizing sustainable ground vehicles. Site-specific topic areas are
include 1) advancement and modernizing of batteries for extending
lifetime/durability/safety, 2) vehicle/battery optimization using data-driven
machine learning, and 3) development of new and lightweight materials for cost-
reduction and fuel efficiency. Thermal management, analysis of battery
degradation, and development of high safety solid-state batteries are the main
priorities in the UL site regarding improving the energy source of electric
vehicles. Additional research efforts are directed at predictive maintenance and
diagnosis using machine learning, intelligent motor control, and optimal design
of human-vehicle interface to increase vehicle efficiency and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.