* 2147594
* EAGER: CAS: Metal Mediated Perfluoroalkyl Halide Activation towards Functional Group Interconversion and Coordination Polymerization of Fluoroalkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Alexandru Asandei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 296,513.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Alexandru D. Asandei of the University of
Connecticut is developing new approaches to the synthesis of fluorinated
polymers. Unlike conventional plastics, the typically nonflammable fluorinated
polymers display not only high chemical and thermal resistance, but also very
important electronic properties which render them indispensable in building and
construction, automotive, aeronautics and aerospace industrial applications.
This research will focus on developing efficient synthetic methodology to
prepare fluorinated polymers with different architectures and functionalities.
This project will provide training and education to undergraduate and graduate
students in synthetic polymer chemistry, and development of educational material
for distance-learning programs offered by the University of Connecticut to
industry professionals. Outreach activities will focus on involvement of
minority and female high school students in research and will be accomplished
via collaborations with high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorinated
alkenes are among the most challenging monomers for controlled radical or
coordination polymerizations. This is due to their low inherent reactivity, the
low activity of their polymeric chain ends and especially to the lack of
appropriate chemistry for such reactions, including initiators and catalysts.
Thus, the synthesis, characterization and applications of complex fluorinated
architectures lag far behind those derived from nonfluorinated monomers. This
research will focus on the development of novel fluorine chemistry to overcome
these deficiencies. Transition metal catalysts will be developed and utilized to
interconvert inert perfluorinated alkyl halides to ones more susceptible to
homolytic or heterolytic cleavage in the initiation as well as in the control of
radical or ionic polymerizations of fluoromonomers. The studies will include
detailed mechanistic investigations of the catalytic cycle aiming at correlating
reaction parameters (strength of fluorinated alkyl-pseudohalogen bond, monomer,
metal, ligand, solvent and temperature) with polymerization kinetics. This
research aims to provide novel polymers with unique properties as well as
potential applications in the re/upcycling of polluting perfluoroalkyl
substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.