* 2147903
* Collaborative Research: Population Dynamics in Random Environments: Theory and Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexandru Hening, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 85,829.00

This project will formulate and analyze a general mathematical framework to
facilitate understanding the persistence and extinction of species affected by
random environmental fluctuations. Global climate change models predict
increasing temporal variability in temperature, precipitation and storms in the
next century. Random environmental fluctuations have been shown to drive
populations extinct, promote persistence, change genetic diversity, and modify
the spread of infectious diseases. It is therefore urgent to develop tools for
understanding the effects of random temporal fluctuations in environmental
conditions on species. The PIs will develop mathematical theory, in conjunction
with analytical and numerical approximation methods, to help theoretical
ecologists pinpoint how environmental fluctuations affect the long-term dynamics
of ecological communities. In collaboration with the Gore lab at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology the PIs will test theoretical results by comparison with
microbial ecology experiments. The investigators plan to involve high school and
undergraduate students in projects allowing them to develop programming skills
and diversify their mathematical and ecological knowledge. For outreach, the
investigators will organize seminars and conferences and promote the
participation of women and members of traditionally underrepresented minorities
within the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will investigate
continuous and discrete time models of interacting populations that experience
random temporal environmental variations. In the continuous time setting the
research will focus on Piecewise Deterministic Markov Processes - processes that
switch between different systems of ordinary differential equations at random
times. In the discrete time setting stochastic difference equations will be
analyzed. New methods for checking when species persist and converge to their
invariant probability measures (which describe the 'random equilibria' of
subcommunities of species) will be developed, and conditions under which species
go extinct exponentially fast determined. Since all theoretical models are
merely approximations of natural systems, the PIs will study how the
persistence/extinction results change under small, density-dependent,
perturbations of the model parameters. The extinction/persistence criteria will
involve Lyapunov exponents, which usually cannot be computed explicitly. In
order to resolve this issue analytical and numerical approximation methods for
estimating the Lyapunov exponents will be developed. Finally, together with the
Gore lab at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the PIs will run experiments
in order to see how analytical results qualitatively compare with multi-species
microbial systems under environmental fluctuations. This project is jointly
funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology Program the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.