* 2147723
* GEOTRACES GP-17 OCE: Measurement of 7Be as a Tracer of Upper Ocean Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Stephens, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2025
* USD 276,070.00

The International GEOTRACES Program was established to identify processes and
quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and their
isotopes in the ocean as these chemical species play important roles as
nutrients, as tracers of current and past oceanographic processes, and as
contaminants derived from human activity. This is a proposal to make
measurements of one such species (the radioactive isotope Beryllium-7) in the
water column and on aerosols during the US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE section of the
South Pacific and Southern Oceans. Beryllium-7 is a tracer that, because of its
half-life (53.3 days), allows the study of processes such as biological
production, nutrient regeneration, and atmospheric deposition, which occur over
seasonal time scales and shallow depths (&lt;200m). The data will be used to
derive important biogeochemical rate information pertinent to interpreting
sources and transformations of the extensive suite of trace elements and
isotopes that will be measured during the expedition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will measure beryllium-7 in the surface waters and in the lower
atmosphere to provide estimates of the atmospheric input of relevant trace
elements and isotopes. The atmospheric input into the global ocean is an
important budgetary component of numerous chemical species, but there is little-
to-no data from this region. Determination of the atmospheric input and its
variability will allow observation of the oceanic response to this flux along
the cruise track. The water column measurements of beryllium-7 will be used as a
tracer of physical processes, such as mixing and upwelling, which redistribute
biologically active species. The rate of oxygen utilization (OUR) within the
upper thermocline will also be determined by water column measurements of
beryllium-7 coupled with hydrographic data and observed oxygen distributions.
Accurate characterization of this process within 200m of the euphotic zone,
where carbon utilization is most intense, has been difficult owing to
limitations of other available techniques which are characterized by multiyear
to decadal timescales that likely miss the rapid organic matter remineralization
occurring along shallow isopycnal surfaces. The seasonal timescale of
beryllium-7 will allow for estimation of OUR within the shallow water just
beneath the euphotic zone, where the most significant remineralization occurs.
This research will support undergraduate researchers in a minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.