* 2147193
* Collaborative Research: Research: Stigma of mental health conditions in engineering and its relationship with help-seeking attitudes of undergraduates and early professionals
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Matilde Sanchez-Pena, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2025
* USD 258,054.00

The last decade has seen a rise in the mental health needs of college students,
with an increasing prevalence of Mental Health Conditions (MHCs) such as
depression, panic disorders, and generalized anxiety among many others. Stigma,
a strong feeling of disapproval, of MHCs is a society-wide issue that tends to
conflict with help-seeking attitudes of those having MHCs. Engineering is known
as a demanding field, where a culture of high stress and endurance is often
promoted, with specific challenges to socialization, especially for members of
marginalized groups. These factors tend to be linked to the onset and
persistence of MHCs. Nevertheless, it is known that while engineering students
do not have a higher prevalence of MHCs, those that have them are less prone to
seek help than those in other professional areas. This project will explore
elements of the engineering culture that may reinforce stigmatized views of
MHCs, therefore limiting the ability of students and early professionals to seek
help when they need it. This study will explore the experiences of students and
early professionals to understand elements of the engineering culture that
influence their internalized stigma, interest to learn about MHCs, and ability
to help others. The project team will pay attention to students' interactions
with other actors such as faculty and administrators to explore how the beliefs
about MHCs are perpetuated in engineering education spaces. This study has the
potential to bring valuable insights into professional cultures and how they
interact with the prevalence and management of MHCs, such as key dynamics,
contexts, and interactions that might promote negative views of
MHCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify elements of
engineering culture that influence the stigma of MHCs and consequently affect
the help-seeking attitudes of students and early professionals. This will be
achieved through a three-year longitudinal sequential mixed methods study. Each
year the relationship between the stigma of MHCs and help-seeking attitudes will
be measured quantitatively through a survey with established instruments. The
results of the first-year survey will be analyzed under the principles of
maximum variability to inform our longitudinal multi-case study that will use
thematic and narrative analyses. The longitudinal quantitative analysis will
examine the evolution of the considered relationships through the years of the
participants’ engineering training and transition to professional life, and how
they are moderated by their characteristics, perceptions of engineering culture,
engineering identity, and sense of belonging. This longitudinal approach will
explore the important transition point where engineering students leave academic
spaces to engage in their first professional experiences and its impact on their
mental well being. The research design will also enable the study of how the
outlook of students without MHCs evolves through time. Since MHCs can develop at
any point in life and many elements of college life, including those specific to
engineering training, have been linked to poor mental health outcomes, the
result of this project have the potential to identify elements from learning and
practicing engineering that could contribute to the onset of MHCs. Project
results will contribute to advancing equity and inclusion in engineering through
the comprehensive description of the challenges experienced by students and
early professionals with MHCs. Since engineering students and professionals with
other marginalized identities in engineering are more likely to experience MHCs,
project results will have the potential to illustrate the specific challenges
navigated by such groups. A partnership with the National Alliance of Mental
Illness (NAMI) will enable a national reach of audiences in and out universities
that will be supported through some of their established
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.