* 2147908
* CRII: III: Disciplinary Knowledge Guided Big Spatial Structured Models for Geoscience Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Zhe Jiang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 107,801.00

The goal of this project is to investigate novel computational techniques for
disciplinary knowledge guided data science methods in geoscience applications.
The field of data science has achieved tremendous success over the last decade,
not only in business but also in science and engineering. The data-driven
approach has been recognized as the "fourth paradigm" of scientific discovery
(after experimental, theoretical, and computational simulation). However, when
solving interdisciplinary problems, a purely data-driven approach often faces a
significant gap in lacking interpretability and consistency with existing
theories and knowledge in the discipline, as shown by the famous Google Flue
Trend example. The proposed project aims to fill the gap by utilizing
disciplinary knowledge to guide data-driven models to enhance interpretability,
consistency, as well as prediction accuracy. Specifically, the team will study
the problem in the context of spatial structured models for geoscience
applications. The team will investigate the utilization of disciplinary
knowledge in constructing novel spatial dependency structure and explore
efficient algorithms for model learning and inference. Proposed approaches will
be validated with interdisciplinary applications in hydrology. The project, if
successful, will contribute towards the next generation water resource
management for the U.S. in the 21st century. Proposed research can not only
improve the situational awareness for disaster response agencies but also
enhance the flood forecasting capabilities of the National Water Model. Proposed
algorithms will be implemented into open source tools that will enhance the
research infrastructure for geoscience communities. Educational activities
include curriculum development, mentoring a broad group of high school students
in data science seminars at Alabama Computer Science Camps, as well as year-long
project for a selected number of high school students for regional Science Fair
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to result in the
following computer science innovations. First, a novel spatial structured model
called hidden Markov topography tree (HMTT) will be investigated, which
generalizes existing hidden Markov models from total order sequences to partial
order poly-trees. Compared with existing spatial structured models (e.g., Markov
random field, spatial autoregressive regression) that captures dependency based
on spatial proximity, HMTT can potentially reduce the impacts of noise and large
obstacles in sample features via more complex structural constraints from
disciplinary knowledge in hydrology (e.g., flow directions). Second, efficient
computational algorithms to construct topography tree from a large number of
locations will be explored. Finally, the team will leverage the poly-tree
structure in the hidden class layer, and explore computational pruning to reduce
the number of backtracking in existing dynamic programming method for class
inference. The idea of integrating disciplinary knowledge (e.g., structural
constraints) with data-driven methods can potentially transform data science
research by enhancing model interpretability and
consistency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.