* 2147597
* SG: Uncovering the contributions of albinism to the evolution of the Mexican cavefish
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Johanna Kowalko, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 38,419.00

When different organisms live in similar environments, the same traits can
evolve in multiple, independent populations. One fascinating example of this is
the reduction or loss of pigmentation in many different cave organisms. Despite
how common this pattern is in wild populations, why cave organisms lose
pigmentation is not well understood. This research will study the role of
pigmentation loss in the evolution of Mexican cavefish. To do so, the project
will examine the relationship between pigmentation, levels of neurotransmitters
in the brain, and behavioral changes that may be beneficial to animals living
underground. The broader impacts of this project take advantage of the cavefish
system to increase access to science education. Teachers will work with the
researchers to develop new units on cavefish biology to take back to their
classrooms. Additionally, the researchers will create an undergraduate class
that will allow students to get authentic research experiences. Finally,
undergraduates and graduate students will be hired to participate in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the effects of
pigmentation-reducing mutations on behavioral traits. Evidence suggests that
mutations in the oca2 gene underlie albinism. Additionally, the mutations may
impact levels of sleep-regulating neurotransmitters, raising the possibility
that albinism is beneficial by reducing sleep time and promoting foraging in the
nutrient-poor cave environment. To test this hypothesis, the research team will
focus on A. mexicanus. Some advantages of this system include the existence of
multiple, independently evolved cave populations and the ability to hybridize
cave and surface fish. Specifically, this project has three aims. First, the
researchers will measure levels of three specific neurotransmitters (dopamine,
epinephrine, norepinephrine) in multiple populations of fish. Those populations
include: 1) surface fish, 2) albino (oca2-mutant), 3) non-albino cavefish, and
4) oca2-mutant surface fish. Measuring neurotransmitter levels in the different
fish populations will allow the researchers to determine if enhanced
neurotransmitter levels are a general property of cavefish with reduced
pigmentation. For the second aim, sleep will be measured in wild-type and
oca2-mutant surface fish to determine the role of oca2 in a potentially fitness-
related trait. Finally, the researchers will generate hybrids by crossing
individuals from cave populations and surface populations. Sleep, pigmentation
and neurotransmitter levels will be measured in these hybrid fish to determine
the genetic relationship between these traits. Thus, this project will provide
new insight into the role of albinism in a cave environment. Further, it will
shed light on fundamental principles underlying evolution in response to
colonization of a novel environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.