* 2147483
* Marangoni condensation of binary refrigerant mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Patricia Weisensee, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 362,471.00

Every year, trillions of kilowatt-hours of energy are lost as waste heat. In
times of severe climate change, becoming carbon-neutral within the next few
decades will necessitate the more efficient use of resources, including power
generation from low-grade heat sources or more efficient air conditioning and
refrigeration systems. In all of these applications the low rates of heat
transfer during condensation of the working fluids, mainly refrigerants, limit
the overall system efficiency and increase the size and cost of the condenser
units. The poor thermal performance stems from the low surface tension of these
non-aqueous working fluids, which causes them to condense as a film, creating a
thermal resistance between the vapor and the condenser coils. One possible
solution to overcome this challenge lies in the use of dilute refrigerant
mixtures, which – due to a unique temperature-dependence of mixture properties –
are able to increase heat transfer rates dramatically by inducing instabilities
that lead to the formation of individual droplets. This project aims to explore
the underlying fundamentals and limits of this so-called “Marangoni
condensation” and demonstrate significant enhancement in condensation heat
transfer rates. Furthermore, this project will foster awareness of the role of
thermal-fluid sciences in combating climate change and help overcome barriers
for women and underrepresented minorities entering the field of engineering via
outreach programs at a local middle school and summer research internships for
talented high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an integrated
experimental and modeling approach, this project seeks to answer two main
questions: (1) What are the critical parameters for reliable Marangoni
condensation, and how do instabilities and droplet growth depend on these
parameters? and (2) Can we artificially trigger instabilities and droplet
formation for low-surface tension fluids, such as non-aqueous refrigerant
mixtures? To answer these questions, a new experimental setup specifically aimed
at characterizing condensation of refrigerant mixtures, which combines state-of-
the-art high-speed interference microscopy with high-speed infrared thermography
and traditional probe-based heat transfer measurements, will be developed.
Scaling analysis and a perturbation approach to the mass, momentum, energy, and
species conservation equations, along with the Nusselt theory for film-wise
condensation will complement the experiments to create a physics-based model to
predict the occurrence of Marangoni condensation for a given pair of working
fluids and thermal operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.