* 2147284
* Collaborative Research: Digital Archives and Indigenous Afterlives of Scientific Objects
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Rosanna Dent, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 302,085.00

At a moment when universities, museums, and archives are grappling with
questions of how to responsibly manage and care for scientific collections
created under unequal power dynamics, this project explores the role of digital
access in understanding these histories, redressing associated harms, and
envisioning new and more equitable forms of research for groups that have been
marginalized. Through the collaborative construction of a digital archive, this
project responds to requests from Indigenous communities for the return of
scientific materials such as photographs, audio recordings, and publications
that document their lives and communities. It explores the potential of digital
infrastructures to enable communities’ control of materials that document them,
according to their norms for sharing and protecting knowledge. Analysis of the
ways participants experience and see themselves in relation to scientific
research will help future researchers better respond to subjects’ and
communities’ priorities. This project will provide resources, training, and a
model for undergraduate and graduate students to pursue research in the social
and natural sciences. It will contribute to broader initiatives that engage
scientists, data repositories, and archival materials to democratize access and
engagement in scholarly work while maintaining respect for Indigenous and local
knowledge systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on methodological insights from
Indigenous studies that prioritize reciprocal foundations of knowledge, this
project will develop a methodology to effectively examine asymmetries in
knowledge production, helping scholars learn how to incorporate reciprocity and
care into their work. Using data collected through community consultation, semi-
structured interviews, and ethnography of the construction and use of the
digital archive, this research will offer theoretical insights into: (1) The
potentials and pitfalls of re-using already-collected materials; (2) How
approaches to archives and collections that reconfigure power dynamics and
permit community-based reinterpretation can result in new knowledge about
history and science; (3) How digital returns of scientific materials can
contribute to community-defined research and inform human sciences research with
Indigenous communities more broadly. In addition to science and technology
studies scholars and historians of science, this project will be of interest to
librarians, archivists, museum professionals, and others dedicated to privacy
and justice in the collection and use of human data. Findings will inform
research design across a wide range of fields in the humanities, social
sciences, and natural sciences, as well as policy and practice related to human
subject’s research regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.