* 2147792
* Plasmon-induced Triplet Energy Transfer (PITET) for Photon Upconversion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ming Tang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 565,042.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Chemistry Division is supporting Dr. Ming Lee Tang at the University of
California Riverside (UCR) to study the energy transfer process of plasmonic
systems. Plasmonics refers to light-induced oscillation of loosely bound
electrons in metals. This research is important for catalysis, imaging, and
energy conversion applications. Minuscule metal particles with dimensions on the
order of nanometers have been treasured historically for their beauty in stained
glass windows. The vivid colors in stained glass arise from the strong
absorption and scattering of light due to plasmons supported by the metal
nanoparticles. Dr. Tang’s team is conducting fundamental research that addresses
that seeks to efficiently transfer the energy stored as plasmons in metal
nanoparticles to neighboring chemical molecules. The research aims to provide
mechanisms to prevent the system from unwanted energy loss through rapid
scattering of light or dissipation of energy as heat. Such advances are
essential for the development of metal nanoparticles for intended applications
in photocatalysis and in solar cells. The team designs and synthesizes various
nanomaterial architectures. Plasmons tightly confined within the nanoscale metal
architectures are then characterized to tune the system to perform useful work
upon light activation. This research also has broader impacts of engaging the
general public in the Inland Empire program in Southern California. This
outreach program includes interactive demonstrations and science activities at
local elementary schools and pre-schools that are led by undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ming Lee Tang’s team at UCR is
investigating plasmon-induced triplet energy transfer. The goal is to use light
captured by metal nano-antennas for photon upconversion, a process of converting
low energy photons from incoherent sources such as the sun to useful high energy
photons. Novel light-absorbing nanostructures based on noble metals in this
research can absorb near-infrared photons to produce violet photon emissions
from neighboring anthracene- and perylene-based chromophores. Specifically,
silver nanoprisms and gold nanorods with their localized surface plasmon
resonance tuned between 1.5 and 1.8 eV are expected to be resonant with the
lowest excited triplet states of the chromophores, so as to photosensitize the
molecular triplet states across an oxide barrier. Steady-state photon
upconversion measurements will be used to quantify the efficiency of plasmon-
induced triplet energy transfer. Time resolved photoluminescence and transient
absorption measurements provide independent measurements of the yield and rate
of the triplet energy transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.