* 2147333
* DDRIG: Language of scientific uncertainty and risk in food safety and environmental science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Katherine Hale, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 19,750.00

This project looks at government reports of food safety and environmental risk
to compare discussions of risk and uncertainty. The reports studied will cover
potential hazards to the public health. Using two decades of scientific policy
reports the project will analyze different expressions of uncertainty within
science communications. The analysis of regulatory documents will help protect
the public when speaking of risks and uncertainty. The project will be of
interest to scientists, policy makers, and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assemble a dataset of sentences
containing expressions of uncertainty within scientific reports published by
regulatory agencies. It will do a comparative analysis of uncertainty expression
within hazard-specific risk assessments commissioned by federal agencies. The
researchers will develop a machine learning natural language processing (NLP)
model to assist the human-supervised coding of documents published in the last
two decades. The coding will focus on expressions by a taxonomy of specific
forms of uncertainty. This project will yield longitudinal cases for comparison
across two policy contexts. The quantitative comparative analysis component of
the project will illustrate the interaction of knowledge formation and
uncertainty expression within the epistemic cultures of governmental food safety
science. The project will use the NLP system’s capabilities to detect
uncertainties expressed around hazards in environmental risk assessment. The
project’s findings will inform discussions of the suitability and risks of using
emerging machine learning technologies for content analysis in the social
sciences. This project will produce a human-verified dataset of scientists’
uncertainties around hazards that bear on the public’s health. By using
governmental risk assessments which are openly published, the resulting database
of uncertainty expressions can also be published online and made available to
the public at large. This will allow interested or concerned citizen to examine
how experts’ questions around the various risks to their health, stemming from
their food or their environment, have changed over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.