* 2147567
* RUI: The Ancestral Modulation Hypothesis: Predicting Hormonal Regulation Of Sex-Biased Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Susan Renn, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 321,072.00

This award funds research on the evolutionary and biological basis of physical
and behavioral traits that are biased toward male expression or female
expression. Understanding the multi-level processes that produce such traits
will help explain the diversity of traits that are observed across individuals
and species. This project will investigate genetic levels, molecular levels, and
physiological levels that contribute to sex-biased traits. By understanding each
level, the work will address a general framework for understanding how these
processes evolve. In common discourse, description of the vast diversity of
traits associated primarily with females or primarily with males is often
compromised in the effort to illustrate general biological concepts. Part of
this award will produce educational outreach materials to emphasize the full
spectrum of natural trait variation across individuals and species. Multiple
educational levels will be targeted through outreach to K-12, undergraduate
introductory courses, and a Master’s level course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will address the biological control of physical and behavioral
traits that are biased toward male expression or female expression. The work
will occur at five different levels of biological organization: global hormone
levels, metabolic enzyme levels for converting hormones at the cellular level,
hormone receptor levels at the cellular level, the distribution of genomic
binding sites for receptors, and the transcriptional response. Two genera of
fishes will be used that include evolutionary transitions of phenotype from
males to females or vice-versa. Using the evolutionary history of the traits for
predictive power, the research will test whether the biological control
mechanisms use different pathways based on the ancestral condition of the
phenotype. The prediction is that novel traits will use existing mating-type
biased pathways while evolutionarily transitioned traits will modify pathways
that are typically present in the opposite mating-type. By bridging proximate
and ultimate mechanisms, the tested model provides a framework for exploring
additional mechanisms for bias and further nuanced phenotypes to better
understand the assorted mating-type biased traits in the natural world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms
and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.