* 2147840
* Cultivating Networks and Innovative Scholarship in Law and Courts, June 2022
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Alyx Mark, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,961.00

In spite of efforts by both professional associations and other groups concerned
about the diversity of the subfield, women and minorities are underrepresented
among the scholars who study law and courts. We know that women scholars within
the law and courts field, as compared to their male counterparts, face barriers
to tenure and promotion due to disparities in resources for research, heavier
teaching loads and service expectations, and a lack of parity in placement of
law and courts-focused articles in top disciplinary and subfield journals. The
effects of these barriers are amplified for those women scholars who are black,
indigenous, or from another minority group. This project—a workshop and
mentoring community—will serve as one targeted effort to improve representation
in the law and courts field. In addition to serving as a space for junior women
and nonbinary scholars to gather and receive feedback on their research, the
workshop aims to facilitate connections between junior scholars and senior
mentors in the field. Further, this workshop will invite undergraduate and
graduate researchers (those pre-Ph.D.) to take part in the professional
development sessions. The workshop thus serves a three-fold purpose: it aids in
rectifying the “leaky pipeline” problem for women and non-binary people, assists
law and courts scholars in gaining acceptance in the top journals, and
facilitates collaborative projects by bringing detached communities together.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide a novel forum for cutting edge
research on law and courts by junior women scholars to be shared with and
reviewed by leading scholars in the field, thus advancing knowledge across a
variety of topics within the subfield. This project grows out of a successful
pilot effort conducted over the past year where the researchers: (1) identified
members of the community of junior women in law and courts through a widely
distributed online survey, (2) developed a series of online peer-to-peer writing
groups, and (3) engaged in outreach efforts to decrease the invisibility of
research by members of the writing groups and other junior women scholars. The
in-person workshop will continue these efforts by bringing together a community
of junior women scholars and will augment the pilot efforts by engaging a group
of leading women scholars in the subfield for professional development and
networking. The workshop will be held in June 2022. Participants will be
selected through a multi-stage, competitive process which will evaluate the
suitability of their projects for the workshop and will also take into account
the global diversity goals of the workshop cohort. At the one-and-a-half-day
workshop, scholars will receive feedback on their work from peers and senior
scholars and will also participate in professional development and networking
panels. Workshop participants’ progress will be tracked and promoted through the
PIs’ outreach channels. It is thus the aim of the proposed workshop and ongoing
peer and senior mentoring to assist junior scholars in producing and publishing
high-quality research in order to achieve professional success, both at their
institutions and in the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.