* 2147703
* Collaborative Research: Sub-Voxel Molecular Patterning of Actuators and Photonic Structures in 3-Dimensional Free-Forms
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2025
* USD 270,000.00

This grant supports research into the 3D printing of macroscopic polymeric
structures with an engineered molecular order that can be defined at the sub-
micrometer-scale. The molecularly engineered structures with unusual optical and
mechanical properties in easily printed structures with arbitrary form factors
could improve many application areas. These properties include structural color
that can change in response to the surrounding environment and the ability to
create artificial muscles that generate mechanical work from an ambient
stimulus. Control of the molecular structure and composition in printable
materials is the key enabler of these functionalities. Fundamental research
advances can enable soft robots that integrate actuators and sensors within a 3D
printed structure. The ability to self-sense actuation and optically report
deformation state allows for the development of new control strategies in soft
robots. This will be key to their potential applications in future medical
devices for minimally invasive surgery and industrial applications that require
manipulation of fragile objects. This research will also result in training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students who will be exposed to
emerging concepts in manufacturing with active soft matter. Outreach initiatives
targeted at the K-12 levels will prioritize inclusion of traditionally
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will control the
interplay between surface anchoring, magnetically-mediated alignment, and chiral
self-assembly of liquid crystal monomers in a stereolithographic printing
system. The effect of the monomerâ€™s structure and composition on the chiral
nematic order in 3D printed voxels will be understood as a function of the
printing parameters. Process-structure relationships will be used to voxelate
the blueprinted microstructure both in-plane and through-thickness in freeform
geometries. Fundamental limits on the resolution at which the molecular
patterning can be enforced will be explored. This will be used to inform the
space of optical and mechanical properties, as well as their sensitivity to an
applied stimulus. Ultimately, this study envisions 3D printed structures that
are capable of morphing and self-reporting state to an observer via a coupling
of the mechanical responses to the optical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.