* 2147375
* FAI: A novel paradigm for fairness-aware deep learning models on data streams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 392,993.00

Massive amounts of information are transferred constantly between different
domains in the form of data streams. Social networks, blogs, online businesses,
and sensors all generate immense data streams. Such data streams are received in
patterns that change over time. While this data can be assigned to specific
categories, objects and events, their distribution is not constant. These
categories are subject to distribution shifts. These distribution shifts are
often due to the changes in the underlying environmental, geographical,
economic, and cultural contexts. For example, the risks levels in loan
applications have been subject to distribution shifts during the COVID-19
pandemic. This is because loan risks are based on factors associated to the
applicants, such as employment status and income. Such factors are usually
relatively stable, but have changed rapidly due to the economic impact of the
pandemic. As a result, existing loan recommendation systems need to be adapted
to limited examples. This project will develop open software to help users
evaluate online fairness-in algorithms, mitigate potential biases, and examine
utility-fairness trade-offs. It will implement two real-world applications:
online crime event recognition from video data and online purchase behavior
prediction from click-stream data. To amplify the impact of this project in
research and education, this project will leverage STEM programs for students
with diverse backgrounds, gender and race/ethnicity. This project includes
activities including seminars, workshops, short courses, and research projects
for students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a new and
innovative paradigm for designing, implementing, and evaluating online fairness-
aware Deep Learning (DL) models. Such models would be used for classification
tasks in noisy and non-stationary data streams. This project will focus on five
areas. First, the project will explore how to ensure a variety of fairness
principles are incorporated in a DL model in online and non-stationary settings.
The project will also look at how to identify a neural network architecture that
will reflect the causal structure and be adaptive to distribution shifts. The
project also looks at how the DL model will learn global initialization of
primal parameters (associated with model accuracy) and dual parameters
(associated with model fairness). Finally, the project looks at how to make
online learning algorithms robust to uncertainties in model estimation of
fairness and how to, ultimately, interpret the fairness of an online DL model.
By bridging the areas of neural architecture search, online meta-learning, and
fairness-aware deep learning techniques, this project advances state-of-the-art
research in Fairness in AI. This project will offer the following innovations:
(1) disentangle underlying sensitive and non-sensitive causal variables from raw
features via causal representation learning; (2) identify adaptive architectures
for data streams via differential architecture search; (3) learn effective
initializations for both primal and dual model parameters in an online-within-
online manner; (4) develop robust versions of the algorithms to deal with
uncertainties in model fairness and tasks, and (5) identify the training
examples and latent causal variables responsible for model adaption using local
and global interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.