* 2147089
* DDRIG: An Historical Study of Science and Scientific Culture
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 14,207.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant supports a study in the
history of science that focuses on the development of science and scientific
culture in the immediate aftermath of the Scientific Revolution. Up through the
19th century, science was not a uniform discipline or practice—there were many
ways to investigate and engage with nature, not all of which are considered
within the ambit of modern science today, but which nevertheless shaped the
objectives and practices of modern science. By broadening the conception of what
science is and how it developed, this project investigates the scientific
activities that were carried out at non-traditional sites, including monastic
communities, trade transshipment ports, and manufacturing complexes. By studying
these sites alongside more familiar institutions, such as scientific academies,
this project widens the category of scientific activities to include pre-
industrial processes and technologies and lays the essential preconditions for
the development of a scientific culture. In doing so, it re-evaluates the
relationship between theory and practice in science and considers the
relationship of religion and a material conception of nature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through archival research on the life and scholarship of
natural philosopher, polymath, and popularizer of science Mikhail Vasilyevich
Lomonosov (1711-1765), this project examines three central questions: (1) what
stimulated the rapid growth of science in the 18th century? (2) How should
science be characterized in the 18th century, and who were its legitimate and
extra-legitimate practitioners? (3) How were scientific methods and scientific
authority codified, presented, and normalized in everyday discourse? Lomonosov’s
life forms a lens through which the full history of science comes into sharper
focus. Additionally, this study reveals Lomonosov’s efforts to create a science-
literate public and cultivate trust in science and scientific authority. This
account thus helps to historicize the promotion of scientific trust today. The
results of this project will be shared through publications in scholarly and
popular venues as well as through teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.