* 2147361
* FAI: AI Algorithms for Fair Auctions, Pricing, and Marketing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shipra Agrawal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 392,993.00

This project develops algorithms for making fair decisions in AI-mediated
auctions, pricing, and marketing, thus advancing national prosperity and
economic welfare. The deployment of AI systems in business settings has thrived
due to direct access to consumer data, the capability to implement
personalization, and the ability to run algorithms in real-time. For example,
advertisements users see are personalized since advertisers are willing to bid
more in ad display auctions to reach users with particular demographic features.
Pricing decisions on ride-sharing platforms or interest rates on loans are
customized to the consumer's characteristics in order to maximize profit.
Marketing campaigns on social media platforms target users based on the ability
to predict who they will be able to influence in their social network.
Unfortunately, these applications exhibit discrimination. Discriminatory
targeting in housing and job ad auctions, discriminatory pricing for loans and
ride-hailing services, and disparate treatment of social network users by
marketing campaigns to exclude certain protected groups have been exposed. This
project will develop theoretical frameworks and AI algorithms that ensure
consumers from protected groups are not harmfully discriminated against in these
settings. The new algorithms will facilitate fair conduct of business in these
applications. The project also supports conferences that bring together
practitioners, policymakers, and academics to discuss the integration of fair AI
algorithms into law and practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops
novel theoretical frameworks to analyze algorithms according to both fairness
and business objectives for three canonical business domains: auctions, pricing,
and marketing. The approach considers three aspects of the decision-making
pipeline. First, the project aims to understand the new types of criteria
required to ensure fair auctions, pricing, and marketing, and designs novel
algorithms that can incorporate these fairness criteria in real-world large-
scale systems. Second, for each of these business contexts, the project
considers how data can and should be collected in order to induce fair outcomes
in the downstream decision-making task. Thirdly, the project considers how
incorporating fairness measures, or failing to do so, can positively or
negatively affect firms and consumers in the long-term, particularly in the
presence of competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.