* 2147276
* FAI: Toward Fair Decision Making and Resource Allocation with Application to AI-Assisted Graduate Admission and Degree Completion
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 01/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

Machine learning systems have become prominent in many applications in everyday
life, such as healthcare, finance, hiring, and education. These systems are
intended to improve upon human decision-making by finding patterns in massive
amounts of data, beyond what can be intuited by humans. However, it has been
demonstrated that these systems learn and propagate similar biases present in
human decision-making. This project aims to develop general theory and
techniques on fairness in AI, with applications to improving retention and
graduation rates of under-represented groups in STEM graduate programs. Recent
research has shown that simply focusing on admission rates is not sufficient to
improve graduation rates. This project is envisioned to go beyond designing
"fair classifiers" such as fair graduate admission that satisfy a static
fairness notion in a single moment in time, and designs AI systems that make
decisions over a period of time with the goal of ensuring overall long-term fair
outcomes at the completion of a process. The use of data-driven AI solutions can
allow the detection of patterns missed by humans, to empower targeted
intervention and fair resource allocation over the course of an extended period
of time. The research from this project will contribute to reducing bias in the
admissions process and improving completion rates in graduate programs as well
as fair decision-making in general applications of machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on machine learning
algorithms for resource allocation, which can be used at various points
throughout a process such as in education. The team will propose new notions of
fairness and show the applicability of those notions to settings in which
limited resources, such as acceptance to the program, faculty mentoring,
professional development, and paid assistantships or fellowships, are allocated
to students fairly. The proposed research will also go beyond fairness in task-
specific supervised learning settings and investigate fairness in unsupervised
learning that guarantees to learn fair representations or generative models for
multiple downstream tasks. The team will address the practical problems that
arise due to uncongenial data in real-world sequential decision-making systems,
including distribution shifts between training and test, imbalanced data, and
missing sensitive attributes. This proposal contains a comprehensive plan to
incorporate its research into education at high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, as well as plans for within- and cross-disciplinary
dissemination of research results, outreach, and other synergistic
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.