* 2147559
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Stability of Multi-Component Lipid Vesicles in Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Vivek Narsimhan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2024
* USD 222,917.00

Vesicles are sub-cellular compartments consisting of sacs of fluid enclosed by a
lipid bilayer membrane. They play a key role in several cellular processes such
as molecular trafficking. Synthetic vesicles are often used in industrial
applications such as drug delivery and personal care products. For example,
small vesicles (lipid nanoparticles) with mixed-composition membranes have been
used to enhance delivery of mRNA vaccines across cell boundaries. Most vesicles
of practical importance consist of a bilayer with multiple lipid components
and/or proteins that exist either in a well-mixed fluid state or with phase-
separated domains enriched in protein. This complex phase behavior plays a major
role in concentrating proteins for signaling and membrane budding. However,
little is known about how this phase behavior is affected when vesicles are
suspended in a flow in physiological situations or in manufacturing processes.
Flow-induced deformation affects the phase transitions of such systems due to
changes in membrane tension and energetics of lipid rearrangement. This work
will provide the first quantitative study of how flow-induced tension alters the
thermodynamics and kinetics of lipid domain formation for multicomponent
membranes. Results from the project will reveal how vesicle composition affects
membrane deformation and breakup in flow, which is becoming increasingly
important for manufacturing vesicles in a controlled, high-throughput fashion
for biomedical applications including mRNA
vaccines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments and boundary element simulations will
be used to study the behavior of multicomponent vesicles under precisely defined
flows. By directly visualizing vesicles with well controlled compositions inside
a microfluidic device known as a Stokes trap, this study will explore how
external flow alters the kinetics and thermodynamics of phase separation in
multicomponent membranes, and in turn, how these behaviors affect vesicle shape
and conformation. Both simulations and experiments will quantify flow
instabilities in which thin tethers pull out from vesicle membranes, in addition
to providing a clear understanding of how phase separation alters the critical
conditions for such instabilities. The simulations will in particular provide
quantitative information on how flow-induced deformation, de-mixing, and
membrane bending timescales compete to determine the non-uniform stretching of
vesicles and the extrusion of tethers. The research team will create events for
the Cena y Ciencias program (“Supper and Science”) at Illinois, which brings K-5
students and their families to a monthly science night at local elementary
schools to learn about soft materials such as polymers, biomaterials, and
organic electronics. At Purdue, science demonstrations will be performed about
complex fluids and interfacial science for local elementary school students.
These events will be repurposed as exhibits for a local science museum that has
20,000 annual visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.