* 2147716
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intersections of worldviews in the co-management of environmental resources
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Mark Moritz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 31,484.00

Millions of people worldwide are dependent on biodiverse marine habitats. These
important habitats are subject to a variety of stresses and are thus
experiencing severe degradation. How should they be managed? What frameworks are
most effective in managing their use and in their conservation? This doctoral
dissertation research examines the political dynamics of collaborative co-
management of natural resources and the intersections of indigenous and other
frameworks in driving management strategies. The research tests theories in
cultural anthropology to understand how different relationships with the
environment are expressed and resolved in dynamic ecological settings. It trains
a doctoral dissertation student in theory and methods in scientific cultural
anthropology and the work will be disseminated broadly to academic and non-
academic audiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research pursues three
objectives: 1) to compare understandings of human-environment relationality
among indigenous and non-indigenous conservationists; 2) to examine how
different understandings of relationality are incorporated into co-management
policy and practice; and 3) to examine associated political dynamics. It uses
ethnographic methods, including semi-structured interviews, participant
observation, and social-ecological network analysis. The work develops a new
analytical framework for incorporating different worldviews into the analysis of
human-environment relationships. The work also contributes to our knowledge of
how different perspectives and objectives are prioritized in co-management
arrangements, ultimately informing the development of policy that engages local
communities in sustainable resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.