* 2148014
* CAREER - Transforming Science Teaching and Learning through Empowering Teachers and Students as Climate Justice Action Researchers and Change Agents
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Tammie Visintainer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 02/28/2027
* USD 222,957.00

This project supports school-based science teachers and students in conducting
community-based science research on the causes and effects of extreme heat/urban
islands in racially and ethnically diverse communities. Doing research of this
nature in schools is important, as studentsâ€™ opportunities to engage in
community-based science research usually occur in out-of-school contexts.
Teachers will participate in professional learning experiences that support
their development of content knowledge, scientific research practices, and
critical pedagogies needed to design and implement research projects in their
classroom. Students will identify locally-relevant issues related to this
phenomenon, conduct investigations to explore the issue, share their findings
through arts-based community narratives, and advocate for change. This project
will broaden access to empowering youth-centered approaches that support
learning and identity construction in science. Educational activities
culminating from this research include the development a graduate-level course
focused on climate justice action research as well as curricular materials for
K-12 classroom use by teachers and students. This CAREER award is funded by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project is also supported by the Racial Equity in STEM Education
program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports projects that advance racial
equity in STEM education and workforce development through research and
practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative and quantitative measures will be
employed to study how 40 teachers across 4 cohorts develop their capacity to
lead students in studying urban heat islands, an issue germane to their
community. The research will explore how student participation in this action
research shapes learning and identity construction in science. This project
presents a novel approach to school-based science teaching and learning by
empowering teachers and students as climate action researchers and change
agents. The research will aid in the development of a hub for justice-centered
science education and will also yield school-based materials and professional
development activities that examine the interwoven nature of climate justice and
racial justice. Further, project findings will support a transformative science
teacher education model that empowers teachers as designers, equity advocates,
and leaders in community-engaged science research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in
part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.