* 2148202
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Evolution of Political Campaign Advertisements over the Last Century
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Brian Lai, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 05/31/2025
* USD 82,608.00

Television advertising, a primary way voters hear about candidates absent a
media filter, is ubiquitous with political campaigns in the United States.
Drawing on an existing but underutilized data set of over 100,000 political ads,
this project examines the evolution of political advertising, especially as it
pertains to issue advocacy and consonance. The project makes significant
methodological and substantive contributions to several fields including
political, information, and library sciences, and enhances our understanding of
the way ads shape and inform political behavior. It also promotes
interdisciplinary graduate and undergraduate education at research and teaching
institutions in the emerging sub-field of automated audiovisual analysis,
including students and scholars from traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a collection of over 100,000
political ads from 1912-2018, the Julian P. Kanter Political Commercial
Collection archived at the University of Oklahoma, to develop (1) an automated
system to identify issue (and other politically relevant) content from ad image,
audio, and text and (2) a state-of-the-art user interface that gives researchers
the ability to query, interact with and view videos, and also output data for
analysis. The project uses the data to examine the evolution of political
advertising, testing models of horizontal and vertical diffusion of issues. The
projectâ€™s tools and data, introduced at an interdisciplinary workshop, are
widely available to scholars across a number of disciplines who study American
politics, campaigns, political communication and public
opinion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is jointly funded by
the Accountable Institutions and Behavior (AIB) program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.