* 2148787
* Dissertations Symposium in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO) XXVIII and XXIX
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Karen Selph, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2025
* USD 165,488.00

Dissertations Symposium in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO) XXVIII and
XXIX&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the 28th Dissertations
Symposium in Chemical Oceanography (DISCO XXVIII), which will be organized by
faculty from the University of Hawaii’s Department of Oceanography. This
biennial conference, initiated in 1978, provides recent and soon-to-be PhD
graduates in chemical oceanography with an opportunity to present results from
their dissertation research and participate in professional development
activities. The symposium fosters collaboration and networking amongst the
attendees as well as with attendees of the Physical Oceanography Dissertation
Symposium (PODS), which runs concurrently. In addition, participants receive
information about proposal preparation, research cruise planning, and how to
request ship time through the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS). The DISCO XXVIII symposium will be held in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii
in October 2022. Participants for this symposium will be selected from early
career scientists who have received a doctoral degree in ocean chemistry in the
year preceding the symposium or who are expected to graduate within one year
following the meeting. The symposium will be advertised widely, including
outreach to under-represented groups and the wide variety of institutions that
train students in chemical oceanography. Symposium attendees will be selected by
the meeting organizers, the guest speaker, and agency personnel from the
National Science Foundation and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration. Similar to past meetings, the DISCO XXVII symposium is expected
to advance the professional development of early career chemical oceanographers,
both U.S. and international, and will build a cohort of scientists able to
provide the research capacity and future leadership needed in ocean
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.