* 2148982
* The Dynamics of Unique Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ian Krajbich, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 197,869.00

The fields of decision neuroscience and neuroeconomics have seen a dramatic
increase in the use of computational modeling to advance understanding of
people’s predispositions and choice biases. The models use choice-process data
consisting of responses such as eye movements during the evaluation of the
options, hand movements during the execution of the choice, and the time that it
takes to decide. However, there remains substantial skepticism about the
usefulness of these methods for understanding decisions such as buying cars or
choosing retirement funds. A major obstacle has been that complex or high-stakes
decisions are very challenging to study with these methods. This project
develops novel ways to circumvent such problems and collects choice-process data
online and applies computational modeling to one-shot decisions. This enables
modeling of the choice process in online experiments while leveraging large
online samples to eliminate the need for designs with repeated decisions. This
research focuses on the extent to which behavior is driven by biases that people
bring to their decisions. Additionally, the project investigates how people
interpret and manipulate decision times in strategic interactions. Overall, this
work extends the scope of computational modeling of choice process data to
complex, high-stakes decisions, with decision times much longer than typically
studied. The education and outreach parts of the project entail many activities
such as research internships, summer institutes, and conference workshops
designed to introduce students of all ages, and those with disabilities, to the
exciting decision science research and motivate their pursuit of careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails research, education, and
outreach activities focused on dynamic modeling of the choice process in
complex, high-stakes human decisions. The research features an innovative
approach to study one-shot (“unique”) decisions, by combining novel
computational modeling approaches with choice-process data (eye tracking, mouse
tracking, and response times) collected from online experiments, existing market
data, and field experiments. The project develops and tests techniques for
single-trial computational modeling and online eye-tracking; develops a mapping
between features of computer mouse trajectories and choice-process components;
and studies choice processes using data from online markets. The project also
implements a multi-faceted broader impacts plan aimed at increasing interest,
participation, literacy, and retention of students in the decision sciences and
STEM more broadly. The project offers summer research internships to
undergraduate students with disabilities; hands-on decision-science activities
for high-school students in the Ohio Supercomputer Center’s (OSC) summer
institute; an annual visit to the Ohio State experimental economics lab for
inner-city middle-school students; an annual workshop on “choice-process data”
for experimental economists; and development of a toolbox for online webcam-
based eye-tracking technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.