* 2148186
* RINGS: Collaborative Inference and Learning between Edge Swarms and the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Sandeep Chinchali, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 567,522.00

Fleets of networked robots are being deployed on our roads, in factories, and in
hospitals for tasks like self-driving, manufacturing, and nurse assistance.
These robots are struggling to process growing volumes of rich sensory data and
deploy compute-and-power hungry machine learning (ML) models. However, robots
have an opportunity to augment their intelligence by querying remote compute
resources over next-generation (NextG) wireless networks. However, researchers
lack algorithms to balance the accuracy benefits of networked computation with
systems costs of delay, power, congestion, and load on remote compute servers.
As such, this project is innovating algorithms based on decision theory (i.e., a
mathematical cost-benefit analysis) to decide how to balance on-robot and remote
computation while only communicating task-relevant, privacy-preserving data. The
resulting communication-efficient algorithms aim to improve the resiliency of
NextG networks by minimizing congestion. The projectâ€™s outreach efforts aim to
enable K-12 students to prototype on remote robots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops algorithms to enable joint inference, learning, and control
between robotic swarms and the cloud while resiliently adapting to variations in
network connectivity and compute availability. Today's robotic control
algorithms are largely informed by onboard sensors and a local physical state,
but effectively ignore the time-variant state of a network. As such, they often
make sub-optimal decisions on when to query the cloud, often leading to
excessive congestion. Accordingly, this project develops decision-theoretic
algorithms that flexibly trade-off the accuracy benefits of the cloud with
systems costs. First, the project develops collaborative inference algorithms
that decide whether, and where, to offload computation using a Markov Decision
Process. Then, it develops statistical data sampling algorithms that estimate
the marginal gain of uploading new training data with labeling and training
costs. The final thrust learns compressed representations of video and LiDAR
that optimize for ML inference accuracy, as opposed to conventional human
perception metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.