* 2148224
* RINGS: Scalable and Resilient Networked Learning Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 413,733.00

Next-generation learning systems enabling applications ranging from healthcare,
energy, banking, augmented/virtual reality and car/robot navigation, will be
privacy-driven, distributed and large-scale, resulting in substantially
increased exposure to network congestion and failures. A typical scenario is one
where a substantial number of entities (clients, organizations, communities
thereof) participate in a learning task; each of these entities owns, has access
to, or generates part of an overall data set which would be impractical or
undesirable to gather at a central location. While the entities benefit from a
collaboration, especially in settings where the amount of local data is
relatively small and thus the ability of an entity to learn a model on its own
is limited, such a collaboration requires major network resources. This research
project centers on developing new, as well as expanding traditional, engineering
principles for the design of resilient and scalable networked learning systems.
To this end, the project investigates interrelated themes spanning the
development of theoretical underpinnings, network architecture, applications and
protocol design. The broader impacts offer advances in education, enhancing
diversity, engaging the community and industry, and disseminating results to a
wider public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will initially focus on Federated
Learning (FL) frameworks and, in Theme 1, study how to achieve resilience to
uncertainty in FL systems experiencing intermittent client availability and
time-varying network capacity. This leads to a novel approach to FL which
effectively "learns how to learn" in an uncertain/resource-constrained
environment. Theme 2 addresses scalability challenges encountered in large-scale
FL by relying on clustering of "exchangeable" clients. This moves from client-
centric to an efficient cluster-centric system management by leveraging
multicast-based estimation/tracking of cluster populations, combined with
probabilistic scheduling of clients in the clusters. This offers new avenues to
scalability and resiliency as well as potential privacy enhancements. Theme 3
builds on ideas from rate-distortion theory and scalable video coding, and
explores the use of scalable/layered (learned) model compression as a basis for
adaptive congestion-aware FL. A key idea here is recognizing that aggressive
compression leads to faster delivery, which motivates the search for a tradeoff
sweet spot where FL performs more updates but with poorer (noisier) models. This
research exemplifies research synergies of ideas from information, queueing and
learning theory towards achieving resilience and adaptability. The project also
pursues the design and use of overlay Data Aggregation Networks which exploit
the aggregative character of model updates via in-network update aggregation and
associated data compression. This can be viewed as the dual of Content Delivery
Network overlays which are a core element managing the cost and performance in
current network infrastructure. Theme 4 recognizes that at the base of FL
applications is client participation and thus brings into focus the joint
incentivization of clients and management of limited resources in uncertain
environments. Overall, the proposed research focuses on new forms of network
intelligence and adaptability, aiming to address scalability through device-to-
edge-to-cloud continuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.