* 2148602
* Collaborative Research: Tracing the Physics of Submesoscale Entrainment and Subduction
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Genevieve Brett, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 89,875.00

This project will investigate the exchange between the well-mixed surface layer
of the ocean and the stratified interior at the so-called submesoscales;
horizontal length scales of hundreds to thousands of meters, where the rotation
of the Earth is still felt but is not the dominant factor like it is at larger
scales. This exchange is widely recognized as one of the primary mechanisms
through which submesoscale processes affect upper ocean variability and
biogeochemistry. However, despite extensive work demonstrating the impacts of
submesoscale entrainment and subduction on diverse topics across the field of
oceanography— including for example the global mixed-layer heat budget, primary
productivity, and the export of carbon to the interior—the essential physical
mechanisms remain incompletely described. In particular, next steps need to
include the impact of the submesoscale interactions between the surface boundary
layer and the interior on large-scale models, as parameterizations of
submesoscale processes explicitly avoid entrainment fluxes. This avoidance
severely underestimates submesoscale impacts on biogeochemistry and climate
(e.g., long-term carbon and heat uptake). Recent work, some from this group,
further indicates that cross-scale interactions between submesoscale flows,
surface gravity waves, and turbulence may also significantly alter the exchange
at the base of the surface mixed layer. However, the balance of several possible
mechanisms for this exchange has not been established. This project will
quantify the effect of these multiscale interactions using new theoretical and
computational tools, resulting in more complete models of submesoscale exchange
between the ocean interior and surface boundary layer. Advances for both
climate-scale and high-resolution Large Eddy Simulation models will be shared
with the science community. New techniques in tracer diagnostics and theory will
be developed, and used to clarify the role of multiscale interactions in
affecting exchange between the boundary layer and interior, providing guidance
towards new approaches in multiscale numerical modeling, parameterization, and
ocean observing. The majority of the funds for this project will go towards
supporting early career scientists: a graduate student, a postdoctoral
researcher, an early career research scientist, and an early career faculty
member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reynolds-averaged numerical simulations (RANS) will
quantify the impact of incorporating entrainment fluxes into a widely utilized
parameterization of submesoscale mixedlayer instability, including the impact of
the improved parameterization on realistic simulations incorporating ocean
biogeochemistry in the Southern Ocean. Large-eddy simulations (LES) will
determine the processes and parameter dependence through which submesoscale
instabilities, surface gravity wave-driven effects such as Langmuir turbulence,
and small-scale three-dimensional turbulence interact to modify entrainment and
subduction of tracers. New insights into these multiscale interactions will be
enabled by recent developments in boundary layer energetics, potential vorticity
dynamics, and techniques for eddy-flux diagnostics developed as part of this
project. These advances will be applied to a set of state-of-the-art large-
domain LES that resolve scales of order 1 m to 10km, providing new benchmarks in
exascale ocean modeling. Together these activities will simulate and quantify
the essential mechanisms of entrainment and subduction at the submesoscale,
their cross-scale interactions, and their accurate interpretation in
observations and representation in numerical models. Community ocean and climate
model improvements will be furthered through inclusion of improved and vetted
representation of entrainment fluxes in two parameterizations, including the
most widely used parameterization of submesoscale mixed-layer instability and a
newer process parameterization. The LES that will be performed will be made
available for immediate community use, providing a valuable new resource
supporting other investigations into submesoscale-Langmuir-turbulence, and
physical-biogeochemical interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.