* 2148517
* Weddell Gyre Mean Circulation and Eddy Statistics from Floats
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Kevin Speer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 413,932.00

The Weddell Gyre is one of the major components of the Southern Ocean
circulation system, linking heat and carbon fluxes in the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current to the continental margins. Water masses entering the Weddell Gyre are
modified as they move in a great circular route around the gyre margin and
change through processes involving air-sea-cryosphere interactions as well as
through ocean eddies that mix properties across the gyre boundaries. Some of the
denser water masses exit the gyre through pathways along the northern boundary,
and ultimately ventilate the global deep ocean as Antarctic Bottom Water. While
in-situ and satellite observations, as well as computer modeling efforts,
provide estimates of the large-scale average flow within the gyre, details of
the smaller-scale, or "mesoscale" eddy flow remain elusive. The proposed
research will quantify mixing due to mesoscale eddies within the Weddell Gyre,
as well as the transport of incoming deep water from the northeast, thought to
be a result of transient eddies. Since the Weddell Gyre produces source water
for about 40% of Antarctic Bottom Water formation, understanding the dynamics in
this region helps to identify causes of documented changes in global bottom
waters. This in turn, will give insight into how climate change is affecting
global oceans, through modification of dense polar waters and Antarctic Bottom
Water characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to track 153
RAFOS-enabled Argo floats in the ice-covered regions of the Weddell Gyre. The
resultant tracks along with all available Argo and earlier float data will be
used to calculate Eulerian and Lagrangian means and eddy statistics for the
Weddell Gyre. The study will link RAFOS tracks with Argo profiles under ice,
allowing one to characterize the importance of eddies in water column
modification at critical ice-edge boundaries and leads. With RAFOS tracks near
the northeastern limit of the gyre, the project will investigate the eddy-driven
processes of incoming Circumpolar Deep Water, to understand better the
mechanisms and volume fluxes involved. Previous work shows that a large fraction
of the mean circulation in the southern and western limits of the gyre, where it
contacts the Antarctic continent, occurs in a narrow boundary layer above the
slope. The research here will integrate this flow structure into a complete
interior and boundary layer mean circulation synthesis. The findings and
products from the proposed work will improve the positioning of Argo profiles in
the polar regions, which would allow for more accurate climatological maps and
derived quantities. Estimates of meso-scale mixing may serve as a foundation for
the development of new parameterization schemes employed in climate models, as
well as local and global ocean circulation models in polar
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.