* 2148271
* RINGS: Resilient mmWave Networks via Distributed In-Surface Computing (mmRISC)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Kaushik Sengupta, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 678,942.00

Wireless networks are undergoing a radical transformation with the aim to
provide the critical information infrastructure for the 21st century and foster
new economic opportunities, innovation and many emerging applications. To
facilitate this, there is a focus on new spectrum in the millimeter-wave
frequency range that has the ability to support ultra-high data rates with low
latency needed for applications in automation, robotics and cyber-physical
systems, smart health, and autonomous vehicles and systems. The spectrum can
also support wireless backhaul links to bridge the last mile connectivity, and
provide broadband wireless access---the importance of which is clearly
highlighted during the Covid-19 pandemic. However, these connectivity links are
prone to physical channel disruptions including blockages and channel
propagation variations, and therefore not resilient. The proposal involves a
multi-disciplinary approach across three different research groups towards
addressing these problems and ensuring resilience and scalability in such
networks. The proposed concept of smart reflecting surfaces aims to enable
dynamic and on-demand control of wireless channels to create favorable
transmission allowing robust wireless connectivity in mobile mmWave WLANs. The
success of this project can enable the next-generation, ubiquitous, and low-cost
mmWave wireless access, including flexible deployment of wireless backhauls
addressing the last-mile connectivity, satellite communication, and intelligent
wireless sensing systems for smart cities and cyber-physical systems. The
project will address the need for developing US-centric capabilities in
semiconductors and wireless technology, through training of students across the
undergraduate and the PhD program in a rigorous multi-disciplinary research
effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, mmRISC, builds Resilient mmWave
Networks via Distributed In-Surface Computing. We investigate mmWave, multi-band
hybrid surfaces with embedded custom-silicon ICs that provide on-surface signal
amplification and computing abilities for multi-user localization, tracking and
ambient sensing. Our proposed surfaces enable resilient and reconfigurable
distributed networks that maintain low latency, energy and spectral efficiency.
We pursue a holistic, cross-system research approach focusing on scalable,
spectrally-agile, low-power, and low-cost hybrid surfaces operable across
multiple mmWave bands with controlled amplification. We will also focus on
embedded computing for on-surface sensing, and resilient network architectures
supporting such smart surfaces allowing capacity optimization. Through cross-
layer design approaches, our proposed work will inform the architecture of NextG
surface-assisted wireless networks for the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.