* 2148534
* Toward Synthetic Neutrophils: De Novo Engineering of Chemotactic Artificial Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2026
* Jian Liu, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,084,604.00

Cell migration is important for many physiological processes and disease
conditions, including angiogenesis, embryonic development, wound healing, immune
defense, cancer metastasis, pathogen infection, and the establishment of neural
circuits. Despite the biological importance of cell migration, relatively little
is known about what is minimally required to allow a cell to move. The goals of
this project are to use an artificial cell-like system to define the minimal
requirements for cell migration and ultimately to be able to control the
movements of cells for applications in medicine and biotechnology. This project
will provide research opportunities for high school students, post-baccalaureate
students and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemotaxis plays a
fundamental role throughout biology ranging from embryonic development to immune
response. Despite its physiological significance and intense research over last
decades, there is still a lack of full understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying cell migratory behaviors. The primary challenge is rooted in the
profound complexity of two signaling modalities: the biochemical reactions that
involve signal transduction and the biomechanical actuations that induce
membrane deformations. By taking a bottom-up approach, the investigators
recently generated an artificial cell made of giant unilamellar vesicles, which
could undergo symmetry breaking upon addition of an external chemical stimulus.
This behavior is characteristic of cell polarization, one of the key events
observed during native chemotaxis. Built on this experimental system and guided
by theoretical modeling, the team aims to identify and assemble a minimal set of
biomolecules inside the vesicles to generate desired types of membrane
deformations as well as motility. Based on the interdisciplinary nature of their
research theme, they will create unique opportunities to promote STEM research
and education for undergraduate and graduate students, particularly minority and
female students. In parallel, they will expand an existing course on synthetic
biology into a new course, “Synthetic and Computational Cell Biology”. This
course will connect diverse communities and raise their awareness of the power
of this interdisciplinary subject in dissecting basic principles of complex
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.