* 2148276
* Collaborative Research: Investigating meso- and submeso-scale variability in air-sea CO2 exchange in the Gulf Stream region with autonomous platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Lora Van Uffelen, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 143,210.00

The Gulf Stream current in the North Atlantic Ocean transports a large amount of
warm water from south to north. Much of this heat is lost to the atmosphere as
cold winds blow over the ocean. This heat loss causes local changes in the
solubility of carbon dioxide in seawater and increases mixing of the upper
ocean. Both of these impacts affect the ocean’s ability to take up carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere. Knowledge of the ocean’s carbon uptake in this
region is important for our ability to understand and predict the global carbon
cycle that determines atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Conditions in the Gulf
Stream region change rapidly and are hard to sample, however. In this project,
investigators will deploy a robotic glider for several weeks to measure
temperature and salinity in the upper 1000 meters of the Gulf Stream region. The
glider will overlap with other robotic vehicles called Saildrones that take
measurements of surface waters and the atmosphere. Together these vehicles will
produce a picture of ocean conditions and carbon uptake that is not possible
with short-term sampling from ships. This project will support an early career
scientist, a postdoctoral scholar, and a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Principal Investigators (PIs)
will deploy one autonomous glider during the late spring-early summer of 2022
that will measure subsurface ocean properties in upper 1000 m of the Gulf Stream
region. This glider will target the waters around three Saildrones that are
deployed in this area through an independent project funded by Google.org.
Uncrewed surface vehicles such as Saildrone autonomously measure surface oceanic
and atmospheric variables at high temporal resolution but generally lack
subsurface observations. The water column data from the glider and the surface
data from the Saildrones will allow the PIs to test the effectiveness of the
synergy of the glider-Saildrone combination as a method to holistically
characterize the ocean variability on the scale of tens of
kilometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.