* 2148984
* Assessing the Effects of Human Activity on the Composition of Tropical Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 06/30/2026
* USD 399,980.00

This project examines human impacts on rain forest ecosystems. Noted for their
biodiversity, the botanical composition of rain forests has potentially been
shaped during extended periods of human occupation by the planting, cutting, and
burning of plants. An alternative possibility is that human activity affects the
composition of rain forests on shorter time scales, including recent periods of
intensive exploitation of forests for rubber and other products. This study
examines these alternatives though a combination of research methods that
includes the analysis of sediment cores from tropical lakes, documentation of
vegetation in forested locations, and surveys of local residents to determine
variation in the uses of local plants. This combination of methods facilitates
analysis of change in forest composition over time, allowing the researchers to
infer when changes occurred and the extent to which human activity resulted in
current patterns. The researchers also collaborate with local ecotourism
organizations to promote greater awareness of human impacts on forested
environments. The project also contributes to the mentorship and training of
multiple students in ecological field methods and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which human activity has modified
tropical rain forests has been a longstanding question among geographers. To
make inferences about human impacts on forests, the researchers examine lake
sediments, which accumulate over thousands of years. The analysis of pollens and
plant parts that have fossilized in these sediments provides insights into
fluctuations in botanical diversity over time. The researchers combine these
findings with data on local ethnobiological knowledge, which permits
retrospective insights into the ways that past human inhabitants may have
curated the forest in beneficial ways. The historical trajectory of tropical
forests is relevant to climate projections given evidence that newer forests
absorb atmospheric carbon at relatively greater rates. Ascertaining the extent
to which forests have been modified on different timescales also provides
insights into the resilience of forests to human activity, including present
impacts on the ecosystems. The project also contributes to conservation in
tropical settings via partnerships with ecotourism organizations that support
conservation efforts. The training of graduate and undergraduate students
contributes to the goals of broadening participation in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.