* 2148293
* RINGS: Building Next Generation Resilient Wireless Systems from  Unsecure Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Farshad Khorrami, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 656,000.00

The design, manufacturing, and deployment of next generation (NextG) cellular
wireless networks (5G and beyond) is increasingly relying on specialized, high-
performance baseband and radio frequency (RF) hardware components, often
supplied by third parties across the globe. The use of these critical of
hardware components sourced from diverse manufacturers introduces formidable
security vulnerabilities into critical network infrastructure. The broad goal of
this project is to develop methods to build resilient and secure NextG wireless
systems from potentially unsecure hardware components. This project focuses on a
particularly important class of attacks called hardware Trojans, where hardware
components supplied by a third party are maliciously altered to launch an attack
from within a network node, such as a cellular base station. Once triggered,
these attacks can degrade or disable service, transmit signals to disrupt other
nodes, or snoop or leak sensitive data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
combines theory in hardware security and communications theory to detect and
mitigate these attacks in four closely related thrusts. Thrust 1 develops
computationally efficient methods to detect the presence of hardware Trojans in
both the baseband and RF. Thrust 2 provides rigorous bounds to estimate the
capacity of undetected hardware attacks and enables a critical optimization of
the power and computation on hardware verification and potential throughput
degradation. Thrust 3 extends these methods to network settings, including
jamming and multi-user attacks. Thrust 4 develops a novel and powerful
evaluation platform to experiment with hardware security methods in both the
baseband and RF in a high throughput millimeter wave software defined radio.The
PIs will disseminate the results and data to the wider community through
workshops. In addition, the PIs teach security and wireless classes at NYU and
will integrate the research and experiments in their classes and class
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.