* 2148916
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Pb Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 02/28/2025
* USD 316,525.00

Although most of the chemical element lead (Pb) found in the ocean is derived
from human emissions to the atmosphere, natural sources of Pb may be important
in remote locations such as the Southern Ocean. Natural sources of Pb are
derived from the Earthâ€™s crust and are delivered to the ocean by glacial erosion
and aerosol inputs. Lead is produced by radioactive decay and has three stable
isotopes that are derived from the decay of uranium and thorium. Thus, distinct
lead isotope ratios are seen in deposits from source rocks of different ages.
These isotope ratios make it possible to distinguish whether pollutant lead in
the ocean is derived from American, Australian, European, and Chinese sources.
Isotope measurements of Pb provide information about temporal changes in the
global transport of pollutants by atmospheric aerosols and the distribution of
contaminants and other elements by ocean circulation and particulate transport.
In this project, water samples will be collected from the South Pacific sector
of the Southern Ocean to help establish the origins of anthropogenic lead in
this ocean region, distinguish it from natural lead from the Antarctic
continent, and understand the dispersal of Pb by ocean circulation. The project
will support one graduate student and one early career postdoctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will be carried out as part of
the GEOTRACES trace element and isotope sampling expedition to the South Pacific
and Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean. The measurement of Pb isotopes during
these expeditions will provide the ability to trace the source, fate, and
transport of other particle-reactive metals in the ocean. Water column, sediment
core top and aerosol samples will be analyzed for the full suite of Pb isotopes
(204, 206, 207, 208) to provide insights into the extent of anthropogenic Pb
contamination in the water column, the relative contribution of different lead
isotopes from the South American continent, significance of hydrothermal Pb
input from Pacific-Antarctic Ridge and whether sediment Pb isotopes reflect
variation in the atmospheric circulation pattern. This work will allow
evaluation of various anthropogenic and natural processes that determine the
global distributions and processes of Pb.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.