* 2148813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Middle Class Participation in the Marketized Eldercare Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* YEORI PARK, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 19,840.00

This doctoral dissertation research project scientifically explores how
behaviors and decisions related to housing and care during retirement are
transforming as the eldercare industry becomes increasingly marketized. Market-
based eldercare has expanded as the size of the aging population continues to
increase, reliance on kin-based networks of care declines, and an expanding
middle class orientation in consumer behavior has driven a preference for
options in eldercare services. In focusing on the behaviors of a cohort first-
generation middle-class retirees, the project aims to understand how older age
experiences have been transformed by a transition to market-based alternatives
and away from kin networks for older age housing and care. In addition to
training a graduate student in methods of scientific data collection and
analysis, it will also provide valuable material for professionals working in
the fields of retirement planning and eldercare management. The project also
broadens the participation of groups historically underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student investigates the extent to which
middle-class identity shapes decisions about eldercare in later life under
conditions of market transformation, through an examination of the experiences
of individuals who opt into privatized eldercare. The researcher will observe
nursing home behaviors, tours, and care practices for older adults who live in a
high-end nursing home. Older adults who can afford high-end nursing homes
identify themselves as middle-class and distinguish themselves from others by
consuming care services and goods including nursing homes. By conducting
ethnographic research including participant observation, semi-structured
interviews and case studies, this research asks how the marketized care
industry, welfare policies, and all the choices and care practices shape the
aging experience of the middle class. This research will further scientific
understanding of the relationship between social class, commercialization, and
eldercare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.