* 2148865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge Resources in the Building of Ecological Restoration Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Fern Thompsett, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 24,624.00

This research project investigates land-based communities and a network of
ecological theorists to analyze the range of strategies that are utilized in
building communities committed to ecological restoration and sustainability. It
specifically asks what knowledge sources these communities draw upon, and how
those knowledge sources are integrated, in ecological restoration efforts. The
project aims to expand understandings of the range of ecological restoration
strategies and knowledge resources that communities marshal in adapting to
environmental change. Findings and data will be disseminated through scholarly
avenues as well as public workshops and through the curation an online archive
of research materials. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the project would enhance scientific understanding
engaging non-academic groups in the process of scientific production and the
scientific method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation focuses on
two groups that are concerned with building communities that are responsive to
the effects of environmental change and engaged in ecological restoration, and
which derive their discourse largely from anthropological theory. The context
provides a unique window into the study of how anthropological citizen science
is translated into ecological restoration efforts. Over the course of twelve
months of fieldwork, the researcher will explore the social structure, decision-
making processes, the external relationships these communities have with
Indigenous communities, and their ecological practices through participant
observation, focus group interviews among a core cohort of participants to
examine collective decision-making practices, and semi-structured interviews and
life histories to understand individual lived experiences. Analytical techniques
include discourse and textual analysis of interview and archival data. The
project would make generalizable contributions to understand the role and
response of non-state sovereign movements to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.