* 2148375
* Collaborative Research:  Lagrangian transport and patchiness of buoyant material in estuarine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Robert Chant, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 292,300.00

Understanding processes that transport material in estuarine systems is central
to fundamental studies of estuarine physics as well as to management practices
in these socioeconomically important and highly anthropogenically impacted
systems. Buoyant material, such as floating debris, marine organisms, oil and
microplastics may be aggregated and trapped within estuaries or dispersed and
discharged to the coastal ocean by these transport processes. Strong convergent
surface flows across the estuary organize buoyant material into laterally narrow
near-surface patches that may extend up to a few kilometers along the estuary.
Local currents that move these patches may substantially differ from tidally and
laterally averaged currents, which are often used to estimate estuarine
transport characteristics. A major objective of this project is to contrast the
transport of material in a frame work that follows the flow, known as the
Lagrangian framework, with one based on a fixed point reference frame, or the
Eulerian framework. Often the Lagrangian trajectories of material differ from
those inferred from the Eulerian mean flows. The classic example stems from
surface waves where the average velocity at a point (Eulerian) will be zero but
a particle oscillating with the wave included flow will have an average velocity
in the direction of wave propagation, due to the Stokes drift or Stokes
velocity. This project will investigate the importance of Stokes transport in
estuaries. The project research hypotheses are: (1) Stokes transport associated
with amplitude and phase structure of tidal flows contribute significantly to
the transport of buoyant material in both the along-channel and cross- channel
directions. (2) Buoyant material organizes in surface patches due to the lateral
estuarine circulations. (3) Patches of buoyant material are fundamentally
transported by spatiotemporally localized currents that vary substantially
across the estuary. (4) The observed spatiotemporal distributions of marine
debris in Delaware Bay are a characteristic signature of Lagrangian estuarine
transport. The project will use both modeling and observations to address
transport of buoyant material in estuaries. This research will help solve
practical real world problems related to marine pollution, gas exchange and
fisheries. The PIs have close working relationships with resource managers and
policy makers with whom they will communicate relevant new understanding. The
project will train graduate and undergraduate students, and both PIs and
students will participate in public outreach events. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine transport of buoyant material in estuaries, specifically
the Delaware Estuary, including its aggregation within estuaries, and the
effects of resulting patchiness of buoyant material on its transport through the
estuary. The hypotheses will be addressed through an integrated research program
that employs original concept models as well as observations and simulations.
Research objectives include: (1) Assess and advance idealized linear and weakly-
nonlinear models of the three-dimensional estuarine circulations to determine
key factors that control secondary circulations, such as bathymetry, tides,
Coriolis force, and baroclinicity. (2) Develop and evaluate a Lagrangian
framework for the estuarine circulation based on the integration of the
idealized models with existing field observations and an asymptotic Stokes drift
analysis to contrast fundamental differences between the Eulerian and Lagrangian
approaches. (3) Conduct and integrate hydrodynamic simulations and field
observations of the Delaware Estuary to understand tidal neap-spring and high-
low river discharge variability. (4) Apply the Lagrangian framework to
simulation and observation results, as well as recent marine debris
observations, to reveal principal Lagrangian transport characteristics and
improved estuarine transport estimates. By exploring and developing a Lagrangian
framework this project would fundamentally advance our understanding of the
physics of estuarine transport processes. This work will transform the current
paradigm of estuarine material transport to include new lateral transport
processes, thereby advancing the current conceptual understanding of buoyant
tracer dynamics in an estuary, and will contribute to solving practical real
world problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.