* 2148720
* Preparing High School Students with Autism for the Future of Remote Software Development Work
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* David Boyer, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,080,688.00

Attracting diverse youth to computer science professions is important to our
national interests and to provide economic opportunity. This project will engage
high school students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in a remote video game
design and software development summer camp. Through teamwork activities,
participating youth will develop and practice communication and collaboration
skills while growing their professional knowledge and skills to prepare them for
potential careers in computer science. To support teaming and social skills
development, the project team will develop a software program, Collaboration
Station, that provides learners with an online, virtual environment for
collaborative programming. Embedding student learning in a virtual summer camp
environment provides participating high schoolers with the opportunity to
develop knowledge and skills for remote work, which is increasingly common in
computer science careers. A distinct feature of this project is its focus on the
attributes that learners with ASD bring to support their preparation for and
interest in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As all project activities
will take place online/remotely, the team will use research methods that attend
to the appropriate and effective use of multimedia recordings and database
evidence of participant engagement in the virtual environment. Employing
primarily qualitative analysis, the team will analyze recordings of camp
activities and use audio transcripts for thematic analysis through iterative,
interpretive passes on the data using open and axial coding. The project’s
design and development process will be guided by a special kind of advisory
board, composed of autistic self-advocates from the community. These project
collaborators will provide essential expertise and experience to inform the
project’s direction, design, and implementation. Outcomes of this project
include a conceptual and operational model for a summer camp experience that
supports students with ASD in the development of their computer science
knowledge and teaming skills. The summer camp model and its outcomes will be
disseminated to academic, educational, and ASD advocacy communities through
academic research and educational technology conferences, a public podcast
series, and a public blog. Anonymized project data will be shared through a web-
based appendix for other researchers’ use. This project is co-funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also co-
funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.