* 2148446
* Physical Oceanography Dissertations Symposium XII and XIII
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Karen Selph, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 172,610.00

This project funds the 12th Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium (PODS)
conference in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii in October 2022. These symposia were
established in 2002 to bring together, for the purposes of scientific discussion
and interactions, recent PhD graduates in physical oceanography who represent
their employing institutions. Once selected to be a participant at these
meetings, these individuals will be required to present their dissertation
research in front of their professional peers and to forge professional
relationships between the participants that will facilitate their future
research and academic careers at their employing institutions. This program is
modeled after the highly successful Dissertations Symposium in Chemical
Oceanography (DISCO) meetings, which were first held in 1978, and is formatted
in a similar manner. It is anticipated that the PODS symposia will be held in
parallel with the DISCO symposia. Support for the DISCO meetings is covered
under a separate grant, but interactions between the two groups are an integral
part of the goals of the proposed PODS symposia. The PODS symposia will produce
a cohort group of early career professionals in the field of physical
oceanography from widely differing backgrounds and geographical origins, serving
to create a peer mentoring group that will last throughout their careers. In
addition, the cross-disciplinary contacts arising from the combination of the
PODS and DISCO meetings will foster future inter-disciplinary understanding and
collaborations, benefitting their employing institutions. Thus, the PODS
participants will be uniquely situated to take advantage of networking between
individuals and groups, which is of great importance to foster advances in
scientific knowledge and preparedness to meet upcoming environmental challenges.
These PODS attendees play a critical role in improving our understanding of
ocean and earth science processes, which provide the scientific framework vital
for developing rational climate-related policies. In addition, as a minority
institution, the University of Hawaii fosters interactions between traditionally
under-represented groups and minorities. Planned meeting activities include
interactions between meeting participants and students, particularly
undergraduates in the Department of Oceanographyâ€™s Global Environmental Sciences
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad international announcement of the PODS
symposia will be made to physical oceanographers working at academic
institutions in both the US and other countries to develop an applicant pool.
From this pool, agency personnel will select invitees. The meeting will consist
of a series of sessions grouped by research subject area that are chaired by
selected invitees and will also include participant-led discussion periods. In
addition to an initial presentation by an invited senior scientist in the field,
there will also be presentations by, and discussion with, agency personnel
explaining funding mechanisms and strategies. Participants will form breakout
groups to discuss current issues in research, as well as obstacles and
opportunities to career paths in the field, then provide feedback to agency
personnel through formal presentations. By bringing the two separate symposia
invitees together in evening discussion sessions revolving around specific
topics, the goal is to broaden the disciplinary expertise of the participants,
promote future collaborations, and to make connections between their research
and the education of future generations of scientists. The funds in this project
will cover meeting venue rentals, audio-visual support costs, as well as
participant support related costs of air travel, hotel accommodation, and
M&amp;IE that are not provided as part of the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.