* 2148429
* STEM-based University Pathway Encouraging Relationships with Chicago High schools in Automation, Robotics and Green Energy
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Maria Zamudio-Mainou, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,349,744.00

This Developing and Testing Innovations project will advance efforts of the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to
better understand and promote practices that increase students' knowledge and
interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers by connecting faculty and
undergraduate students at Illinois State University with students and teachers
at four Chicago-area high schools and four Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)
that serve the communities around them. The project is based on the exploration
of STEM-focused technologies including robotics, solar energy, and electric
vehicles, and aims to serve students from populations that are underrepresented
in STEM fields. Students will meet after school once per week to engage in
informal, hands-on STEM educational activities. During the summers, students
will attend a three-day STEM camp to apply and extend the knowledge they have
gained throughout the year and learn about STEM educational and career pathways
through field trips and guest speakers from STEM industries. Teachers at each of
the high schools will serve as mentors for the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research, guided by the National Research Councilâ€™s
STEM Learning Ecosystem Model, will contribute to the disruption of inequities
that hinder access to STEM career pipelines for participants by serving as a
bridge between informal high school academic experiences, STEM-related higher
education programs, and STEM-related career pathways. The project will recruit
approximately 320 students from the four partner high schools. The project will
use a mixed-method data collection approach including observations, surveys, and
interviews. Utilizing a pre to post methodology, researchers will employ the
Common Instrument Suite (CIS) of surveys, developed and validated by the
Partnerships in Education and Resilience (PEAR) Institute. Survey data will
measure student and teacher's STEM-related attitudes, including STEM engagement,
STEM career knowledge, and STEM identity. This work offers an approach to
support youth in their understanding of the impact that automation, robotics,
and green energy are having on the technology industry and the nature of that
work. Additionally, the work will capture the effects CBO partners have in post-
secondary STEM education and career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.