* 2148583
* RINGS: Provably Robust Machine Learning for Next Generation Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Romit Roy Choudhury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2025
* USD 794,000.00

Next-generation (NextG) networks will be unprecedented in their scale,
diversity, and capabilities. They will connect hundreds of billions of devices
ranging from smartphones to smart sensors. These networks will enable networking
for very diverse devices -- low power Internet-of-things (IoT) devices with
year-long batteries to data hungry virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR) headsets.
Finally, next-generation networks will enable new services through joint
communication and sensing -- e.g., a multi-antenna base station may sense its
environment and share information about pedestrians and cars with autonomous
vehicles. These characteristics will make NextG central to many transformative
applications like digital healthcare, Industry 4.0, autonomous driving, and
telepresence. This proposal will build robust Machine Learning-based frameworks
that deliver new communication and sensing capabilities for NextG networks. The
educational efforts in this proposal will train students to research and work
with cutting edge data-drive wireless systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
will build state-of-the-art Machine Learning frameworks that will be key
enablers for Next-generation (NextG) networks. Specifically, these frameworks
will: (a) create autonomous systems that remove bottlenecks and maximize the
performance benefits of novel hardware capabilities in NextG networks such as
massive antenna arrays, and multiple frequency bands, and (b) extract fine-
grained insights from wireless signals for sensing and imaging of the
surrounding environment. A key focus of this proposal is to build logical
reasoning and formal verification frameworks that provide provable guarantees on
the robustness of these Machine Learning models, so that they are robust to both
environmental and adversarial noise. Such robustness is crucial for successful
adoption of data-driven approaches in production systems, due to the criticality
of NextG infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.