* 2148382
* RINGS: l-RIM: Learning based Resilient Immersive Media-Compression, Delivery, and Interaction
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 608,060.00

Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) has been recognized as a
transformative service for the Next Generation (NextG) network systems, while
wireless supported AR/VR will offer great flexibility and enhanced immersive
experience to users and unleash a plethora of new applications. The primary goal
of this project is to explore innovative technologies in NextG and Artificial
intelligence (AI) to provide a unified media compression, communication, and
computing framework to enable resilient wireless AR/VR. The research agenda
comprises five thrusts. Thrusts 1 and 2 are focused on learning-based immersive
media compression, i.e., developing high-efficiency Light Field and Point Cloud
compression solutions, respectively. The next two thrusts explore the
fundamental concepts and techniques that facilitate wireless AR/VR transmission
and interaction. Thrust 3 shall develop theoretical models and explore the
fundamental performance tradeoffs among compression communication, computation,
and caching for wireless AR/VR considering several NextG communications and
networking technologies. The work in Thrust 4 shall investigate the application
of edge intelligence to develop learning-based algorithms for resilient AR/VR
transmissions. The design of resilient AR/VR will be guided by the model-based
performance analysis developed in Thrust 3. Thrust 5 will integrate the
techniques developed in Thrusts 1-4, and validate their performance with
simulation studies using open-source datasets and experimental studies using an
AR/VR testbed and publicly available wireless and cloud-related
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has a high potential to
achieve great impacts in our research community and society. The wireless
community has been making great efforts on developing learning-based solutions
for the NextG wireless and mobile communication, networking, sensing, and
computing systems. Findings from this project are expected to facilitate
breakthroughs in enabling immersive media applications that require huge amounts
of data to train complex deep learning models. The PIs are committed to
integration of research and education. This project will offer research and
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at the two
collaborating institutions. New training certificate courses will be developed
and research outcomes will be incorporated into a forthcoming textbook by PI
Mao. The several existing outreach programs at the two institutions will be
leveraged to broaden participation from underrepresented groups. Research
outcomes will be disseminated through scholarly publications, a project website,
open-source repositories, as well as workshops and journal special issues to be
organized by the PIs. Industry will also be pursued through the NSF IUCRC Center
for Big Learning at The University of Missouri, Kansas
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.