* 2148723
* Towards two decades of ocean mass and heat transports at 26.5N: Extension of the RAPID-MOCHA Array
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,304,481.00

Climate models suggest that variability of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (AMOC) is linked to sea surface temperature changes on interannual
to multi-decadal time scales that can have far reaching societal impacts.
Additionally, climate models continue to project a substantial weakening of the
AMOC over the next century that could feed back on the climate system through
reduced northward heat transport as well as reduced CO2 uptake in the North
Atlantic. The specific role of the AMOC in the climate system has been difficult
to determine due to a lack of long term measurements of its variability. At the
end of its current phase, the RAPID-MOCHA observing system along 26.5째N will
have provided continuous estimates of the AMOC for just under 19 years, the
longest full-depth, basinwide measurements of oceanic transport currently
available. These observations have provided a critical benchmark for the
evaluation of forced, data-assimilative, and coupled climate models, and have
formed a fundamental building block around which international programs are
being developed to monitor the AMOC throughout the Atlantic basin. This project
will continue the U. S. contribution to RAPID-MOCHA for an additional 42 months,
from January 2023 to June 2026, extending the time series of oceanic mass, heat,
and freshwater transports to 22.3 years. The results from this program will
continue to provide oceanic observations crucial for the assessment and
improvement of forced, data-assimilative, and coupled climate models. The
proposed program continues a successful collaborative effort between the P.I.'s
and investigators from the U.K. National Oceanography Centre, who are submitting
a companion proposal to maintain their part of the observing system for the same
time period through U.K. funding sources. The program also collaborates with
NOAA AOML in their Western Boundary Time Series program, and provides training
for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
contribution to the in-situ observation system includes: (1) Florida Current
monitoring using a submarine cable, calibrated by regular cruises with
hydrographic and velocity measurements, and (2) continuous moored time series
measurements within the Deep Western Boundary Current and Antilles Current
region east of the Bahamas, including hydrographic and velocity sections at
approximately 11-month intervals. The maintenance of the repeat hydrographic
sections will be conducted in collaboration with NOAA which also supports
independently the Florida Current monitoring. U.K. collaborators will provide
support for the eastern basin moorings that complete the 26.5째N trans-basin time
series observing system. Limited new instrumentations on moorings will also be
included to derive ocean bottom pressure gradient on the boundary east of the
Bahamas. The RAPID-MOCHA observations will allow the team to document and
understand the causes and impacts of the AMOC interannual to decadal
variability, to investigate the control of western boundary pressure on
transports, and to link changes observed at 26.5째N to other AMOC indices and
results from on-going AMOC measurement programs around the Atlantic basin. By
quantifying the interannual to decadal variability of the meridional
circulations of mass, heat, and freshwater in the North Atlantic Ocean at
26.5째N, this project will further contribute to the understanding of the
processes leading to changes of sea surface temperature, air-sea fluxes, and
ocean heat and freshwater storage that are integral components of the North
Atlantic regional climate and global climate. The time series so far have shown
a longer-term decline with respect to the early years of the program, the origin
of which---natural variability or response to anthropogenic climate change---is
yet to be determined from longer observations. The AMOC constitutes a relative
rapid conduit between the atmosphere and the deep ocean that is crucial to
continuously observe on climate-relevant temporal scales to understand the
ramifications of anthropogenically-forced climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.