* 2148500
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling connectivity constraints and pathways of Sargassum and the nature of their variability by building on a Maxey-Riley framework for drift modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nathan Putman, LGL ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 197,813.00

Satellite imagery has revealed abundant pelagic Sargassum seaweed in the
Sargasso Sea, the northwestern Gulf of Mexico and, in the last decade, a new
recurrent zonal band, referred to as the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt (GASB),
often extending from the west coast of Africa to the Caribbean Sea. The
magnitude of pelagic Sargassum in the tropical and subtropical Atlantic
represents a new form of coastal hazard with direct impact on the water quality
and living marine resources of the nearshore ecosystem. This project seeks to
develop and implement a physical-biological transport model of Sargassum
responding in a novel manner to the ocean and atmospheric circulations and
changing environmental conditions. The model will account for the combined
effects of ocean currents and wind drag mediated by Sargassum raft inertia,
which will be a function of growth and mortality in response to ambient
temperature and nutrient availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would
use first-principle-based Maxey–Riley framework of fluid mechanics for the study
of inertial particle motion to develop a framework for modeling Sargassum drift.
The investigators have extended and tested this application to investigating the
drift of isolated objects floating at the ocean surface. This foundation, and
further recent theoretical developments, will contribute to building a
mechanistic physical–physiological model formulation for the movement of
Sargassum rafts represented as networks of elastically interacting floating
inertial particles whose configurations change according to a growth model. In
the model, these changes in Sargassum raft size and shape will correspondingly
affect their transport. The required carrying flow to conduct the proposed
Sargassum connectivity investigation will be obtained from reanalysis systems
and a multidata synthesis. The Sargassum transport model will be tested in the
field by satellite tracking Sargassum rafts deployed in the Florida Current.
Laboratory experiments in an air-water flume facility will be carried out to
quantify buoyancy dependent leeway and constrain wave-induced drift effects.
Tools for connectivity analysis and uncertainty quantification will be brought
from ergodic nonlinear dynamics theory including set-oriented methods for
framing asymptotically almost-invariant sets and the transition path theory for
discrete Markov chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.