* 2148672
* Collaborative Research: The Potential Importance of Intracellular Nitrate Cycling in the Nitrogen Cycle in Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Anne Giblin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2025
* USD 313,465.00

Nitrogen is an essential element for life. Thus, knowledge of the rates and
processes that control nitrogen cycling are needed to understand marine
ecosystem dynamics. Nitrogen exists in many chemical forms, and the processes
that convert one form to another are mostly carried out by bacteria. However,
new data suggest that nitrate stored inside the cells of more complex organisms
accounts for a major pool of nitrate in marine sediments. This intracellular
nitrate has not been adequately measured and integrated into an overall
framework of nitrogen cycling. The investigators will address this issue in the
proposed research to better understand and revise nitrogen inventories and flows
in the oceans. This information can be used to increase understanding of
controls on global carbon cycling and climate change feedbacks. One graduate
student will be trained in using tools and techniques to solve complex marine
systems issues, and three undergraduate researchers will participate in the
work. The team will expand the impact of this research by 1) collaborating with
the U. Maine Center for Innovation in Teaching and Learning and the Institute
for Broadening Participation to produce and distribute educational videos about
this research and its implications for the environment; and 2) leading summer
workshops to mentor high school teachers to develop ocean sciences curricula in
partnership with the Gulf of Maine Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key processes that influence nitrogen cycling
in marine sediments are denitrification and anammox, which lead to a net loss of
biologically available nitrogen, and dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium
(DNRA), which diverts nitrate away from denitrification back into the system. It
has traditionally been assumed that these processes are controlled by bacteria
lacking intracellular nitrate and driven by porewater nitrate pools. However,
more recent data indicates that large intracellular nitrate pools are widespread
in marine sediments and that eukaryotic microbes, particularly benthic
foraminifera and diatoms, may be responsible for these pools. The team
hypothesizes that the size and flux rate of this intracellular nitrate pool
needs to be sufficiently accounted for to accurately measure and understand the
nitrogen cycle in marine sediments. Intracellular nitrate presents significant
methodological and conceptual challenges to current understanding of the marine
nitrogen cycle. The investigators propose two objectives: 1) To measure rates of
intracellular nitrate cycling and other major nitrogen cycling pathways in
marine sediments across a depth gradient from photic subtidal to dark
continental shelf sediments in the Gulf of Maine; 2) To further examine controls
on intracellular nitrate cycling by conducting physiological experiments on
different microbial eukaryotic cells isolated from the proposed study sites to
measure their intracellular nitrate pool sizes and cycling rates. They propose a
new strategy using nitrogen-15 labeled nitrate spike experiments to measure the
role that intracellular nitrate plays in overall rates of nitrogen cycling in
marine sediments. Through the proposed work, they aim to develop a model system
to understand and integrate intracellular nitrate cycling into the nitrogen
cycle in marine sediments more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.