* 2148178
* RINGS: Mobility-driven Spectrum-Agile Resilient mmWave Communication Links for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Traffic Management in the Sky
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Kamesh Namuduri, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2025
* USD 635,104.00

As the unmanned aviation industry moves towards Advanced Air Mobility (AAM)
services, air taxis and air ambulances are expected to become a reality in near
future. Handling such a high volume of unmanned air traffic requires innovative
solutions for enhanced situational awareness in the airspace. The US Federal
Aviation Federal Aviation Administration envisions air tracks specifically
reserved for AAM vehicles at altitudes ranging from 500 ft to 2000 ft. Air
tracks cross one another at intersections and vehicles may need to share the
airspace with other manned and unmanned aerial vehicles. This requires
coordination among the vehicles especially during close encounters. Such a
coordination requires highly reliable communication links which serve as a
substitute for traffic signals on the roads. This proposal addresses this key
knowledge gap by investigating strategies for establishing reliable and robust
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication links to support AAM services. The two
institutions leading this research project, the University of North Texas and
the University of New Mexico, are both Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs).
With the teamâ€™s deep commitment towards broadening participation, the
educational initiatives of this project help train the next generation of
leaders including those from under-represented and minority groups, contributing
to the workforce development both at regional and national
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates spectrum-agile millimeter
wave-based tunable beamforming strategies needed for establishing reliable and
robust V2V communications links to support autonomous flight operations in air
corridors along with the supporting radio frequency and mixed signal circuits
and steerable antennas. Important research contributions include: (1)
investigation of air corridor design and analysis, minimum operational
requirements including latency, security, reliability, frequency, and data rates
for V2V communications, (2) investigation of software-defined networking for
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), design of an application layer protocol to
enable a logic network controller to manage the physical layer functions of the
UAVs in unstable wireless networks, (3) investigation into federated learning-
based online trajectory planning to locally adjust the acceleration of a UAV in
a dynamic environment, (4) design of frequency-reuse planning for air corridors
in 3D space and investigation into spectrum sensing based dynamic channel
allocation approaches to maximize network performance, and to ensure reliable
and efficient air corridor traffic management, and (5) design of a phased-array
antenna and beamforming for the directed wireless data transmission using mm-
wave bands, and adaptive beamforming strategies based on the estimated states of
the UAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.