* 2148560
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Underrepresented Student Engagement in STEM through Mentoring and Family Involvement
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jerrod Henderson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 05/31/2027
* USD 739,486.00

This collaborative project is an informal science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) intervention that will uniquely combine partnerships between
STEM and education faculty at the University of Houston (UH) with mentorship
from the participants’ families and UH STEM undergraduate mentors to provide
hands-on STEM experiences to fourth- and fifth-grade Students of Color. The
project aims to increase awareness of and interest in STEM careers as a way to
broaden participation in STEM careers. Key program components will include
weekly hands-on activities that engage the students with technology through the
engineering design process led by undergraduate STEM mentors who also are from
groups underrepresented in STEM careers; the Scientist of the Week, which
exposes students either to a STEM pioneer from underrepresented groups or a
current STEM professional from an industry partner; the math problem of the day,
which is aligned to state standards for fourth and fifth grades; and an end-of-
year interactive STEM fair, during which students demonstrate their knowledge to
larger audiences from their schools and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research questions that will guide this mixed-methods project will include: 1)
What strategies help conceptualize STEM knowledge in a manner that affirms
students' racial identity and cultural ways of knowing? 2) How do students' STEM
identity and awareness of and interest in STEM change over time? 3) How do
families engage in their children’s STEM learning in out-of-school STEM
communities, and 4) how does family participation shape students' interest in
STEM and their STEM identity? Data from interviews, observations, and
questionnaires on Engineering Identity and Career Aspirations will be gathered
and analyzed to study possible changes over time. The project's research will
contribute to the knowledge-base on family engagement in STEM learning and the
STEM identities of racially and ethnically diverse students. Specifically, the
team will build upon their prior research on students' STEM identity and program
implementation by studying students' STEM identity longitudinally, the racial
dimensions of STEM identity, and variability in program implementation across
school sites. This project will also have an explicit focus on broadening
participation in STEM studies and careers among Students of Color. Within two
years, the project will expand to four elementary schools in the Houston region.
During the timeline of this award, the project will directly impact 140 fourth
and fifth grade Students of Color and an additional 50 students and families per
site, per year through the annual interactive STEM fair. This project will also
directly engage 50 racially and ethnically diverse STEM mentors who lead project
activities. A final product of this work will be a program model guided by
principled adaptation that positions the project for large-scale implementation.
This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.