* 2148138
* Industry 4.0 Skills for Manufacturing Technicians: Adjusting Engineering Technology Programs to Respond to Industry Identified Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Marilyn Barger, FLORIDAMAKES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 952,021.00

The manufacturing workspace and the technician workforce that will support that
space in the future is an important issue to deal with today. As Industry 4.0
technologies are integrated into manufacturing facilities around Florida,
manufacturing technicians working in these facilities must prepare to acquire
new skills and knowledge. Also, students must gain these skills prior to
entering the workforce. This project will infuse Industry 4.0 skills within both
Florida's Engineering Technology programs and the manufacturing technician
workforce. The project is leveraging findings from a prior award, Technician
Future of Work Issues Caucus for Florida Community Colleges and Manufacturers.
The Caucus identified Florida-specific technician workforce skills deficiencies
and a statewide collection of Florida manufacturers willing to work on this
problem. The findings and the manufacturers will inform this project to develop
a model for cooperative interactions on Industry 4.0 identified skill needs
between Florida industry, state colleges, FloridaMakes (National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Manufacturing Extensions Partnership) and the
Florida Department of Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal
will be to generate pathways that support future as well as incumbent
technicians in Florida acquiring STEM knowledge related to Industry 4.0 (I 4.0)
technologies. Two college certificates with credit articulation to all twenty-
two Engineering Technology degree programs in Florida will be developed to
support this goal. The first targets students in Florida's Engineering
Technology associate's degree programs to assure they have manufacturer
identified I 4.0 needed skills. The second certificate will be a post-
associate's degree technical certificate that upskills technicians and generates
a pathway to STEM-related 4-year programs at state colleges and universities in
Florida for people looking to continue their education. Project personnel will
work directly with the Florida Department of Education (FLDOE) to meet State
Legislature expectations for Career and Technical Education (CTE) courses
through FLDOE maintained Frameworks. Professional Development activities will
provide faculty additional expertise in I 4.0 technologies as defined during the
project’s duration. It is expected that project outcomes will lead to increased
student access to potential employers in all Florida community college service
regions; active engagement of more Florida manufacturers and manufacturer
organizations in manufacturing career and technical education; increased career
advancement through the project's credit-bearing college certificates for
current manufacturing technicians; broadened manufacturer's access to Florida
State College resident expertise; and increased manufacturer statewide access to
the FloridaMakes network. Upon project completion, the five statewide
organizations involved in the project (FloridaMakes Advanced Manufacturing
Workforce Leadership Council and Board of Directors Technology Committee,
Engineering Technology Statewide Industry Advisory Board, Florida Engineering
Technology Forum, and FLATE) will have crafted duties that allows each to employ
their own resources to execute their part in clarifying and then rectifying
manufacturer identified technician skills
deficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.