* 2148012
* Development of language-related neural networks using multimodal imaging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Richard Aslin, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 747,017.00

One of the enduring questions of developmental neuroscience is how the
functional organization of the brain changes with maturation and experience. The
present proposal focuses on a key behavioral skill acquired by nearly all
children in their first few postnatal years – the ability to understand and
speak their native language. The neural basis of language acquisition will be
studied with a non-invasive neuroimaging technique that will allow researchers
to understand changes in the brain during language learning. Such data in
children has been very difficult to collect with other brain imaging techniques,
because those techniques create loud noises that interfere with spoken language
stimuli and require severe constraints on body and head movement - features that
are especially challenging for children. In conjunction with others, the
investigators in this project have developed a “child-friendly” neuroimaging
approach that will make it possible to study brain signals in widespread neural
networks in the brain during language acquisition in infants and young children.
This will provide a new window into neural dynamics, and brain plasticity and
reorganization during the early years of natural language development as
children learn to speak, read and write. This research will have profound
implications for social, cognitive and educational outcomes of early
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a relatively new
approach to brain imaging called fNIRS (functional near-infrared spectroscopy)
and validate the technique with a more established brain imaging technique -
fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging). This combination of fMRI and fNIRS
is crucial to achieve the best possible interpretation of brain signals across a
wide age range (from 6 months to 7 years) as language-related networks develop.
After enhanced characterization and validation of fNIRS signals, the researchers
will then obtain repeated longitudinal measures of individual infants during a
period of rapid language development using fNIRS alone. Children will be
presented with engaging, naturalistic movies with linguistic content that is
systematically varied to study how the language areas and networks of the brain
are activated across development. Measurements of language development using
parental report and in-home audio recordings will be conducted in parallel with
the brain imaging measures. The overall goal is to provide a detailed
characterization of the language-related brain networks that support language
comprehension as infants/toddlers/children acquire their native language. In
addition, this project will generate a useful public dataset and a critical test
of the utility/reliability of fNIRS as a more child-friendly neuroimaging
technique, thereby making possible the use of fNIRS in the future as a readily
accessible and cost-effective tool for future pediatric studies of brain
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.