* 2148212
* RINGS: Learning-Enabled Ground and Air Integrated Networks (GAINs)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Arthur Calderbank, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2025
* USD 794,000.00

The explosive growth of mobile data traffic is in part a response to the
proliferation of mobile access services in recent years. However, not all mobile
users are able to enjoy stable and reliable broadband connections due to limited
network capacities and limited coverage areas. Therefore, in next generation
(NextG) mobile broadband networks it is necessary to integrate terrestrial and
non-terrestrial networks to democratize wireless access, by providing seamless
wireless coverage and supporting heterogeneous service requirements. To meet
this goal, this project will develop the fundamental research necessary to
integrate and operate terrestrial and non-terrestrial networks, termed Ground
and Air Integrated Networks (GAINs). The research project is highly
interdisciplinary at the interface of machine learning and wireless networks,
providing graduate and undergraduate students with the skills needed to thrive
in either community, as well as to bridge them either in academia or in
industry. Software and hardware testbeds will provide proof of concept
demonstrations for academic, industry and government partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this research program is to
develop fundamental enabling communication and computing technologies for
resilient and intelligent Ground and Air Integrated Networks (GAINs) based on
waveform design, real-time machine learning, resource scheduling, distributed
computing and learning. This research program makes the sparse representation of
the propagation environment visible to machine learning algorithms by designing
signals and controlling networks in the delay-Doppler domain, rather than the
time-frequency domain. The research program is streamlined into four
interconnected research thrusts: 1) Waveform design to enable machine learning;
2) multi-agent reinforcement learning-enabled resilient scheduling for
terrestrial networks; 3) distributed and resilient computing in GAINs; and 4)
proof-of-concept development and system evaluation. A new suite of distributed
and resilient machine learning algorithms that are communication-efficient and
heterogeneity-aware will be tailored to information processing in GAINs at the
speed of the next generation (NextG) networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.