* 2148957
* Collaborative Research: Facility: Next Generation Interoperable Data Infrastructure  for Geoscience Sample Data (EarthChem, LEPR/traceDs, SESAR): IEDA Re-invented
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Michael Grossberg, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2027
* USD 22,449.00

Interdisciplinary Earth Data Alliance (IEDA2): Solid Earth Geoscience Data from
NSF-Funded Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society relies more and more on data to
survive. Researchers need to make sure that data they create are openly
accessible, protected for the future, and can be used again for further research
and teaching purposes within the community. They need a home for their data that
stores and curates the data and makes it accessible online to other researchers
and others who may be interested in the use of the data. In this project, three
data systems in the Earth Sciences (EarthChem, SESAR, LEPR/traceDs) that have
for over 15 years served as digital libraries for data are joining forces
through the IEDA2 facility to create better data sharing tools and practices and
to make it easier for anybody to discover and access data from previously
disconnected studies in a single location. These new tools will help humans as
well as machines access data faster and with accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;EarthChem is an open data provider for the geochemical, petrological,
mineralogical, and related communities. EarthChem’s services include data
publication, data preservation, discovery, access, and visualization. In this
project, EarthChem will undertake essential developments to modernize and
optimize technical implementation, enhance user functions, expand accessible
data holdings, and engage with a broad community of users and data facilities to
establish best practices and interoperability standards for geochemical data.
EarthChem will restructure and reengineer its systems to ensure that its data
services scale to evolving community demands and that operations are optimized
for efficiency, resilience, and sustainability. New developments and
applications of data science approaches will support next generation modes of
data-driven research by improving both human and machine-readable interfaces for
discovery, access, visualization, and analysis of content in EarthChem data
systems. The Library of Experimental Phase Relations (LEPR) and traceDs are
databases that comprise results of published experimental studies involving
liquid-solid-fluid phase equilibria relevant to natural magmatic systems. Data
compiled into LEPR/traceDs will be connected to the EarthChem Synthesis for
broader access in order to support modeling and data analytics. SESAR is a
unique repository for sample metadata that provides services to make samples
more discoverable and interoperable. SESAR will expand its user community beyond
geochemistry and the Earth Sciences. In addition, SESAR’s services will move to
a new, independent, multi-disciplinary infrastructure for sample registration, a
separately funded collaborative effort with cyberinfrastructure providers in
biology, genomics, and archeology. IEDA2 will also substantially increase
engagement with the communities and users it serves, specifically students and
early-career researchers (ECRs). Online and in-person workshops for researchers
and educators to learn about using IEDA2 resources that will be run and promoted
in collaboration with the Science Education Resource Center SERC and the
National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT), aim to expand the reach of
the data facility, while recruiting and supporting a new and diverse generation
of geoscientists. Activities with students, educators, and researchers at City
College of New York, South Dakota Mines, and Oglala Lakota College will broaden
participation in data science. Integration of the CARE Principles for Indigenous
Data Governance into IEDA2 will support the community-wide adoption of these
ethics in sample and sample data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.