* 2148706
* REU Site: REU Site in Quantitative Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Esteban Mazzoni, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 290,375.00

This REU Site award to New York University, located in New York City, NY, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. &lt;br/&gt;Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Emphasis will be on quantitative research, as scientific progress
increasingly requires quantitative skills and the analysis and interpretation of
large data sets. Assessment of the program will be done through an online survey
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Department of Biology laboratories located at
the Washington Square Campus will host the students. Research encompasses
diverse topics, including genomics, bioinformatics, ecology and evolution,
proteomics, developmental and cellular biology, and usese various organisms,
including microbes, plants, worms, and flies. The students will perform research
involving designing experiments, gathering and analyzing quantitative data. The
program includes an R workshop and weekly structured meetings to support
literature reading, crafting presentations, career development, networking with
mentors, training in ethics and responsible conduct of research. Participant
selection is conducted by the program directors and mentors using a holistic
approach that considers multiple variables beyond grades. The program and the
faculty are highly collaborative and additionally interact with other programs
in the NYC scientific community. More information on the program is available by
visiting https://as.nyu.edu/content/nyu-
as/as/departments/biology/outreach/surp.html, or by contacting the PIs at
surp.biology@nyu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.