* 2148265
* EAR-Climate: Catalytic: A Modern Spatio-Temporal Hierarchical Modeling Framework for Paleo-Environmental Data (PaleoSTeHM)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,808.00

The geological record provides the only long-term archive of environmental
change and variability. Yet that record is sparse and often quite noisy and
indirect. Reconstructing past environmental conditions is thus a critical and
challenging statistical task. For example, sea level varies over a broad range
of spatial and temporal scales. Global average sea-level change must be
estimated from sparse, noisy, indirect and typically local records, such as the
ecological preferences of fossils preserved in salt marsh sediments. Similar
challenges arise in the interpretation of other types of environmental records
(for example, of temperature or precipitation). Existing statistical analysis
packages are not equipped to easily reconstruct past environmental fields while
addressing some of the distinctive characteristics of paleo-environmental
records. These challenges include the complex relationships between what can be
observed in geological materials and the environmental conditions that they
reflect, and the uncertainties that characterize the age of geological samples.
Past efforts have thus generally relied on custom-built, problem-specific code,
which has limited the adoption of state-of-the-art analysis approaches. The
PaleoSTeHM project will therefore develop a new software framework, built on top
of modern, scalable software infrastructure for machine learning, that will
enable broader use of these approaches. It will thus facilitate the
contextualization of current global change and lead to improved projections of
future global change risk. The project will also develop resources to train
early-career Earth scientists seeking to employ theme methods in their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central concept in PaleoSTeHM is that of the
spatio-temporal hierarchical statistical model. These models provide a natural,
conceptually straightforward (but sometimes computationally challenging)
framework for reconstructing past environmental variables over space and time.
Hierarchical statistical models, which are frequently implemented in a Bayesian
framework, partition the multiple random effects that lead to individual
observations into levels, thus clarifying the assumptions in a statistical
analysis. They separate the underlying phenomenon of interest and its
variability from the noisy mechanisms by which this underlying process is
observed. PaleoSTeHM will develop a Python-based framework for spatio-temporal
hierarchical modeling of paleodata. By leveraging an existing, widely used
machine-learning framework at the base level, PaleoSTeHM will be built to take
advantage of current and future computational advances without modifications to
the user-facing product. It will facilitate the incorporation of complex
likelihood structures, including the embedding of physical simulation models,
and thus pave the way for further advances in paleo-
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by a collaboration
between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.