* 2148907
* 2022 Cooperative Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 03/31/2024
* USD 897,613.00

The 2020 Cooperative Election Study (CES) is a collaboration of over 50
different university research teams throughout the United States. Collectively
this group designs and fields a large sample survey of at least 50,000 American
adults. The very large sample size allows researchers to have sufficient data to
study state electorates as well as the entire nation. The survey measures
demographics, opinions and attitudes, and voting behavior in national and state
elections. The survey is used to study who votes and why, and what explains the
choices that voters make. The data from this project are used widely by
researchers, journalists, and members of the public to understand American
elections and public opinion. The survey helps to create and sustain a network
of researchers interested in state and national elections, survey design, and
public opinion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 CES survey is developed by a
consortium of research teams. Each research team that wishes to be involved in
the project purchases a 1,000-person sample survey from the same firm. Each
individual team determines half of the questions on its survey. The other half
of the content (Common Content) is created by a design committee, drawn from the
participating teams. Common Content consists of questions that every team would
like to measure or questions that are of broad interest and require a very large
sample. The project, thus, fields as many surveys as there are teams and also
produces a single large sample survey that consists of the Common Content. The
survey is fielded over the Internet, with samples constructed to be nationally
representative. Each team receives the data from its own 1,000-person survey and
a dataset consisting of the 50,000+ observations from the Common Content survey.
Survey data are validated using voter validation and through comparisons of
state level election results to the survey results from the sub-samples for each
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.