* 2148831
* Collaborative Research: Distribution and Cycling of Carboxyl-Rich Alicyclic Molecules (CRAM) in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Karl Kaiser, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 399,720.00

Collaborative Research: Distribution and Cycling of Carboxyl-Rich Alicyclic
Molecules (CRAM) in the Ocean&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved organic matter is
the largest pool of organic carbon in the ocean. Thus, it plays an important
role in carbon storage and climate change. The components of dissolved organic
matter are the remains of biological products. As a result, the chemical make-up
of dissolved organic matter (DOM) can provide important clues about the
processes affecting this carbon pool. By learning more about the chemical
structures and reactions that produce DOM, connections can be made to biological
and biochemical processes and their importance. This project will study the
distribution, production, and removal of one important class of molecules called
carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules (CRAM). These molecules are abundant in marine
DOM and play an important role in the ocean carbon cycle. They also affect the
supply of the micronutrient iron, and thus have an important influence on
primary production and ocean food webs. The research includes field and
laboratory experiments and takes advantage of ocean locations with long-term
data. Together, the lead scientists will provide training and resources for the
graduate students, undergraduate research opportunities for underrepresented
groups in STEM, and direct outreach to the public through a website, articles in
local newspapers, and talks at public venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRAM make-up
8 to 25% of marine dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and represent a carbon
reservoir of &gt;65 Pg C that is equivalent to at least 8% of the atmospheric
CO2 pool. CRAM play a central role in the functioning of the microbial carbon
pump, a conceptual framework for producing refractory carbon by microbial
processes in the ocean. Further, CRAM act as an important ligand of Fe(III) in
the ocean, thereby playing an important role in regulating marine primary
production. The main project objectives are: (1) measure the variable
distribution of CRAM in the ocean, and (2) determine the dominant mechanisms of
CRAM production and removal. The project will leverage an extensive set of
already collected samples across the worldâ€™s oceans and new field work within
the framework of the Bermuda Atlantic and Hawaii Ocean Time Series. Field
measurements will be combined with experimental approaches to specifically
address microbial and photochemical reactions leading to CRAM production and
removal. This research will fill important gaps in resolving the key questions
about organic carbon cycling in the ocean and explore the role of DOM in
mediating the cycles of iron and other trace elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.