* 2148555
* Collaborative Research: Local Government Officials and the Management of Religion-State Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Damon Mayrl, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 123,413.00

The day-to-day management of interaction between religion and government falls
to hundreds of thousands of local officials, who are entrusted with decisions
that impact all American citizens. This mixed-methods, nationwide study of local
officials investigates how local government officials, across diverse
communities, understand and manage religion-state relations. This project is
designed to help the public understand how local officials can support pluralism
and resolve conflicts in local communities. The project produces a public-use
dataset and trade book, and it supports the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in science. This project is jointly funded by the
Sociology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses the interaction of religion
and government through a large-scale survey and in-depth interviews with elected
officials. The survey is of 2500 local officials, both elected and appointed,
asking about their attitudes and actions regarding religion, the state, and
interaction between the two. The survey is nationally representative of
officials across three forms of government (municipalities, counties, and school
districts) and five governance domains (administration, policing, public health,
zoning, and education). The project also includes in-depth interviews with 150
local officials sampled from the survey based on their (non)religiosity and
local context. The quantitative and qualitative data are merged and analyzed,
resulting in a methodological report, a public-use dataset, and research
findings. The study provides the first empirical portrait of local officialsâ€™
interactions with and preferences about religion, and it examines how those
religion-state preferences are patterned by key individual factors (beliefs,
affiliations, background) and contexts (region, municipal size, local
demography). Ultimately, the research demonstrates how government officials, who
often have ample discretion but limited formal guidance when it comes to
religion, make decisions about how to navigate and manage religious questions
and resolve potential conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.