* 2148309
* RINGS: Resilient Edge Networks with Data-driven Model-based Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shivendra Panwar, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 662,661.00

Next-generation cellular wireless edge networks with embedded computational
capabilities and services have become a critical infrastructure that enables
secure, robust, and high-performance applications in many domains, including
education, business, transportation, healthcare, and entertainment. Meanwhile,
the availability, reliability, and resiliency of edge networks are constantly
being challenged by both the expected resource and demand variations, e.g.,
diurnal application traffic patterns, user mobility, and random link/node
failures, as well as the unexpected level-shifts of operating conditions, e.g.,
traffic flash-crowds triggered by emerging events, major infrastructure failures
after coordinated malicious attacks and natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing novel hybrid learning solutions for
autonomous and resilient wireless edge networks from the angle of joint
provisioning, allocation, and scheduling of communication and computation
resources. It includes several research thrusts: 1) To achieve high efficiency
and robustness in the face of expected demand/resource variations, the project
team is investigating robust communication and computation resource provisioning
at long time scales. At short time scales, the team is studying adaptive routing
under the Model Predictive Control framework coupled with Adaptive Dynamic
Programming (ADP). The researchers are also investigating adaptive scheduling of
virtual middle-boxes using a domain-knowledge enriched reinforcement learning
framework. 2) To recover from major disruptions, the project team is studying
how to progressively bring network services back by strategically utilizing
backup and external resources. Resilient progressive recovery is achieved
through joint provisioning, routing, and scheduling based on hybrid online
learning. The stability of the recovery process is analyzed under the Robust ADP
framework. 3) Individual research components are being evaluated using
mathematical analysis, trace-driven simulations, and experiments on the CloudLab
testbed. The project is generating new theories and algorithms on hybrid
learning that can be used to study complex systems in other domains. Valuable
research opportunities are being created for graduate and undergraduate
students, especially women and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.