* 2148838
* Subinertial variability across and around the Greenland-Scotland Ridge and its impacts on the ocean circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Renske Gelderloos, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 289,618.00

This project will examine Greenland-Scotland Ridge (GSR) circulation, where
northward-flowing warm and saline surface currents meet southward-flowing dense
overflows and Arctic outflows, to quantify the relative importance of
subinertial variability (with periods of days to tens of days) compared to the
time-average flow in a series of high-resolution realistic numerical model
simulations. The work will quantify the impact of subinertial variability on (1)
cross-ridge volume transports to and from the deep ocean basins on either side
of the GSR; (2) cross-frontal water mass exchange; and (3) cross-shelfbreak
volume transport on and off the shallow continental shelves. The first GSR-wide
estimates of volume, heat, and salt fluxes across continental shelfbreaks along
the ridge (the Greenland, Iceland, Faroe, and Scottish shelves) will be
provided, including their spatial and temporal variability. Project outcomes
will provide fundamental understanding of the nature and importance of GSR
variability, which plays a key role in the global climate system and inform
potential observing strategies. Further broader impacts include support of an
early-career female PI and train an undergraduate student to gain practical
research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses that subinertial
variability exceeds seasonal and superinertial variability in channels, along
the GSR, and around the Iceland and the Faroes (excepting tides close to coastal
margins) and that it may dominate the time-mean flow in some places on the GSR
will be tested by addressing several objectives. These include characterizing
subinertial current, sea surface height and isopycnal displacement variability;
quantifying how such variability impacts the cross-ridge volume transport;
characterizing the spatial structures and scales associated with high-transport
events, and how water mass properties are modified due to cross-frontal heat and
salt fluxes; and quantifying how subinertial variability impacts the cross-
shelfbreak volume transport. Based on these findings, an observational strategy
will be recommended to capture the subinertial variability where it is important
to the mean flow. Tools to be used include three existing one-year-long
hydrostatic simulations from regional ocean-sea ice configurations of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology general circulation model (MITgcm), which
have been shown to realistically represent the regional ocean properties and
dynamics. An offline particle tracking tool for Lagrangian analyses (developed
by the PIs) will be used, which employs a trapezoidal solver with a predictor-
corrector scheme, and uses the full four-dimensional velocity fields to
calculate particle trajectories. Publicly-available data sets will be used for a
model-data comparison. Goals are to quantify the realism of the numerical
simulations and estimate bias, and to elucidate the complementary information in
sparse, intermittent observations and inaccurate simulations. Products to be
used include hydrographic profiles, mooring timeseries, glider datasets , and
gridded and along-track altimetry data products. If quality-controlled high
resolution satellite altimetry from the planned Surface Water and Ocean
Topography (SWOT) mission are released within the duration of this project, they
will also be utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.