* 2148211
* RINGS: Resilience of NextG Communication Systems to Malicious Modification Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2025
* USD 655,166.00

The next generation of wireless communication systems (NextG) presents a larger
attack surface to malicious actors. The increased vulnerability is driven by
many factors including the rising complexity of systems and algorithms, the
blurring of the line between computing and communication, and the introduction
of new technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT) that introduce devices from
a globalized supply chain, whose provenance and security may be difficult to
verify or guarantee. This project investigates the emerging risks from malicious
modifications in hardware or software of NextG wireless communication systems,
and devises techniques that improve the resilience of the next generation of
communication systems against these risks. Malicious modifications can find
their way into a communication system via software or firmware updates, which
are nowadays common. Malicious hardware modifications have also evolved into a
credible threat, due to the stretching of the integrated circuit (IC)
fabrication supply chain that creates many opportunities for vulnerabilities to
be inserted into a communication IC from design to fabrication. The project’s
broader significance and importance are the protection of NextG systems against
cyber threats, electrical and computer engineering curriculum development, and
K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project concentrates
on the modification threats that infiltrate the physical layer of wireless
communication systems, inflicting harm by compromising data, or hampering
legitimate communication via jamming and denial of service. New classes of
modification threats in the physical layer are identified, and their threat is
quantitatively analyzed. The research project further studies methods to detect
the presence of malicious modifications, an important step for their removal or
neutralization. The performance of these detection techniques is studied under
adversarial uncertainty. The project demonstrates and verifies the attacks, as
well as detection and mitigation strategies, via a custom-designed hardware
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.