* 2148005
* Collaborative Research: The benthic influence on North Atlantic deep water eNd signatures
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2025
* USD 934,762.00

The speeds and patterns of deep water currents, collectively known as
thermohaline circulation, impact the global distribution of heat and chemicals
including dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide. Modern thermohaline circulation
has been described as a "conveyor belt," wherein deep water is formed in the
North Atlantic and near Antarctica, then moves throughout the rest of the global
oceans. Changes in the location and strength of deep water formation have
dramatic impact on both the ocean and on Earth’s climate. However, direct
measurement of circulation from Earth’s past is not possible and measuring
modern ocean circulation is difficult, because of the inaccessibility of the
deep ocean and the vast spatial scales involved, geoscientists must rely on
geochemical tracers to understand deep circulation. These tracers allow
geoscientists to understand changes in ocean circulation from both modern ocean
water and ancient waters recorded in ocean sediments, and thus inform models
that predict future change. Observations that the isotopic ratio of the
dissolved trace metal neodymium (143Nd and 144Nd) appears to mimic modern deep
ocean circulation has meant that this ratio is considered one such circulation
tracer. Unfortunately, it is not yet understood why this ratio ostensibly
mirrors deep ocean circulation, nor is the established view on the marine
geochemical cycle of neodymium completely consistent with observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve these inconsistencies, the researchers
hypothesize that the sediments at the seafloor are a major source of neodymium
to the ocean; a proposal in contrast to existing element budgets which consider
the sediments to be primarily a sink removing neodymium from the ocean. To test
this idea, the investigators will sample sediments, the pore water they contain,
and the overlying ocean water from several sites in the North Atlantic,
measuring a suite of elements and isotopes in all these samples. This research
will contribute to better understand the geochemistry of neodymium and its
isotopes in the North Atlantic, one of the regions critical to understanding
ocean circulation. Constraining the major controls on neodymium in the ocean is
significant to the understanding of ocean-climate interactions as different
mechanisms can lead to very different interpretations of the neodymium record of
past and present deep water circulation. This improved understanding will result
in more accurate interpretations of new and existing data with respect to
changes in deep ocean circulation through time and its impact on climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neodymium (Nd) is one of 14 rare earth elements (REEs)
frequently used to investigate environmental processes. In addition to its use
as part of the REE series, the isotope ratio of neodymium (143Nd/144Nd; eNd) is
arguably the most promising tracer of past ocean circulation, and is also
heavily invested in the GEOTRACES project for the modern ocean. Unfortunately,
many observational and theoretical studies indicate that the mechanistic
understanding of both of these tracers has considerable problems, leading to
potentially erroneous interpretations. The research team prior efforts have
concluded that a benthic source of REEs to the oceans exerts a primary control
over the distribution of REEs and eNd in deep waters. To date this work has been
conducted in the Pacific Ocean, but in this project the investigators will test
the hypothesis in the North Atlantic, a region critical for thermohaline
circulation. This project will explore fundamental aspects of the geochemical
cycle of marine REEs and Nd isotopes. Thus, this work has transformative
implications on the understanding and application of the REEs and Nd isotope
data in both the modern and ancient oceans. The investigators make the specific
and (perhaps) counterintuitive prediction that benthic fluxes of the REEs will
be greater in the North Atlantic than those measured in the Pacific. If proven
correct, these results will transform the interpretations of a large suite of
existing data and provide a more accurate mechanistic understanding of what
information these elements provide about modern and past ocean circulation. Even
if proven incorrect, the proposed measurements will provide an important
contrast to those made in the Pacific and will offer insight into the global
geochemical cycling of these elements and their isotopes. Beyond the use and
interpretation of neodymium, the work will further the understanding of the
importance of the benthic environment on marine trace metal cycling in a general
sense (e.g., for iron, copper, zinc, chromium, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.