* 2148933
* Collaborative Research: Extended Family Support and the Housing Stability of Youth
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Brandon Robinson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Family rejection is a well-known cause of youth homelessness. This project aims
to understand how support from extended family members shapes pathways of
housing stability and safety before youth end up at shelters or on the streets.
The study documents the roles and practices of grandparents, aunts, uncles,
cousins, and adult siblings in providing long-term shelter and housing stability
for youth whose parents are unsupportive or ambivalent about their children’s
identities and behaviors. The research is innovative in its focus on youth who
are experiencing challenges at home but are not yet homeless. The study advances
the science on familial social support and homelessness. Researchers draw from
the study’s findings to engage in outreach to youth shelters and programs and
inform practitioners and decision-makers on strategies to prevent youth
homelessness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the role of non-parental
relatives and how their support shapes the housing stability and safety of
youth, this project studies 80 youth aged 16-19 who are at risk of homelessness
using a 14-month mixed-methods longitudinal approach. Participants are recruited
from two states in the southwest United States, including youth in rural
communities and from minority groups. Data are collected through an initial
interview, 10 monthly surveys, and a follow-up interview tailored to each
respondent. Researchers evaluate how the forms and consistency of instrumental
and emotional support that youths receive from extended family influence their
sense of safety and housing stability. A longitudinal approach enables analysis
of how family support and housing stability and safety shift over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.