* 2148598
* I-Corps: Repurposing Serotoninergic Compounds for Improved Treatment of Parkinson's Disease
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Christopher Bishop, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of target-specific drugs that reduce severity and incidence of
levodopa-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease. Dyskinesia is a debilitating
side effect of levodopa therapy characterized by abnormal involuntary movements
that can interfere with daily activities present in up to 90% of nearly 10
million Parkinson’s disease patients worldwide. Considering the increased
economic burden felt by caregivers and patients resulting from the development
of dyskinesia, in addition to the associated reductions in quality of life,
providing dyskinesia relief to patients represents a largely unmet need in the
clinic. Reducing dyskinesia may allow some patients to regain more control of
their lives. Some may be able to begin feeding and bathing themselves again,
others may once again play with their children or grandchildren, and others may
regain enough movement control to return to work. Commercially, dyskinesia
relief presents an opportunity to repurpose FDA-approved drugs into patentable
combinations and/or formulations that increase the likelihood of successful
translation into the clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of newly repurposed dual-action selective serotonin (5-HT)
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)/5-HT1A receptor agonist compounds that reduce the
expression and incidence of dyskinesia. Over a decade of research has validated
the capability of drugs with either SSRI or 5HT1A receptor agonist actions to
reduce dyskinesia, however, a breakthrough discovery has uncovered evidence that
drugs acting on both targets produce an unprecedented reduction of dyskinesia
exceeding 90% suppression. Fortunately for patients, two FDA-approved drugs have
been identified that meet these criteria and produce substantial effects in pre-
clinical models. Using repurposed, as opposed to novel, drugs increase chances
of successful translation into the clinic, as these compounds already have been
de-risked and trialed for safety and tolerability. In addition, the mechanisms
of action of these drugs are well validated through prior trials, reducing
development costs by hundreds of millions of dollars. The use of repurposed
drugs is safer, cheaper, and more successful, which is why 30% of all newly-FDA
approved treatments involve the use of repurposed
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.