* 2148761
* REU Site: Sensorimotor Neural Engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Eric Chudler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2025
* USD 403,635.00

This REU Site award to the University of Washington, located in Seattle, WA,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks each summer from 2022-
2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Participants
will gain valuable knowledge in an area of research that has significant and
growing global impact on the quality of life. Assessment of the program will be
done using the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific theme will focus on the emerging domain of neural engineering. This
research area encompasses the development of concepts and devices used to
assist, understand, and interact with neural systems. Because neural engineering
is an interdisciplinary topic, students will be assigned to laboratories in
several departments including Bioengineering, Biology, Physiology and
Biophysics, Psychology, Rehabilitation Medicine, Computer Sciences and
Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. In addition to
laboratory work, students will participate in a communications course and
workshops to improve their presentation and writing skills. All REU participants
will complete a Responsible Conduct of Research Training including discussions
about the ethical conduct of research. A special workshop will be provided about
how ethical issues might arise in the field of sensorimotor neural engineering.
Talented undergraduates, especially those from under-represented groups and who
have completed their freshman and sophomore years, are encouraged to apply. The
selection of students is based on the quality of the students' written materials
in their application, letters of recommendation and academic record. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://centerforneurotech.uw.edu/content/research-experience-undergraduates, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Eric H. Chudler at chudler@uw.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Rajesh Rao at rao@cs.washington.edu). This award is supported by the Department
of Defense ASSURE Program in partnership with the NSF REU
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.