* 2148251
* RINGS: Resilient and Low-Latency Networks for Situation Awareness in the Factory of the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Dimitri Bertsekas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 666,666.00

Timely and accurate situation awareness (e.g., knowing the state of agents such
as people, objects, and vehicles) is a key enabler for automating the factory of
the future (FoF). The Industry 4.0 paradigm foresees a myriad of heterogeneous
agents that robustly and reliably communicate and coordinate their actions. FoF
environments manifest harsh conditions for sensing and communication, resulting
in information latency and data uncertainty. This may impair current state-of-
the-art localization and decision-making procedures and calls for techniques
that are robust to outdated and inaccurate information in FoF networks. The
project aims to establish a new framework that revolutionizes the approach to
localization and decision making by designing latency-aware and latency-
resilient techniques for FoF environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes two main aspects: latency-aware network localization and latency-
resilient decision making in multi-agent FoF networks. First, the team of
researchers is developing a framework for the design of latency-aware
localization techniques. These techniques are robust to disruptive events by
adapting accuracy-latency tradeoffs and by fusing data obtained from
heterogeneous devices. Second, the team of researchers is developing latency-
resilient decision-making algorithms. These algorithms are resilient to outdated
information by efficiently allocating network resources and by coordinating the
agents for accelerated learning. This project will serve as a foundation for
large-scale multi-agent FoF networks that are capable of operating in highly
dynamic environments in the presence of latency. The methodologies developed in
this project are robust to outdated and inaccurate information, paving the way
to fully automated industries in the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.