* 2148788
* RII Track-1: Harnessing the Data Revolution for Fire Science
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Frederick Harris, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2027
* USD 7,992,269.00

The frequency and severity of wildfires in the western U.S. has increased over
the last forty years, caused by changes in climate, fuel buildup, and invasive
species. As a result, wildfires are now the most prevalent type of natural
disaster in the southwestern U.S. and are detrimental to human health and
ecosystem services (including water availability, visibility, and recreation).
The Harnessing the Data Revolution for Fire Science (HDRFS) project aims to
understand the “wildland fire continuum,” the process in which an ecosystem’s
pre-fire state (plant community composition, ecology, hydrological state, etc.)
determines the level of fuel buildup and thereby helps determine the conditions
of the eventual wildfire. Post-fire recovery in turn sets the initial condition
for establishing the pre-fire state for the next fire in the cycle. The HDRFS
research and capacity-building program is organized around interconnected
elements of the wildland fire continuum and aligned efforts in research
computing and data. Along with its research and capacity-building agenda, the
HDRFS project includes an ambitious education and workforce development focus
aimed at expanding opportunities for Nevadans at the K-12 and community college
levels. HDRFS is administered by the Nevada System for Higher Education in
collaboration with the University of Nevada, Reno; the University of Nevada, Las
Vegas; and the Desert Research Institute. Additional institutions involved
include Nevada State College and four community colleges (College of Southern
Nevada, Truckee Meadows Community College, Western Nevada College, and Great
Basin College). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing the Data Revolution for Fire
Science (HDRFS) will explore the fire continuum of diverse processes interacting
across scales in the sagebrush ecosystem. Goals include: 1) improving
understanding of fire processes and effects over spatial scales; 2) determining
fire’s interactions with carbon cycling, water balance, fuel buildup, and
invasive species; 3) increasing our mechanistic understanding of fire-induced
soil hydrophobicity and its influence on hydrology; 4) improving models of fire
processes and eco-hydrological fire effects; 5) improving characterization and
modeling of fire emissions and their aging; 6) adapting aerial robots for
greatly improved data collection under hazardous or challenging conditions
(e.g., characterizing smoke plumes, fire processes, and ecohydrology); and 7)
developing computer vision/machine learning data fusion to process and
assimilate multisensory data into fire and ecosystem models. HDRFS research will
contribute to understanding the spatial scaling of fire processes and effects
over ~eight orders of magnitude in area, with the goal of using laboratory and
other small-scale results for predicting and modeling large scale wildland fire
processes and effects. In parallel with its research and capacity-building
program, HDRFS will also engage students, educators, and practitioners via a
series of outreach and workforce development activities aimed at achieving a
more diverse, STEM-capable population and workforce in
Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.