* 2148712
* Engaging Blind, Visually Impaired, and Sighted Students in STEM with Storytelling through Podcasts
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Martin Storksdieck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2025
* USD 364,686.00

This project will broaden participation in STEM for blind and visually impaired
(BVI) and sighted upper elementary students through engagement with podcast
technology. BVI individuals are significantly underrepresented in the STEM
workforce. Research has shown that BVI students face many obstacles in pursuing
education pathways to STEM fields, beginning in early education. These obstacles
include negative attitudes of both students and teachers regarding the ability
for BVI persons to engage in STEM careers, and the lack of BVI-accessible STEM
resources in classrooms. This project builds on the success of the children’s
science podcast, Tumble, to engage BVI students in the use and development of
podcasts to promote STEM learning and career awareness. In addition, this
project explores how podcasts can be used to engage BVI students in the
classroom, with broader implications for digital media use for all students. It
lays the foundation for educators to integrate podcasts and podcast technology
into the classroom, in a way that is accessible for BVI students. Tumble will
produce a variety of podcasts featuring BVI and disabled scientists. Teachers
will guide students in using these episodes as the basis for producing their own
science podcasts - developing ideas, interviewing scientists, writing scripts,
and editing audio. Twelve BVI and integrated classrooms will be involved in
design-testing this curriculum. The final materials will be made freely
available in a web portal, where students and teachers around the world can
access it. Tumble’s BVI episodes will also be freely available and will reach
its estimated 200,000 listeners worldwide. Additionally, the episodes will be
adapted into Spanish, and released on Tumble’s Spanish-language podcast
feed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many teachers have begun using podcasts in the
classroom, there is little research around podcasts as a technology to
disseminate information to K-12 students or how podcasts can be used as a
teaching/learning tool in classrooms, especially to meet the needs of BVI
students. This project is innovative in its approach to exploring outcomes of
engaging upper elementary students (grades 3-5) with podcast technology for
science learning, with a particular focus on supporting access for BVI students.
Project goals address the following questions: 1) How can listening to and
producing podcast technology increase awareness and interest in STEM careers for
BVI and sighted students? 2) How does featuring BVI scientists and their work
normalize participation of persons with disabilities in science and scientific
research? 3) To what degree does this lead to empathy in all students, and to a
sense of “possible selves” in science for BVI students? The project is an
iterative process of data collection and design testing. It begins with a front-
end research study in Years 1 and 2, to evaluate the literature, gain insight
from podcast professionals, BVI scientists and advocates, engage a teacher
design group, and conduct a national survey of teachers. Interviews and focus
groups with podcast professionals, BVI scientists and teachers will be analyzed
using inductive open coding. The national survey of teachers (n=500) will be
analyzed for frequencies and central tendencies, and inferential statistics
(e.g., comparisons between groups, comparisons by variables of interest) will be
used for exploring explanatory variables. In year-2, design testing of the
resources in upper elementary classrooms with BVI and sighted students will take
place. It will rely on a 12-person design tester group and will involve
questionnaires and focus groups, website analytic data, and at least six
classroom observations. An efficacy study will be conducted in Years 2 &amp; 3,
combining a naturalistic study of the use of the resources by teachers with a
quasi-experimental study to understand outcomes for BVI and sighted students.
The naturalistic study will focus on 12 classrooms and combine a system of
regular written feedback with interviews, web analytics and classroom
observations. The quasi-experimental study in 12 classrooms with 240 students
(in a nested design) involves teacher interviews, observations and a student
retrospective post-survey. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.