* 2148104
* RINGS: REALTIME: Resilient Edge-cloud Autonomous Learning with Timely Inferences
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Roy Yates, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 683,330.00

Machine learning (ML) is the enabler of emerging real-time applications ranging
from augmented reality and smart cities to autonomous vehicles that are changing
how people live and work. Low latency is essential for these services; emerging
real-time applications will typically need assistance from a mobile edge cloud
(MEC) for real-time operation. This emerging scenario introduces significant new
challenges: mobile devices are heterogeneous, ranging from energy-harvesting
sensors to automobiles, but storage and compute resources are generally limited
and communication is often over low-bandwidth channels; real-time deployment of
trained ML models requires autonomous computation and decision-making that is
adaptive to heterogeneous time-varying local environments; devices need to make
high-accuracy inferences on high-dimensional data in real time; devices
continuously gather new data that must be processed, aggregated, and
communicated to the MEC; mobile users have heterogenous privacy preferences that
require privacy-sensitive use of the MEC; and the applications and services on
the mobile devices must be resilient to changes in both the cyber and physical
worlds in order to ensure personal safety. This project is aimed at the design
and experimental validation of an MEC-based distributed ML system that accounts
for these factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this setting of real-time operation,
online decision-making, and offline training of ML-based applications that must
be resilient to data, application, user, and system changes, this research
program has four facets: (1) Edge-centric distributed ML models to enable both
real-time inferences at mobile devices and fast distributed semi-supervised
training are being developed and evaluated. (2) Based on age-of-information
timeliness metrics, real-time inference methods and system operation are
optimized to balance mobile computation against network resources. (3)
Differential privacy and other privacy metrics for real-time and online
operation of MEC-assisted ML are being developed and incorporated in the
distributed algorithms for system adaptation. (4) The project integrates these
design approaches in a proof-of-concept prototype on the NSF COSMOS testbed in
NY City to validate feasibility and evaluate device and system resilience for
representative applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.