* 2148405
* Collaborative Research: Lee Waves and Sheared Mean Flow: Interactions and Impacts of Topography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Eric Kunze, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 287,769.00

Lee waves are an example of internal gravity waves forced by stably stratified
flow over bathymetry. Oceanic internal lee waves have horizontal wavelengths
between O(1–10) km that bridge mesoscale currents and smallscale turbulence and
play a central role in the ocean’s energy cascade. Their generation exerts wave
drag on balanced flow and extracts mesoscale energy, and their propagation
transports this energy through wave-fluxes. When they break, they convert energy
downscale to turbulent dissipation and mixing, maintaining ocean’s
stratification and in turn contributing to the largescale circulation. This
project will examine why observed dissipation in the deep ocean downstream from
flow-topography interactions is smaller than predicted by the common assumption
of equating lee-wave generation with dissipation. This research will determine
the role of lee waves in dissipating versus redistributing energy for better
parameterizations of wave drag and mixing for oceanic general circulation
models. This project will support an early-career lead PI, a graduate and two
undergraduate students to be trained on wave dynamics and ocean
modeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Regional numerical modeling with Process Study
Ocean Model (PSOM) will simulate the generation, propagation, interaction and
dissipation of lee waves in mean shear. PSOM is a non-hydrostatic ocean model
that has been widely used to study submesoscale processes. The PIs will extend
prior idealized simulations to explore a range of topographic variations to
examine mechanisms that may suppress turbulence in the lee of flow-topography
interactions. These mechanisms are: (i) nonlinear generation due to topographic
blocking and splitting, (ii) reabsorption of lee-wave energy back to the sheared
mean flow, (iii) remote dissipation in the form of free waves that escape the
localized generating current, and (iv) downstream advection of lee-wave energy
from localized generating topography. Among these mechanisms, reabsorption will
occur for trapped lee waves in bottom-intensified currents, while nonlinear
generation and downstream advection have a strong dependence on specific, as
opposed to random, topographies. The primary analysis tool will be energy
conservation budgets for different components (mean jet, lee waves, and free
waves) to quantify the dissipative and non-dissipative fates of lee
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.