* 2148544
* Wave Erosion at Ice Cliffs
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Lucas Zoet, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 622,183.00

The decay of ice shelves, glaciers, and icebergs greatly influences the polar
environment, with far-reaching implications for the global climate and sea
levels. A key driver of ice loss in the polar regions is the wave-induced
erosion of icebergs, glaciers, and ice-shelf fronts. While rapid progress has
been made in recent years in understanding a number of ice decay processes, wave
erosion at the waterline of ice cliffs has not been studied in detail. This
project will conduct an in-depth investigation of wave erosion in a laboratory
setting, with the goal to provide new insight on how ice cliffs erode and
improve the representation of these processes in large-scale ocean and climate
simulations. The primary focus is on icebergs since wave erosion is most
impactful in the open ocean environment. However, many of the findings will
apply directly to glacier and ice-shelf fronts. In addition to its scientific
significance, the project will train two graduate students at the forefront of
climate science. A further aim is to construct a basic wave flume for
educational purposes and involve K-12 teachers in the study through summer
research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How ice cliffs decay is one of the
most ardently researched questions in the cryosphere. A key driver of ice loss
that has garnered relatively little attention in this context is wave-induced
erosion. Wave action at the sides of icebergs and at the fronts of water-
terminating glaciers and ice shelves can cause ice loss in several ways: (i)
Waves mix meltwater and ambient water, efficiently transport heat toward the
ice, and accelerate melt at the waterline. (ii) The resultant incisions at the
waterline can lead to failure of the overhanging ice cliff. (iii) The remaining
submerged ice is buoyant, and the induced stresses can trigger full-depth
calving events. This project aims to conduct the first detailed investigation of
these processes in a laboratory setting, which will be used to guide new
theoretical considerations and the development of a revised iceberg erosion
parameterization to be implemented in comprehensive ocean models. The primary
objectives of this work are two-fold: (1) To gain insight into the fundamental
physics of wave erosion and derive theoretical relationships between melt rates
and environmental conditions. (2) To develop a decay parameterization that
accounts for the processes (i)-(iii) above with the aim to reduce the
uncertainty associated with ice loss in model projections. This constitutes an
important next step toward the larger goal of more accurate climate projections
and improved estimates of future sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.