* 2148209
* RINGS: Power Resilient NextG Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 714,654.00

Next-generation data centers will operate under tight and variable power
envelopes. Renewable energy and an increase in extreme weather lead to more
power supply variability. At the same time, fluctuating data center utilization
caused by user churn increases power demand variability. Power demand and supply
have to be kept in balance at increasingly short timescales and resiliency of
data centers to power events is paramount for their availability. This project's
goal is to build and evaluate a data center power control plane (PCP). PCP can
control power demand at a fine granularity and over short timescales by making
it software-defined. The key is to gracefully trade off power and quality of
service over time. This allows PCP to shed or consolidate load to conserve power
during a power event. PCP aims to reduce recovery latency from power disasters,
outlive power disruptions, and improve the energy efficiency of next-generation
data centers via power oversubscription. Several research questions are
addressed to make PCP practical, such as how to scale power demand and supply
instrumentation and control; how to leverage the diverse power envelopes of
various processing devices available in a data center; how to determine
sheddable load, and how to control it transparently; how to further reduce fail-
over and recovery latency from power outages?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-
generation data centers will provide time and life-critical services to a large
portion of society globally. By providing power resiliency, this project has the
potential to dramatically improve next-generation service availability, to
enable critical services, and to avert power disasters to save lives, reduce the
blast radius of a power emergency, and constrain the cost of a power disaster.
The work will also influence the education of the next generation of systems
engineers, as associated project materials can serve as courseware emphasizing
power resiliency to better prepare students for these changes touching every
aspect of computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.