* 2148727
* An Experimental and Computational Study of the Radiative Thermal Conductivity of Upper Mantle Minerals and Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 364,362.00

The Earth is a dynamic planet — with earthquakes, volcanoes, mountain-building,
and supply of life-essential compounds to the surface — because of forces
arising from the transport of heat through its interior. Such transport occurs
by three mechanisms. The first mechanism is advection: the upward motion of hot
material and downward motion of cold material that make the planet active. The
others represent “waste heat” that moves through Earth materials without
necessarily contributing to planetary activity. One is conduction, the familiar
experience of heat flowing from hot objects to cold objects in direct contact.
This mechanism is well-studied. The third mechanism is transmission of heat by
visible and infrared light, or radiative heat transfer. This latter mechanism
has been largely neglected in geophysics. Here the team builds on their initial
discovery that mineral grains can become dramatically more transparent at
elevated temperatures. This allows for more radiative heat transfer. The
researchers, thus, re-evaluate the role of radiative heat transfer in the
Earth’s mantle. They systematically extend their experimental and computational
test to the minerals that dominate the interior of the Earth. This project
involves two important components. The first is measurements of the optical
absorption properties of relevant minerals at elevated temperatures. The second
is to use the measured optical absorption data to improve the mathematical
models that describe radiative conductivity in the Earth. The project’s
overarching goal is to assess the consequences of a more transparent mantle for
global tectonic plate motions. The project support one graduate and several
undergraduate students. Its outcomes, which include new techniques, methods,
codes, and data products, are openly shared with the scientific community. The
project results, technical and theoretical, have broad implications beyond Earth
sciences in materials science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal
conduction represents inefficiency of the Earth’s convective heat engine.
Indeed, if the sum of lattice and radiative thermal conductivity become large
enough, convective vigor decreases. Consequently, a greater heat flow or lower
viscosity becomes necessary to maintain dynamic motions. In the upper mantle,
radiative thermal conductivity has largely been ignored. This is because the
opacity of Fe-bearing mantle minerals is thought to be high enough to make
radiative transport negligible. Yet, the team’s preliminary work has shown that
the optical spectra of minerals collected at room temperature can be quite
different from those collected at elevated temperatures. At room temperature,
the most important optical absorption mechanism in many mantle minerals at
visible wavelengths is intervalence charge transfer (IVCT). This mechanism
involves pairs of Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions or Fe2+ and Ti4+ ions. Since it depends on
electrons moving between orbitals of different ions, intuition suggests that
elevated temperature should reduce the barrier to such hopping and increase the
probability of absorption. But initial experimental results on model minerals
have shown that the IVCT absorption fades with increasing temperature and is
gone at the temperatures of Earth’s asthenosphere; this makes the minerals
increasingly transparent to visible light. Here the researchers investigate the
consequences of this discovery for geodynamics through two parallel and
integrated efforts: (1) experimental work to characterize the optical spectra of
key mantle minerals at elevated temperature; and (2) application of a flexible
numerical code to model radiative transport in a multiphase medium - given
measured spectral properties of the constituent phases - and to incorporate the
resulting bulk radiative conductivity into geodynamic models of mantle
convection. Their initial studies involved analogues for mantle minerals. The
team now investigates actual mantle minerals. The goal is to gain a systematic
understanding of mineral high-temperature optical spectra. The researchers study
important (relatively transparent) mantle minerals such as olivine and garnet.
In addition, they work with collaborators who grow thin films of nearly opaque
minerals (spinels, orthopyroxene) that can be used for spectroscopy. These novel
measurements call for upgrades to the laboratory centered around improved
broadband detectors, a heating stage for the microscope, and environmental
control to minimize mineral oxidation at high temperature. Although the
researchers suspect that the temperature dependence of IVCT is the main effect
in need of study, they also conduct some measurements at elevated pressure in a
diamond-anvil cell to evaluate the effect of pressure on the
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.