* 2148863
* Comparative Ethnography of Face-to-Face and Digital Political Participation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Damien Stankiewicz, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 111,324.00

This study asks whether democratic participation is changing as people
increasingly engage with digital information sources. It focuses on a context
where electoral shifts have been attributed by journalists and scholars to the
innovation of digital platforms and to political support fostered through social
media and user-moderated websites and forums. This study sets out to what
relationship, if any, exists between changing media use and electoral shifts.
This research project disseminates findings and data widely to scholars and
policy makers about how media technologies may be altering forms and norms of
democratic participation. The study engages a broader audience by making its
data widely accessible, which can foster development of new public education
initiatives and campaigns for increasing democratic and civic dialogue. It also
trains undergraduate and graduate students in methods of scientific data
collection and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines online and
offline research methods. The researcher will conduct twelve months of intensive
ethnographic research including participant observation and interviews to
investigate pathways of information dissemination, what media platforms are most
widely used, whether these have changed over time, and how civic participation
takes shape more broadly, both locally and nationally. Concurrently, digital
ethnography conducted on Twitter and in selective chat rooms will be used to
track whether there are observable differences in rhetoric and styles of
participation between face-to-face versus digital contexts. In addition to
shifting forms of political participation, this study explores people’s changing
experiences of their national identity, and how national identities and
belonging may be reshaped by digital news and media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.