* 2148889
* Explaining Changes in Racial Identification across Time and Place
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Craig Carpenter, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,943.00

Racial and ethnic identity, and how people select into categories of race and
ethnicity, can be fluid. This study investigates how racial and ethnic self-
categorization changes across an individual’s life and is affected by time and
place. The project links individuals and their offspring across 80 years of
federal administrative and survey data, looking for shifts in racial and ethnic
self-categorization. The researchers focus on categorization patterns of
immigrants, children of immigrants, and people with more than one ethnic or
racial background. The study also examines the effects of where people live and
where they move on how individuals categorize their race and ethnicity. Linking
individuals intergenerationally enables analysis of how racial and ethnic
categorization is passed down through generations. This research contributes to
a broader understanding of race and ethnicity in the United States and informs
decision-making that relies on demographic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
links the 1940, 2000, 2010 and 2020 decennial Censuses, all years of the
American Community Survey, and Social Security Administration Data to produce a
dataset of millions of individuals. Using these data, researchers investigate
patterns of racial and ethnic self-categorization over time and place. The study
estimates how many individuals change racial categorization and how this varies
across time, demographic and socioeconomic status, and geography. Researchers
investigate how the characteristics of a place, including racial and ethnic
demographics and patterns of racial residential segregation, affect self-
categorization, and whether and how moving within the United States generates
change. For children of immigrants, the project investigates how racial
categorization in adulthood varies by birth cohort, country of origin, and place
of parental residence. Looking inter-generationally, the study also considers
how a parent’s racial categorization shapes their children’s racial and ethnic
categorization. Findings from this research inform how demographers and other
social scientists use racial and ethnic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.