* 2148141
* RINGS:Deep Generative Models for Ultra High-Dimensional Next Generation Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jeffrey Andrews, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 481,342.00

Wireless communications applications of the 2030s --- such as extended reality,
autonomous vehicles, and telemedicine --- will require extremely high bit rates
and reduced energy consumption. To fulfill these requirements, sixth-generation
(6G) era systems will leverage ultra-high carrier frequencies enabled by
deploying massive arrays of very small antennas. Such architectures are termed
ultra-high dimensional (UHD) communication systems. This is a very challenging
scenario for wireless communication, since the UHD channel is difficult to learn
and the wireless energy must be radiated in a highly directional manner towards
the intended receiver. Existing approaches to channel estimation and beam
alignment will not scale to the UHD scenario in terms of complexity, power
consumption, or overhead signaling. This project aims to develop novel,
scalable, and high-performing approaches to channel estimation and beam
alignment for UHD communication systems using deep generative models (DGMs), an
emerging toolset from unsupervised deep learning. This project will advance the
fundamentals of DGMs in a manner appropriate for decentralized real-time
applications, and also develop these novel methods for the unique challenges of
UHD communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop novel
theoretical tools for solving challenging inverse problems arising in UHD
communication systems, in particular considering (i) resilience to measurement
errors and outliers; (ii) resilience to shifting channel distributions and low-
resolution measurements; (iii) adaptation to changes in data distribution via
federated generative adversarial network (GAN) training; (iv) compressed GAN
representations; and (v) incorporating prior information in untrained DGMs via
learned regularization. The project will also research DGM-based (i)
interference-robust channel estimation and GAN-training techniques; (ii)
federated downlink UHD channel estimation paradigms; (iii) end-to-end UHD
channel estimators that account for physical impairments such as low-resolution
quantization and RF nonlinearity; (iv) low-latency beam alignment using
compressed DGM-based channel representations; and (v) joint channel estimation
and beam alignment using DGM-based site-specific codebooks. The project will
also build novel simulators and experiments to accurately characterize UHD
channels in the context of 6G cellular systems, in collaboration with the RINGS
industry partners, to benefit the wider 6G ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.