* 2148303
* RINGS: Massive Extended-Array Transceivers for Robust Scaling of All-Digital mmWave MIMO
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Mark Rodwell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 660,893.00

As the demand for high-speed wireless data keeps growing, it is essential to
access the vast amounts of spectrum available in “millimeter wave (mmWave)”
frequency bands, which are orders of magnitude higher than the frequency bands
used in WiFi and cellular systems today. There has been substantial recent
progress demonstrating feasibility of radio frequency integrated circuits
(RFICs) built with low-cost silicon semiconductor processes, for lower mmWave
frequency bands such as 28 GHz licensed spectrum (for 5G cellular), and 60 GHz
unlicensed spectrum (for next-generation WiFi). This project aims to provide a
quantum leap beyond these efforts, developing strategically important and
commercially viable technologies for opening up upper mmWave bands beyond 100
GHz. A specific goal is to develop antenna arrays with thousands of elements,
capable of forming agile pencil beams tracking mobile devices, which can be
miniaturized into compact form factors because of the tiny wavelengths at 100+
GHz. The project investigates novel approaches for co-design of hardware and
algorithms for scaling array sizes, targeting significant jumps in attainable
link distances and data rates (10 Gbps per mobile user in an urban cell, and 100
Gbps for a fixed wireless alternative to fiber).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millimeter
wave (mmWave) communication will play a crucial role in next-generation
communication infrastructures. A fundamental bottleneck in mmWave hardware
development is packaging: “fitting” the RFIC electronics becomes difficult at
small carrier wavelengths due to the standard constraint of half-wavelength
spacing between antennas. This project investigates novel hardware architectures
that sidestep such packaging bottlenecks to realize massive extended arrays,
along with closely coupled innovations in all-digital hierarchical signal
processing architectures, targeting quantum leaps in capacity and resilience.
Hardware research includes development of extremely low-cost 140GHz transceiver
modular array tile technologies that readily scale to arrays having vast numbers
of elements. Signal processing and systems research develops all-digital
hierarchical signal processing architectures matched to the tiled hardware
architecture, illustrating the system-level impact of the robustness and
additional spatial degrees of freedom provided by extended arrays in canonical
multiuser (MU) MIMO and Line of Sight (LoS) MIMO settings aimed at flexible,
cost-effective deployment of access and backhaul nodes. A key design concept is
spatial redundancy: by choosing hardware and system parameters such that the
number of array RF channels greatly exceeds the number of MIMO signals involved,
it becomes possible to simplify power consumption and die area by sacrificing
dynamic range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.