* 2148475
* Collaborative Research: Facility: CSDMS: Engaging a thriving community of practice in Earth-surface dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Moira Zellner, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 273,340.00

Natural processes such river floods, landslides, hurricanes, stream meandering,
and coastal erosion continually alter Earth's landscapes, seascapes, and
coastlines. From an engineering perspective, such processes can pose hazards to
people and can damage infrastructure. From a scientific perspective, these same
processes are responsible for shaping the Earth's surface and creating the
sedimentary deposits that contain useful resources as well as critical archives
of our planet's history. One of the key tools that scientists use to study
Earth-surface processes is computer simulation modeling. Computer models, which
use equations and algorithms to simulate natural processes, provide a way to
perform controlled experiments on geological systems and to compare theory with
a rapidly growing body of data about Earth's dynamic environment. Recent
advances in both data and computing technology have opened new possibilities for
discovery. To unlock this potential, this project, which supports continuing
operations of the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS)
Geoinformatics facility, provides training and technology development that will
bridge the gap between the power of today’s digital resources and the ability of
the Earth-surface processes research community to take full advantage of them.
CSDMS combines intellectual merit, in the form of new and improved digital
resources for Earth science research, and broader impacts, in the form of
training and workforce development for students and early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in both data and
cyberinfrastructure have opened new possibilities for understanding the dynamics
of Earth's surface. To unlock this potential, the CSDMS facility combines
community capacity-building and technology development to bridge the gap between
today's powerful cyber resources and the ability of the research community to
take full advantage of them. CSDMS provides training, workforce development,
online learning resources, and outreach to traditionally underrepresented
groups, alongside innovative cyberinfrastructure that speeds the time to science
by lowering technical barriers. CSDMS's intellectual merit lies in its
contribution toward developing a quantitative, mechanistic understanding of
diverse Earth-surface processes. This goal is advanced in part through new
technology, such as the ability to launch models from an online repository to a
cloud-hosted computing platform, and new tools to make community software
contributions more sustainable via shared, auto-tested repositories. CSDMS's
broader impacts include education and workforce development, through programs
such as a summer school in geoscience computing, annual scientific meetings, and
onsite training visits that provide educational opportunities for students and
early career scientists at a variety of higher-education
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.