* 2148995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Financialization of Industrial Waste Recycling
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Shannon Dawdy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Considerable waste is generated in industrial settings, and efforts are
frequently made to recycle waste more efficiently and profitably. The
commoditization of waste among transnational institutions has broad economic,
environmental, and health implications for communities that engage in the trade
of waste. This study focuses in particular on the recycling of scrap metal from
the shipbuilding industry, which employs large numbers of workers in domestic
and international contexts. At multiple sites, the researchers use a complement
of ethnographic methods to examine how working conditions, social organization,
and ecological factors are impacted by fluctuations in the transnational flows
of waste and its financialization. Relevant findings are shared with diverse
stakeholders to improve local and global recycling infastructures in ways that
enhance the working conditions of laborers in the industry while minimizing
environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project
examines the social and ecological consequences of changes in the
commoditization of scrap metal waste. The researchers employ participant
observation among financial professionals working in international scrap-metal
markets. Similar ethnographic methods are used among workers at a ship-breaking
yard. In addition to participation observation, semi-structured interviews will
be conducted with a sample of key informants at both sites. Surveys and archival
research on changes in the policies and economics of the scrap-metal provide
complementary data that contextualize the ethnographic research. The findings of
this research contribute to debates in economic anthropology, science and
technology studies, and scholarship on the anthropology of finance, work, and
waste. The project also contributes to the education of a graduate student in
the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.