* 2148606
* Engaging Underrepresented Populations in Environmental Action through Mentoring, Geospatial Technology and Digital Media Storytelling
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* David Campbell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,350,000.00

This project seeks to address several challenges simultaneously: there is a need
to improve the diversity of learners and workers in environmentally-focused
STEAM (i.e., science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics) careers
and educational programs, a need to broaden participation in community
environmental action, and a need to train future environmentally-focused STEAM
workers in effective science communication. This project builds on an existing
program that engages teens in intergenerational community conservation projects
via geospatial technology so that it can better engage underrepresented youth.
The innovation of the project is the inclusion of near-peer mentoring of high
school students by undergraduate students, along with other culturally
sustaining revisions to the existing program like the inclusion of other digital
media forms to better support narrative storytelling, and the integration of a
career guidance panel led by professionals engaged in relevant environmental,
geospatial, and digital media careers. To prepare the undergraduates as near-
peer mentors, they will be engaged in an Environmental Action through
Storytelling and Mentoring course. The program will engage school pods (each
with about 5 teens and 1 teacher) in both short-term workshops and long-term
environmental action projects, guided by the near-peer mentors, university
faculty, and community conservation partners. The digital storytelling products
of these projects will be shared with the general public via radio, television,
and digital platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are framed
around the concept of “identity authoring,” which entails three dimensions of
engagement: developing competence with a domain’s content, engaging in
performances of domain-specific practices, and being recognized (by oneself and
by others) for one’s competence and performance. The project will (RQ1)
investigate how the learners’ career interests and identity authoring are
influenced by the digital media-supported science communication, the near-peer
mentoring, and engagement in community environmental action. The project will
also (RQ2) characterize how identity authoring takes place within the school
pods. The project will engage up to 270 underrepresented teens, 60
undergraduates, and 54 educators, all of whom will complete pre-, post- and
delayed-surveys to measure participants’ identity authoring. To address the
second research question, purposive sampling will be used to select 4-10
participants for a longitudinal case study and an additional 4-10 participants
for focus groups. The contribution to the field lies in the project’s
exploration of how different program elements may encourage identity authoring
among underrepresented youth. The broader impacts of the project include
exposing learners to the constellation of STEAM careers associated with
exploring and communicating environmental issues, as well as the impacts the
youth projects may have on local community environmental issues. To facilitate
adoption of the program model by others, the approach will be shared via a
variety of dissemination strategies with community members, peers, and
environmentally-focused STEAM professionals. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.