* 2148520
* A Model Program to Engage Students in Authentic, Technology-Infused Coastal Research and Monitoring: Building Student Data Literacy and Career Competency through Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Susan McKay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,350,000.00

The project will introduce and investigate an innovative model for using
authentic community-relevant research to deepen students' STEM knowledge and
skills, while building strong community connections between Maine's coastal
school districts and their communities. The project will involve teachers and
administrators, STEM and STEM education faculty, and business leaders and other
community members in a research practice partnership. The partnership will
support middle school and high school students in authentic science research
experiences, including coastal monitoring and investigations of local changes in
ocean water properties. Data from these studies will inform community policy
decisions and strategic planning. Through the proposed work, teachers and their
students will expand their awareness and understanding of local career
opportunities where STEM knowledge and experience, including computing,
computational thinking, and technology, are required. A diverse group of
business and non-profit partners will be involved in STEM classes and career
competency development in meaningful ways, such as mentoring, job shadowing, and
internships, preparing students for STEM careers using technology, computing,
collaboration, and communication. The project will engage 20 teachers from
multiple school districts, who will become peer guides for future teachers to
build stronger connections between communities and their schools using this
model. The project will impact at least 2500 students from economically-
challenged, rural Maine communities, many of whom will be the first in their
family to attend college. Through collaborative summer institutes and school-
year work sessions, partners will develop and disseminate modules that use
marine sciences examples and data for use in courses including, but not limited
to, science, social studies, mathematics, and statistics. The model and lessons
learned will be transferable to other partnerships that aim to broaden
participation in STEM in rural communities and more deeply engage students
through community-relevant research using technology and computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will generate an evidence-based model of
professional learning and curricular supports for teachers to guide technology-
infused, multi-disciplinary student research. Pre- and post-survey data will be
collected from the students of participating teachers to see how the community
relevance, marine sciences emphasis, and research involvement impact students'
learning, engagement, and attitudes toward STEM and STEM careers. Student data
will be disaggregated by gender and, where possible, by racial and ethnic groups
to better understand how to make STEM education inclusive, exciting, and
valuable for all. The model and knowledge gained from the project’s research and
evaluation will be disseminated to the STEM and STEM education research
communities, and to practitioners and other stakeholders, both locally and
nationally. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.