* 2148041
* Impact of Matrix Viscoelasticity on Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Ovijit Chaudhuri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2026
* USD 990,839.00

This project will study the use of engineered biomaterials to guide the life,
death, and development of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), which
will advance our understanding of hiPSC biology, identify design rules for
development from the hiPSCs, reveal how hiPSCs are able to form organ-like
structures (organoids) containing lumens, and provide insight into human
development. hiPSCs are derived from normal adult cells and have the potential
to turn into any type of cell in humans, similar to the potential of embryonic
stem cells. Until now, the scientific community has mostly focused on using
biochemical factors and Petri dish-based culture to study and drive the
development of these stem cells. The engineered biomaterials-based work in this
project represents a new approach to studying and using hiPSCs, and the
successful completion of this work should lead to biologists, bioengineers, and
clinicians adopting these engineered biomaterials as a matrix to grow cells for
studies or applications involving hiPSCs. The results of this research will be
disseminated through presentations at conferences and peer-reviewed journal
publications. This project will support the training of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, undergraduate students including those from groups
underrepresented in science, high school students including those from high-need
under-resourced schools, and high school teachers. Hands-on demonstrations
related to the research targeted at a lay audience will be developed in parallel
and delivered to audiences at various venues open to the broader public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to determine how
the biological and mechanical properties of hydrogels regulates the
morphogenesis of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). Alginate
hydrogels with independently tunable stiffness, viscoelasticity, and cell-
adhesion ligand densities will be used for 3D culture of hiPSCs. Preliminary
results have identified that hydrogels that are more viscous and contain high
cell-adhesion ligand densities promote hiPSC growth, proliferation, and lumen
formation in hiPSCs, with the hiPSCs maintaining their pluripotency over long
times. The first objective of the project is to determine the effect of hydrogel
properties on the morphogenesis and lumenogenesis of hiPSCs cultured within the
hydrogels, and fully characterize the molecular state of the hiPSCs in the
different conditions by use of phosphoprotein arrays, RNA-seq, and ATAC-seq. The
second objective of the research is to elucidate the physics of lumen formation
by hiPSCs in viscoelastic hydrogels using pharmacological inhibition and
CRISPR/Cas9 knockouts combined with timelapse confocal and lattice light sheet
microscopy. These studies will reveal how known mechanisms of force generation
combine to drive lumen formation and expansion. Finally, hiPSCs undergo
apoptosis, or programmed cell death, in more elastic hydrogels with no cell-
adhesion ligands, but not in fast-relaxing viscoelastic hydrogels with no cell-
adhesion ligands, which indicates that an adhesion-independent mechanism
regulates apoptosis. The third objective of the project will be to determine the
molecular mechanism mediating the effects of hydrogel viscoelasticity on
apoptosis, focusing on the role of cell volume regulation and mechanosensitive
ion channels, and utilizing inhibition studies and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.