* 2148091
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Tracing Inputs and Transport of Aluminum, Manganese, and Iron from the Amundsen Sea Sector of the Antarctic Continental Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2025
* USD 187,233.00

The international GEOTRACES program seeks to understand the distributions of
trace elements and their isotopes in the oceans. As part of this effort, the US
GEOTRACES program will undertake the GP17-ANT research cruise in November
2023-January 2024, with a focus on the distribution of trace elements and
isotopes in the Amundsen Sea sector of the Southern Ocean. Biological production
in the Southern Ocean plays an important role in regulating atmospheric carbon
dioxide via biological uptake and the associated transfer of organic matter into
the ocean interior. Most of this ocean region has abundant major nutrients
(nitrogen, phosphorous and silicon) required for phytoplankton growth, but is
deficient in the essential micronutrient iron. This means that phytoplankton
growth during the summer growing season is regulated by iron. Other trace
elements, such as manganese and cobalt, may also hold importance in this
context. Hence, there is a compelling need to constrain the sources of these
micronutrient trace elements to Southern Ocean surface waters. Chief among these
sources are sediments, glaciers and sea ice on the Antarctic continental
margins. This project seeks to advance understanding of the sources and
transport of the micronutrients iron and manganese in the Amundsen Sea sector of
the Southern Ocean, as part of the upcoming GEOTRACES GP17-ANT research
expedition. The Amundsen Sea is a highly productive section of the Antarctic
continental margin that is bordered by some of Antarcticaâ€™s most rapidly melting
glacial ice shelves, and is thought to provide an important source of dissolved
iron to the adjacent, iron-deficient surface waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current. As such, the measurements of trace elements and isotopes during this
expedition will provide a critically important benchmark to assess the impacts
of major changes that are anticipated for this marine environment during the
coming decades, such as inputs of the micronutrient iron that are associated
with increased glacial melting. The project involves two US laboratories, and
will support the research of a graduate student and an undergraduate student.
The project also includes the participation of a K-12 STEM education specialist
who will develop educational outreach materials targeting elementary and middle
school students and science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
concentrations of trace elements that serve as micronutrients (dissolved iron
and manganese) and tracers of inputs from continental dust and seafloor
sediments (dissolved aluminum and manganese) will be measured in seawater
samples collected during GP17-ANT. In addition, shipboard experiments will be
performed to assess the potential for suspended particles and surface sediments
to contribute these dissolved trace elements to surface seawater. This work,
together with measurements of other trace elements and isotopes made by
collaborators, will assess the sources, transport and chemical transformations
of micronutrients in this sector of the Antarctic continental margin, and hence
the trajectories of these micronutrient inputs in response to future
environmental changes. The chemical analyses of dissolved aluminum, manganese
and iron will be performed at sea, in near real-time, thus providing data to
inform the cruise sampling strategy and guide the analyses of other
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.