* 2148023
* STEM Tales: Investigating the effect of media read-alouds on young children's STEM and literacy learning and interest in STEM careers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Keliann LaConte, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,349,995.00

Exciting young children's interest in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) is an essential way to attract more students to STEM course
work and STEM careers. This project will use a variety of tools to engage four-
to eight-year-old children and their families. First, the project will create a
five-episode STEM media series for the Public Broadcasting System. The series
will include diverse STEM professionals, including astronauts and engineers,
reading STEM picture books from space, Earth and sea. The picture books will be
complemented by related media that shows diverse children engaging in STEM
activities in their homes and communities. Next, 10 family-friendly, low-cost
STEM activity kits that are aligned to the PBS series will be created. To
continue STEM learning at home, these kits will be shared with a national
network of libraries that serve diverse, low-income communities. To support STEM
learning in their local library, librarians will engage in professional
development. The innovative combination of digital media and libraries as hubs
for STEM learning and sharing take-home kits is expected to support young
children’s interest in STEM, their confidence for pursuing their STEM interests
and their early literacy skills. The project is a partnership among Twin Cities
Public Television, T2 Science and Math Education, American University’s School
of Education, and the Space Science Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reading
aloud to children increases their literacy. In turn, literacy skills are
strongly linked to STEM success. However, the literature on read-alouds is based
largely on reading in person. Less is known about how digital media read-alouds
support children’s STEM and literacy learning. This 30-month Developing and
Testing Innovations project will explore the extent to which digital media read-
alouds impact children’s STEM content learning, STEM-aligned literacy skills and
children’s interest in and awareness of STEM careers. It aims to increase the
quantity and quality of digital STEM media read-alouds and STEM library programs
for children and families of color and from low-income communities. All media
and hands-on STEM activities will be shaped by: 1) Established curriculum
frameworks, including the Next Generation Science Standards and Common Core
State Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy and Mathematics; 2) A
diverse project team and advisory board; 3) Evidence-based research on the use
of effective read-aloud strategies, best practices in children’s media
production, and STEM activities; and 4) Evaluation that includes parents and
librarians’ voices from the communities this project will serve. The mixed-
methods project will use quantitative data, in the form of pre- and post-surveys
around children’s STEM and literacy skills, knowledge and interest to assess
change over time. Qualitative data in the form of interviews and observations
will investigate children’s use of STEM and literacy skills and interest in STEM
careers. Themes around these constructs will be developed through constant
comparison of interview data and triangulation. Data collection sampling will
occur at the library level through a simple randomized sampling of children
within the targeted age range. Formative evaluation with parents and librarians
will provide feedback on the new media and aligned activities. An independent
evaluation will examine librarians’ professional development and program
implementation, seeking to understand how library educators engage and motivate
children and parents/caregivers around STEM topics and career pathways. The
project involves eight research sites and 21 outreach sites across the country
with the goal of engaging 42 librarians working with over 200 children and over
400 parents/caregivers. More broadly, the STEM Tales media will appear across
multiple national PBS digital platforms where it will reach an estimated two
million viewers (including children, librarians, educators, and parents) over a
seven-year rights period. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.