* 2148705
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing MPOWIR to Build a Diverse and Inclusive Oceanography Workforce
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Mona Behl, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 147,021.00

MPOWIR (Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention) is a
community-led program aimed at providing mentoring to junior women and other
marginalized and underrepresented genders (herein referred to women+) in
physical oceanography to improve their retention in the field. Since its
inception in 2007, MPOWIR has made substantial contributions to decreasing the
attrition of women+ physical oceanographers. However, MPOWIR’s work is far from
being done. Shifting demographics, the impact of COVID-19 on the careers of
women+, and longstanding structural inequities remain challenges to retention.
This project would sustain and enhance MPOWIR for another 4 years. It seeks to
improve retention through a series of interrelated objectives that include: (1)
providing continuity of mentoring from a woman’s+ career transition from
graduate school to postdoctoral years to the early years of her permanent job,
(2) providing mentorship training to MPOWIR participants, (3) fostering a sense
of community in physical oceanography, (4) broadening participation in MPOWIR by
providing training and professional development opportunities to all those who
self-identify as physical oceanographers, and (5) engaging a cross-section of
stakeholders to develop a shared vision for the next decade of MPOWIR. To meet
the needs and expectations of its stakeholders, MPOWIR aims to enhance its
design by incorporating a few new initiatives to provide additional professional
development opportunities and support to the community of mentors and peers that
MPOWIR has helped build over the past 16 years, and lead to improvement in the
overall culture of the physical oceanography community.

Specifically, this funding supports the following MPOWIR activities: 1. Pattullo
Conference held biannually, brings ~25 junior women+ physical oceanographers
together with 12 senior physical oceanographers of all genders for a 2.5 day
meeting focused on discipline-based mentoring. 2. Mentoring groups of ~6 junior
and 2 senior women+ physical oceanographers meet for a monthly teleconference,
for the purpose of confidential, personalized mentoring. 3. MPOWIR website
serves as a repository of resources for mentoring and physical oceanography
careers. 4. MPOWIR webinars and virtual discussions held semi-annually, focus on
topics of particular interest to those in the early stages of a physical
oceanographer’s first position, provide continued support for previous
participants, expand gender neutral participation, and connect to the broader
scientific community. 5. Townhalls held at large conferences, such as the Ocean
Sciences Meeting, provide a forum for dissemination of information and
communication with the whole oceanographic community. 6. Databases and surveys
are conducted to assess the effectiveness of MPOWIR activities, determine
community mentoring needs, and evaluate progress in retention. 7. NEW -
Mentorship training for mentors and mentees who participate in MPOWIR. 8. NEW -
Virtual Professional Development Conference held in the intervening years
between Pattullo conferences with the aim of broadening participation, expanding
training, and networking opportunities. 9. NEW - External program evaluation and
strategic planning to assess the impact of MPOWIR and establish a shared vision
with the oceanographic community for the next decade of the program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.