* 2148315
* RINGS: Resilient Delivery of Real-Time Interactive Services Over NextG Compute-Dense Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Elza Erkip, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 595,266.00

Real-time interactive (RTI) services are anticipated to be the ‘’next big thing”
in information technology, merging the areas of sensing, computation, and
communications that until recently have been treated separately. In traditional
systems, these building blocks are not optimized to work with each other, and
particularly not in real-time, constraining the type of services that can be
offered. RTIs require real-time aggregation of distributed data streams onto
edge/cloud compute servers that can process data as soon as it is generated. The
goal of this project is to develop a general mathematical framework as well as
concrete algorithms to provide such RTI services with guaranteed latencies. The
results benefit the US economy by enabling more efficient, more reliable, and
more resilient automation schemes, e.g., for smart factories and farms, as well
as improved augmented/virtual reality. The interdisciplinary nature of the
project benefits the students working on this project; a detailed plan for
outreach and increasing participation of underrepresented groups strengthens the
impact of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs a general
mathematical framework and concrete algorithms for reliable and resilient Real-
time interactive (RTI) systems. In a first thrust, the project explores the
limits of delivering latency-critical services reliably. The establishment of
the reliable network stability region provides bounds on how much offered RTI
traffic a network can support under the best of all algorithms. A packet-
lifetime-based queuing model serves as the basis of Lyapunov-drift-inspired
control algorithms that not only account for the packet delay but also takes
cost such as energy consumption into account. A second thrust of the project
develops robust NextG network control algorithms that can adapt to dynamic
network states. Integration of the approaches in the first two thrusts under a
common Lyapunov drift control framework is an avenue to enable reliable RTI
service delivery, which is verified by the implementation of the algorithm on a
Platform for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) community
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.