* 2148016
* Engaging Latinx Youth in Understanding the Science of Climate Change by Developing Digital Narratives and Games
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Paul Martin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2024
* USD 359,998.00

The project will engage LatinX middle and high school youth in developing
technology-rich, interactive digital media, games, and narratives about climate
science. In creating digital stories, youth will blend real-world scenarios with
their ideas and decision-making processes to solve climate-related problems.
This immersive experience will help the underserved population of LatinX youth
build robust knowledge of climate science and support their identities to serve
as community science experts. While creating digital narratives and preparing
for community events, the youth will interact with STEM role models in climate
science and information communication technologies. Such interaction can support
their exploration of STEM pathways and develop a deeper interest in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed as a participatory
research-practice project (RPP) which centers equity in its design and
implementation. This will be done by 1) investigating questions of common
interest to researchers, practitioners, and learners; 2) activating the talents
of all groups to co-create and test innovative learning experiences; and 3)
drawing on the experience and strengths of all groups to generate knowledge,
share findings, and determine next steps. By using the methods of surveys,
personal meaning maps, and focus groups with participating youth, the research
will focus on investigating outcomes related to increasing environmental science
knowledge and improving STEM career aspirations among Latinx teens. The study
will utilize both quantitative (Wilcoxon signed-rank tests) and qualitative
analysis (a priori and inductive coding). This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.