* 2148159
* Robust Covert Wireless Communications: Fundamental Limits and Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 03/31/2025
* USD 499,795.00

Wireless communication networks form a critical part of the national
infrastructure for both civilian and military applications. Because these
networks propagate a radio signal that can be readily observed, security and
privacy are major concerns. Much of security and privacy research focuses on
protecting the content of messages from eavesdroppers, but there are important
applications where even the detection of a communication signal's presence by an
adversary is undesirable. In a civilian setting, the detection of a signal from
an embedded medical device leaks health information, or the detection of
encrypted signals transmitted between parties can lead to that communication
being shut down by an authoritarian government. In a military setting, the
presence of communication signals can be used as a proxy for troop activity.
Hence, undetectable or low probability of detection (LPD) communications has
motivated significant historical and recent study. Protection against the
detection of a radio signal is challenging given recent advances in algorithms
and computation. Algorithmic advances through techniques based on artificial
intelligence (AI) and computational advances based on quantum computing provide
the adversary with a powerful set of tools for developing a signal detector.
This has motivated a branch of information systems research initiated by a
portion of this research team ten years ago, now termed “covert communications,”
that is developing a fundamental understanding of the ability of two parties to
communicate without detection by an attentive and capable adversary. This
project will develop results in covert communications for the models that
underpin radio communications to allow for the protection of messages in the
wireless communication systems that are crucial to modern
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For discrete-time additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channels, Bash, Goeckel, and Towsley initiated recent covert
communications work by demonstrating in 2012 that a transmitter Alice can
reliably transmit O(sqrt(n)) bits in n channel uses (and no more) to recipient
Bob without detection by an attentive and capable adversary Willie. And nearly
all work in covert communications has been performed on discrete-time models,
with the implicit understanding that the results would be applicable to the true
continuous-time system. But this is not true for important emerging
architectures for covert wireless communications; rather, the continuous-time
channel must be considered directly. This project will consider the fundamental
characterization of covert communication systems as they are considered for
implementation in wireless communications through three research thrusts: 1.
Foundations of covert communications in continuous-time systems: We focus on
performance characterization and design in the face of tools available for the
adversary Willie in continuous-time wireless systems: interference cancellation,
cyclostationary detectors, and transmitter identification. 2. Covert
communications in the presence of environmental interference: Covert
communications hidden behind environmental signals is preferable to employing
jamming. We focus on covert throughput bounds as a function of the interference
dynamics and techniques to achieve those bounds. 3. Learning-based covert
communication approaches: We design and analyze deep neural network (DNN)-based
covert transceivers by the simultaneous training of an adversary whose
performance is used as a regularizer in the training of the transmitter Alice.
The training of a diverse workforce in security and privacy is an important
aspect of the project. The third thrust that considers AI-based approaches at
both the communication parties and the adversary provides an accessible and
highly desirable research area for University of Massachusetts undergraduate
students in engineering and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.