* 2148871
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Anticipation, Catastrophic Flooding, and Canal Infrastructure in Urban Coastal Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Audra Simpson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 13,812.00

Flood risks are a chronic concern for many coastal inhabitants, and considerable
effort may be invested to mitigate those risks. In many settings, however,
projected future flood risks are sufficiently great that infrastructural
mitigation strategies are limited. In such settings, how do residents and other
stakeholders adapt to the prospect of rapid coastal change? This dissertation
research examines the social, political, and material effects of planning for
flood events and climate change for coastal urban waterways. Using a complement
of anthropological methods, the project investigates the varied questions and
possibilities around flooding faced by governments and communities as they
consider adjusting life in places that are already challenged by toxic waters,
constrained infrastructure, and concretized landscapes. In attending to concerns
around urban flood risk management, this project also contributes to a greater
understanding of the promises and challenges of infrastructure development and
expansion. The research supports the training of a graduate student in methods
of empirical data collection and analysis, and results are disseminated widely
through academic and non-academic avenues, including to organizations concerned
with environmental politics and policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
brings together scholarship in anthropologies of the environment and
infrastructure, critical indigenous and settler colonial studies, and
anthropologies of climate change and crisis, to examine how people imagine,
anticipate, and call upon diverse possibilities in remaking coastal landscapes.
The researcher examines how water and infrastructure are understood, managed,
and acted upon as part of these challenges and the ethics, politics, and
knowledge that are revealed as the multifaceted threats of climate change
confront the present formation and continued existence of coastal landscapes.
The research design includes the use of participant observation, interviews,
life histories, discourse analysis, and archival research to examine processes
of change and efforts to respond in anticipation of possible catastrophes. The
resulting findings allow for greater understandings of social and economic
adaptations to coastal flood risks in urban settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.