* 2148059
* Collaborative Research: Sustainable management of human organic pollutant exposure (HOPE) at formerly used defense sites in the changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Frank von Hippel, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 04/30/2026
* USD 205,972.00

The Arctic is contaminated by persistent organic pollutants (POPs) from many
sources, including thousands of formerly used defense (FUD) sites. As the
climate warms, POPs that had been bound in Arctic soils become more mobile and
enter the food chain, ultimately increasing human health risks from exposure to
POPs. The research team is collaborating closely with the Qawalangin Tribe of
Unalaska and City of Unalaska through a participatory research approach to
understand the risks of human exposure to POPs on Unalaska Island. The
community-driven co-production approach enables the continuation of culturally
important subsistence lifestyles, trains residents for research and management
techniques, and fosters proactive and sustainable public health risk management.
The results will inform management and remediation efforts at FUD sites and
thereby provide knowledge to make informed decisions about local resources and
minimize the health hazards faced by local populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The community-engaged research includes workshops,
interviews, and an environmental monitoring academy to collect the information
and samples for priority community needs. Workshops and interviews are being
conducted to identify research questions that are community-driven and at a
system scale related to sustainable management of POPs grounded in tribal self-
determination. The environmental monitoring academy includes classroom sessions
and field exercises on nutritional benefits of a subsistence diet, sources and
health effects of contaminants, environmental mapping, sampling techniques,
operation of analytical instruments, and appropriate quality assurance/quality
control procedures. Students collect and analyze environmental samples that are
critical for comprehensive understanding of FUD site pollution. To track broader
impacts, we are administering questionnaires at the end of workshops and
academies to assess the extent to which the community is gaining tools and
information to address issues surrounding POPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.