* 2148358
* RINGS: Resilient Edge Ecosystem for Collaborative and Trustworthy Disaster Response (REsCue)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Abderrahmen Mtibaa, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2025
* USD 751,057.00

This project addresses networking and security challenges in next generation
public safety and disaster response networks, where mission-critical emergency
operations (e.g., search and rescue) need to be performed with limited surviving
infrastructure, potentially augmented with diverse devices deployed by first
responders. These mission-critical operations are performed in a challenging
environment and can only be effective if the fundamental security and
architectural challenges specific to them are addressed, which is the goal of
this project. The project's novelties are: (i) effective integration of diverse
autonomous networks (e.g., utilities and smart homes) into a resilient,
cooperative, and secure network-of-networks; (ii) a system for supporting
network operations during broad disruptions including the enforcement of access
control to data and services, and (iii) efficient verification of untrusted
users' communications. The project's broader significance and importance are
two-fold: (i) providing new research outcomes in networking, near-user
computing, low-latency wireless communications, and cybersecurity, leading to
the creation of disruption-tolerant networks, whose use extends beyond effective
disaster/emergency response to other applications, such as rural networking and
distributed manufacturing; and (ii) contributions to a diverse workforce through
recruitment and training of a diverse student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project identifies the fundamental architectural and
security challenges in fragmented networks, such as seamless multi-modal
communications, resilient and verifiable computing, and trust management, and
addresses them for viable deployment in disaster-response scenarios. The
resulting outcome is a generic blueprint to design an edge-centric, trustworthy,
and resilient named data networking architecture. The project also investigates
foundational resilience challenges including engendering trust without a
centralized certificate authority in a network stitched-together from
independent network fragments, providing flexible and revocable access control
and authorization for data/services, and ultra-reliable low latency wireless
communications in challenging environments. The proposed designs and solutions,
grounded in rigorous analytical frameworks and theoretical models, reinforced by
real-world experimental evaluations, will form the basis for future edge network
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.