* 2148739
* Fostering STEM identify development through localized engineering for LGBTQ+ youth displaced by housing insecurity
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Jennifer DeBoer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 06/30/2025
* USD 394,861.00

The project will develop and research a model for engaging LGBTQ+ youth
experiencing housing insecurity in an engineering education program. This
research program explicitly broadens engineering and STEM participation through
a three-year Design-Based Research study. The team will collaboratively tailor
their existing “Localized Engineering in Displacement (LED)” curriculum to and
with LGBTQ+ runaway/homeless youth at a residential center in Indianapolis. The
LED curriculum uses Active, Blended, Collaborative, and Democratic pedagogy to
support learners in identifying a technical problem they see around them,
studying relevant STEM principles, and coming up with a solution they can use.
The educational technology kit (EngStarter) provides adaptable tools for
learners to use. The team will integrate practice and research and study the
development of youth identities, learning experiences, and technology
engagement. Enabling LGBTQ+ runaway/homeless youth will have large individual
and social impacts, expanding opportunities for this specific population to
choose STEM pathways, become self-reliant individuals, translate their assets
and potential into community development, and in turn support more youth in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LGBTQ+ runaway/homeless youth are often
characterized as an exceptionally vulnerable population with the
intersectionality of sexual orientation and gender, as well as race/ethnicity
and class, and research has overemphasized the deficits of these young people.
This project, therefore, uses an asset orientation in its theoretical and
methodological stance. Through a three-year Design-Based Research (DBR) study,
the project team will collaboratively design and contextualize a localized
engineering program consisting of a curriculum (“Localized Engineering in
Displacement”), a pedagogy (“Active, Blended, Collaborative, and Democratic”
learning), and a technology (“EngStarter,” a versatile educational lab kit).
Students are asked to identify, scope, and iteratively generate and test
solutions to a problem around them (“localized”), proceeding through the
tailored LED curriculum to learn relevant skills and lead decision-making. The
team will collaborate with Trinity Haven Transitional Home for LGBTQ+ Youth in
Indianapolis and co-design the localized engineering program, the technology
tools appropriate for the context, and the research. The research team will use
DBR, given its unique nature, to link practice and research to foster
collaborative participation throughout the program cycle. The project will
address questions regarding (1) identity negotiation, construction and
resolution experience and strategies: (1) (a). What identities do LGBTQ+ Youth
experiencing housing insecurity negotiate and resolve by participating in a
localized engineering in displacement program? (b) What strategies are employed
by youth in negotiating and constructing an engineering identity? (c). What are
the identities developed by teachers engaging in the program? (2) Unique LGBTQ+
runaway/homeless youth experiences and construction of multiple STEM pathways:
(2) (a) What are the experiences of youth participating in a localized
engineering in displacement educational program addressing community issues? (b)
In what ways does the program inform and augment choices of STEM workforce
pathways for youth? (c) What are the interactions and experiences of a local
teacher embedded with youth? (3) technology’s role and expertise of youth: (3)
(a) What are the roles and realized affordances of the EngStarter technology in
the negotiation of engineering identity? (b) What are design modifications youth
make to contextualize educational technology for their needs? (c) What is the
process by which teachers develop ICT self-efficacy with EngStarter? The
research will use quantitative and qualitative research methods to iteratively
develop the program model. The project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts, and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.