* 2148183
* RINGS: Robust and Resilient Wireless Networks using Next Generation Spectrum
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Eytan Modiano, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 572,239.00

Next-generation wireless networks will operate in an environment involving
extensive sharing of underlying infrastructure and spectrum with heterogeneous
characteristics. Many services will likely be provided by over-the-top providers
that utilize multiple networks of shared spectrum and infrastructure to provide
services to end-users. These trends raise new challenges in addressing how
resources are effectively shared within a network and how service providers can
effectively manage resources across different shared networks. These challenges
are particularly acute when attempting to offer services that have
stringent&lt;br/&gt; Quality of Service requirements, e.g., in terms of latency
and reliability, and so require a high level of robustness. This project is
developing an architecture, associated resource provisioning mechanisms, and
autonomous control algorithms to meet these challenges and to&lt;br/&gt;enable
robust and resilient next-generation wireless networks based on infrastructure
and spectrum sharing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture being developed
will enable service providers to utilize shared infrastructure and spectrum to
increase resilience. A hierarchical architecture is being considered in which
infrastructure and services are separated. Service provisioning schemes are
being developed that include approaches for pooling different bands of spectrum
with different availability, orchestrating service guarantees over a shared
infrastructure, and providing probabilistic service guarantees over different
timescales. Autonomous network control algorithms are also being developed that
make intelligent use of the services provided by the underlying infrastructure.
These algorithms learn the dynamics of the underlying infrastructure (e.g.,
capacity, latency, reliability) and dynamically adapt to changes in both the
infrastructure and end-user traffic demands. A combination of simulation and
testbed implementation is being used to evaluate and validate the algorithms.
The project also seeks to introduce undergraduates into the research process and
is incorporating the research results into advanced graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.