* 2148921
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Nitrogen isotope dynamics on the Amundsen Sea continental margin
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 02/28/2026
* USD 365,989.00

The continental shelf of Antarctica is a dynamic and often biologically
productive polar environment, with global importance for ocean circulation,
nutrient and carbon cycling. Due to its high latitude location and the impacts
of the proximal Antarctic ice sheet, the Antarctic continental shelf stands to
change quickly under ongoing global warming. Yet the natural state of the
Antarctic continental shelf is poorly known, and previous research suggests that
this environment has changed through time, which would also signal how it may
change in the future. This study will investigate the operation of the nitrogen
cycle on the Antarctic continental shelf, using the natural isotopes of
nitrogen. Nitrogen is a critical nutrient for life, limits biological
productivity in many environments, and provides a holistic view of the balance
between biological growth and decomposition in ocean waters. The nitrogen
isotope measurements, combined with the other measurements of the U.S. GEOTRACES
GP17-ANT expedition, will determine the major sources and sinks of biological
productivity on a segment of the Antarctic continental shelf – the Amundsen Sea
shelf – that may be particularly susceptible to change as Antarctic ice sheet
melting accelerates. The measurements will also provide key baseline information
to support the reconstruction of past changes using sediment cores and other
archives. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students and support
one early career postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
GEOTRACES GP17-ANT expedition will provide the opportunity to generate
complementary data sets of trace elements and isotopes on the Amundsen Sea
shelf, an Antarctic margin environment characterized by abundant sea ice,
melting ice shelves, and highly productive polynyas. For all stations of
GP17-ANT, full depth profiles of the nitrogen and oxygen isotope ratios of
nitrate will be measured, along with nitrogen isotope ratios of total dissolved
nitrogen at a few representative stations to provide insight into nitrogen
sources and cycling in the water column. Moreover, suspended particle nitrogen
isotope ratios will be measured from the GEOTRACES high-volume pump samples from
deeper depths than standard methods allow, to investigate regeneration and
ground-truth the application of deep-sea coral nitrogen isotope ratios as a
paleo-proxy. Lastly, from surface sediment samples, bulk sediment and diatom-
bound nitrogen isotope ratios will be measured, providing ground-truthing for
ongoing paleo-oceanographic reconstructions using longer sediment
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.