* 2148944
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negotiating migration adversity and well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Amy Non, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

As migrants navigate public places, medical systems, and resettlement efforts in
new cities, they often encounter discrimination, inadequate resources, and a
lack of institutional services, which have been well-documented to have a
syndemic effect with other underlying health issues. This doctoral dissertation
research project examines how experiences of adversity relate to resilience and
well-being in urban environments, and what resources are leveraged in responding
to adversity. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology and biocultural data collection and analysis, this
project measures the role that resilience and sentiments of belonging play in
influencing experiences of adversity in multicultural and urban environments.
The project enhances public understanding of science and the scientific method
by engaging its research communities in the scientific research process and
broadly disseminating its findings beyond academic venues. It also broadens the
participation of underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
multidisciplinary methods, this project investigates resilience and well-being
by examining the behavioral context of migrant decision-making, focusing
specifically on how issues related to health, livelihood, and time management
are prioritized. This project asks two main questions: 1) how do migrants make
sense of and negotiate experiences of adversity? and 2) how do spaces of
community both succeed and fail to manage the effects of adversity? Methods
include participant observation, semi-structured interviews, focus groups, and
mapping workshops to explore the relationship between resilience and adversity.
Data will be coded around themes of belonging, histories of migration,
experiences of city-life, migration trade-offs, ideas of community, and notions
of well-being. By scientifically investigating how migrants negotiate adversity
and resilience in their daily lives, this project will contribute to research on
community, resilience, and well-being in urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.