* 2148313
* RINGS: LARA: Layering for Active Resiliency and Awareness in Next-generation Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Urbashi Mitra, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 663,394.00

Wireless networks are an essential societal infrastructure, much like power,
water, and transportation systems. With the growing incidence of natural and
human-induced disruptions, it has become critical that network service is
resilient to unforeseen disruptive events. The state of the art in wireless
network design does not directly provision for large-scale disruptive events
such as a weather event disabling base-stations. In other words, the wireless
networks of today play a small role in ensuring its own resiliency. Our research
advances the national infrastructure, prosperity and welfare by providing a
novel resiliency paradigm for Next Generation networks. In particular, the
specific aim of this research is to design a new generation of wireless networks
that stay vigilant by sensing both the internal system state and the external
environment. The inclusion of sensing into a future physical layer will be a
cornerstone of realizing next generation (such as 6G) wireless networks. Joint
sensing and communication will enable high performance allocation of limited
resources and create the ability for the network to reason about itself and its
environment. We assert that such a paradigm needs to adopt the following design
principles: First and foremost, resilient systems assume that unforeseen
disruptions can and will occur. Second, the systems are smart in their vigilance
by actively managing the resources to form a world-view that enables active
preparedness and resilience. Third, armed with active vigilance, resilient
systems are in a constant state of preparedness, continually adapting their view
of the world by counterfactually reasoning about the system’s future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate the translation of academic
research through an active and sustained engagement with industry on this future
network design. The proposed work will yield software, open data sharing and
research leveraging the PIs’ extensive track-record of open-source experiments.
The PIs will expand the existing educational and outreach programs to increase
participation from under-represented groups in Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering at their institutions. These programs focus on all levels of
education and engagement, from faculty to post-doctoral researchers, graduate
students and undergraduates. In particular, we will take a data-driven approach
to widening participation of underrepresented groups in flagship conferences of
the field as well as the annual Information Theory and Applications workshop
which is held annually at University of California San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.