* 2148132
* RINGS: Coding over High-Frequency for Absolute Post-Quantum Security (CHAPS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Daniel Mittleman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 667,530.00

New generations of wireless networks aim to provide responsive, ubiquitous
service in a way that is reliable and secure. Currently underutilized parts of
the spectrum, at very high frequencies, can provide massive bandwidth, and new
possibilities for services that require high responsiveness, such as self-
driving cars or augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR). Such services are, in
addition, critical and sensitive, requiring thus high security. Traditional
approaches to ensuring security exploit cryptographic approaches that can add
non-negligible delay because of their complexity; some are even being steadily
undermined by the fast progress of quantum computing. The existing security
techniques that are post-quantum secure are even slower and more onerous,
rendering them less attractive for delay-critical applications. This project
addresses these challenges in an integrated way by making active and synergistic
use of the characteristics of operating at very high frequencies and of recent
mathematical developments in systems that remain secure under quantum computing
attacks. The approach also offers low complexity and is therefore compatible
with low-delay, highly responsive system requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
high frequencies, the location of an eavesdropper deeply affects their ability
to listen in on private communications when the appropriate hardware, namely
antennas, are used. With the right antennas, a legitimate receiver can be given
an edge, even a slight one, over the eavesdropper and that edge can be turned
into a key advantage through mathematical transformations. The approach relies
on mathematically pre-processing data in such a way that an eavesdropping
intercepting part of the communication cannot recover the missing data, unless
100% of it is available, thus thwarting the effort. Furthermore, wireless
communications are often subjected to noise and interference, ranging from a
microwave oven to a neighboring user's activity. In order to combat those
effects, the data encoding mechanism must be robust, while still maintaining
security. Very new developments in techniques for combatting noise lend
themselves well to work with the sort of security approaches to be developed in
this project. The outcomes of this project will be high speed, low delay, cost-
effective, energy efficient communications that can remain secure even to
sophisticated, powerful attackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.