* 2148217
* Collaborative Research: Patterns, Context, and Secondary Impacts of State Policy Responses to the Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Harden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2024
* USD 76,027.00

Understanding the role of policy developments in the response to the COVID-19
pandemic is vital for researchers, lawmakers, and the public to improve
preparedness for future public health emergencies. This opportunity to learn
from an ongoing pandemic and inform choices in the future requires extensive and
timely data gathering. U.S. state governments have taken tens of thousands of
public policy actions—executive orders, regulations, and laws in response to
COVID-19. This project advances our understanding of the causes and consequences
of states' policy responses to the pandemic. The PIs collect data on state
governments' decisions to mitigate COVID-19's impact, analyze the adoption and
diffusion of pandemic-related policies, track state officials' online discussion
of the pandemic, and study health impacts of policies implemented in response to
it. This project provides insights into how states manage a global health
crisis, the ways that online communication and policy debate involving public
officials factor into the contemporary management of a public health emergency,
and the public health impacts of rapid innovations in state health policies. It
provides comprehensive data sources on state policy activities as well as online
communication by state officials. These data are helpful to others who seek to
understand the causes and consequences of states' pandemic policies. The project
also involves hiring and training a diverse, multidisciplinary team of graduate
and undergraduate research assistants as well as a post-doc. The project leaders
will provide extensive training, experience, and mentorship to these early
career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State policy responses to the COVID-19
pandemic have occurred rapidly, with information and choices updated daily. This
timeframe provides an opportunity to study the rapid spread of policy
responses—two orders of magnitude more frequent than the typical yearly
timescale covered in policy diffusion research. The data collected in this study
cover hundreds of pandemic-related policies and tens of thousands of policy
actions by states, all unfolding over a three-year time period. The decision
environment in which governments select their responses to COVID-19 involves
several key components that have been found to be important in the study of the
spread of public policy: information, imitation, competition, and coercion.
Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic represents a rare opportunity to study the spread of
public policy with voluminous contemporary information about the factors that
influence states' decisions. Specifically, this project uses the recent timeline
and high salience of COVID-19 policy to understand the relationship between
online communication involving policymakers and official policymaking activity.
Because most elected state officials are active online, particularly on Twitter,
policy responses to COVID-19 present the opportunity to understand the
relationship between online communication by officials and public policymaking.
Lastly, to illustrate the utility of the data collected, this project uses a
difference-in-differences approach to study the COVID-19 policies’ secondary
impacts on health. Given that COVID-19 policy responses have affected every
facet of public and private life, this project includes a focused study of the
impacts of pandemic policy responses on maternal and infant health in the
American states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.