* 2148367
* RINGS: Bumblebee: A Neural Network Transformer Architecture for Summarization and Prediction in Interactive XR Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jeffrey Bilmes, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 679,922.00

Extended Reality (XR) applications tightly couple virtual content with the
physical world through technologies such as virtual and augmented reality. These
applications are compute-intensive, latency-sensitive, and bandwidth-hungry,
making them ideal drivers for next-generation communication architectures.
Current best-effort networking techniques struggle to meet the high demand of XR
workloads leading to dropped or delayed network packets, observable jitter, and
poor Quality-of-Experience. Fortunately, there are statistical correlations
between past and future packets that go under-exploited in modern XR systems.
The goal of this project is to develop a fast, resilient, and adaptive general
neural network transformer-based architecture for interactive XR applications
using machine learning (ML) to model, historically summarize, adapt to, predict,
and then utilize streaming time-series data. The proposed modeling strategy is
transformer-based, but it can represent context relationships going arbitrarily
far back in time, something ordinarily infeasible, and it can also rapidly adapt
to changing statistics via a novel adaptive final neural network layer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will result in a system that can transparently
interpose network control messages to reduce bandwidth through forecasting and
extrapolation. It will also help to mask packet delays and drops over wireless
channels improving network coordination critical to many XR applications like AR
guided surgery, search and rescue, digital telepresence and automotive heads up
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.