* 2148407
* Collaborative Research: The effects of terrestrial organic matter inputs on coastal mercury cycling, methylmercury production and bioaccumulation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 432,778.00

Climate change will influence the delivery of contaminants, organic matter, and
nutrients from land to the coastal ocean. This is because higher rainfall and
warming increase runoff from land to coastal waters. Runoff also influences
coastal algal blooms. These changes are expected to alter the distribution of
mercury in the water and impact its availability for biological uptake. Mercury
is a potent toxin. Its uptake into the food web contaminates fish and seafood
and affects human health. This project will study how organic matter delivered
from land to coastal waters affects mercury concentrations in seawater and in
the food webs of the Gulf of Maine. The Gulf of Maine is one of the largest and
most important coastal fishing grounds in the United States. This project will
measure the concentration and isotopes of mercury on samples collected from
research cruises under different algal bloom conditions and river flows. Lab
experiments will be used to study how land-derived organic matter affects
mercury accumulation in plankton. The project will provide research experiences
for four undergraduate students in a STEM field. Training will be provided to a
PhD student and a postdoctoral fellow. Findings from the project will provide
critical information about the effect of climate change on mercury levels in
marine waters and food webs. This information is needed for achieving the goals
of the Minamata Convention, a global treaty for reducing mercury emissions to
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the effects of
climate change on terrestrial organic matter and mercury concentrations in Gulf
of Maine waters. Specifically, the scientists will study the complex and often
competing processes that influence: 1) mercury cycling and distribution; 2) the
formation of methylmercury; and 3) methylmercury uptake to microplankton.
Terrestrial organic matter plays an important role in transferring mercury from
watersheds to coastal and offshore waters. It also controls the formation of
methylmercury in water by providing a microenvironment that promotes the
methylation of mercury by microbes, which represents the first step for uptake
of methylmercury into seafood. However, some plankton can directly use organic
matter as a food source (so-called “mixotrophs”) and can bioaccumulate
methylmercury during feeding. Mixotrophs can dominate microplankton assemblages
in coastal waters at some times of the year, and previous studies have not
explored the impact of this feeding mode on methylmercury uptake at the base of
the food web. This project will study the effects of organic matter dynamics on
mercury and methylmercury cycling and bioaccumulation through 1) field surveys
and shipboard experiments in the Gulf of Maine, where delivery of terrestrial
organic matter is increasing, and 2) through laboratory microcosm experiments
using autotrophic and mixotrophic microplankton taxa under contrasting carbon
acquisition modes and organic matter characteristics and concentrations. This
work will also apply novel mercury and methylmercury-specific isotope analyses
and measures of organic matter quality to increase understanding of mercury
cycling in coastal environments. This research will fill important gaps in
predicting the effects of environmental changes on marine methylmercury levels,
providing critical information to mitigating mercury emissions and methylmercury
exposures, and for predicting changes in mercury levels in seafood in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.