* 2148353
* RINGS: Enabling Joint Sensing, Communication, and Multi-tenant Edge AI for Cooperative Perception Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Wencen Wu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 665,053.00

Nationally, 40 percent of all traffic crashes involve intersections, with a
quarter of all traffic deaths and about half of all injuries occurring in such
locations. Recent advancements in vehicle communication and perception systems
have led to significant improvement of situational awareness in modern connected
and semi-autonomous vehicles. However, these light-based perception systems are
limited by view blockage in busy traffic intersections and thus cannot reliably
detect all objects. To improve sensing reliability, many autonomous systems rely
heavily on multiple active sensors including 3D LiDAR, Radar and Ultrasound
sensors. However, the improved perception reliability comes at the cost of
bigger and more complex systems with multiple vendor-specific components, which
cause much higher power consumption and increased maintenance, security and
reliability issues. Moreover, there are no coordination or multiple access
control mechanisms for nearby active sensors, thus potentially making nearby
perception systems interfere with each other in busy traffic intersections. The
goal of this project is to design a next generation system with multi-modal
sensing and low-latency communication capabilities that share the same essential
hardware including the spectrum band, baseband processing, and computing units.
This design will result in a low-cost and compact perception device that
provides cooperative sensing with nearby devices with improved resilience. To
improve the device utilization and harness the power of multiple artificial
intelligence (AI) services, this project proposes an edge computing framework to
enable multi-tenant AI capabilities on the proposed perception
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Federal Highway Administration (FHA) reports
approximately 2.5 million traffic intersection accidents every year. The
successful conclusion of this project will enable future sensing and
communication systems to cooperate with the infrastructure and nearby devices
automatically, detecting objects and mapping busy traffic intersections
reliably, thus decreasing the number of accidents and fatalities. The proposed
joint sensing and communication system will serve as a well-rounded, reference
design for the development community to use in future connected and sensing
systems. The proposed cooperative sensing mechanism will help lower the cost of
individual devices while at the same time achieving higher resilience and
minimizing interference between nearby systems. The proposed research will also
lower barriers for undergraduate and K-12 students (especially underrepresented
groups) to learn intelligent embedded systems design, internet-of-things, and AI
systems while accessing state-of-the-art edge-computing lab system settings with
remote testing, deployment, monitoring, orchestration, and over-the-air
programming capabilities. The lessons learned and system developed in this
project will serve as a plug-and-play resilient next-generation networking
solution to unlock more innovative future 5G/6G projects and
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.