* 2148203
* Repeated evolution of eye regression and loss: phylogenomics of scallops and relatives (Bivalvia: Pectinoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeanne Serb, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2025
* USD 814,628.00

Eyes in their many different forms have evolved numerous times in animals.
However, eyes are energetically expensive to produce, use, and maintain. As a
result, animals that live in dim light environments tend to have eyes that
maximize the ability to capture light at the expense of generating clear images.
Thus, different light environments produce selective pressures that are
predicted to affect eye number, form, and performance. The project will test
hypotheses of how the transition into dim or totally dark marine environments
may be related to eye regression and loss. To address these fundamental
questions in sensory biology, the project will collect and analyze genetic,
morphological, and ecological data under an evolutionary framework. Broader
societal impacts include addressing goals of the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS) by incorporating molecular concepts in the teaching of
evolution while using the eye as an approachable example. Novel curriculum on
evolution at the high school level will be created through a collaboration with
two educators immersed in the research project. Lesson plans will be publicly
available via websites (e.g., National Science Teaching Association) and
pedagogical data will be published in peer-reviewed journals. To expand training
opportunities, the team will develop a workshop on teaching evolution for 12
additional high school teachers in Year 3. Workshop impact will be assessed with
pre- to post- surveys. The work also will directly support the cross
disciplinary training of postdoctoral researchers and undergraduate students.
Participation of underrepresented groups in STEM is a
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding visual system diversity requires
determining ecological and evolutionary mechanisms responsible for functional
and morphological changes. Scallops and relatives (Pectinoidea) have tens to
hundreds of eyes on a single animal and broad bathymetric distributions spanning
the taxonomic and ecomorphological diversity of the clade. The proposed work
will use the Pectinoidea to understand eye evolution in association with
functional and ecological changes that may drive eye regression and loss, such
as oceanic depth. Harnessing the true potential of pectinoideans for
macroevolutionary research is contingent on the resolution of a robust time-
calibrated phylogeny and anatomical knowledge for the poorly studied taxa. This
work will address three central questions: 1) What are morphological and
functional changes of eyes among deep- and shallow- dwelling species? 2) When
and how many times have eyes been regressed or completely lost among
pectinoidean taxa? 3) Could the invasion of dim light or aphotic zones be
related to eye regression and loss? The project will infer the phylogenomics of
Pectinoidea using an anchored hybrid enrichment approach to understand the tempo
and mode of eye evolution and regression. The project will 1) provide extended
taxon sampling, a time-calibrated phylogeny, and taxonomic revision; 2) address
major gaps in knowledge of the factors and forces that have contributed to the
evolution and diversification of visual systems; 3) inform a broader
understanding of evolutionary processes underlying new traits; and 4) generate
new genetic resources for bivalves, an understudied, but phenotypically diverse,
group. All materials will be archived through publicly accessible
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.