* 2148655
* REU Site: Summer undergraduate research internships in ocean ecology, biogeochemistry, physical oceanography, and marine geology and geophysics in the CEOAS at OSU
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Kaplan Yalcin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 107,358.00

Oregon State University will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site program at its main campus in Corvallis, OR that will support ten
undergraduate interns. Interns will be mentored by faculty at the OSU College of
Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences (CEOAS). This REU Site offers research
experiences in physics of ocean circulation, ocean ecology and elemental
cycling, and marine geology and geophysics. The objectives of the REU program
are to:&lt;br/&gt;1) provide students the highest quality research experience in
ocean science and an understanding of its interdisciplinary nature;&lt;br/&gt;2)
provide students with a professional development and training opportunity
facilitating persistence and retention in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) career pathways; and&lt;br/&gt;3) increase access to and
participation in ocean sciences in under-represented groups through targeted
recruitment efforts at regional community colleges and four-year colleges and
non-research universities serving underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students in CEOAS are plugged into major
research centers, institutes, and initiatives and have access to premier
facilities including: the Regional Class Research Vessels (RCRV) project; the
Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI), which deploys and maintains the Endurance
Array in the northeast Pacific; the Marine and Geology Repository (MGR), which
curates core collections from the Antarctic and Southern Ocean, North Pacific,
and elsewhere; PacWave, which is building the first grid connecting wave energy
testing facility in the U.S.; and OSUâ€™s Marine Studies Initiative. The program
includes professional development seminars and fieldtrips. Prior interns have
participated in research cruises on the R/V Elakha (for coastal and estuarine
sampling) , R/V Oceanus, and other UNOLS and NOAA fleet vessels (for multi-week
cruises world-wide). The first of the RCRVs, the R/V Taani, will continue and
build upon the tradition of intern participation in seagoing research once
delivered to OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.