* 2148653
* RII Track-1: Future Technologies and Enabling Plasma Processes
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2027
* USD 4,069,259.00

Plasma is the most abundant form of matter in the observable universe. Plasma
Science and Engineering (PSE) translates advances in fundamental plasma science
to technologies that address society’s needs. This Future Technologies and
Enabling Plasma Processes (FTPP) project will develop future transformational
technologies enabled by PSE, including the design of novel materials,
agricultural applications, sterilization, food safety, and space weather
forecasting. The proposed foundational plasma research will incorporate the
complexity of particle kinetics and energy flow into theory, models, and
experiment. This will lead to better understanding, diagnosis, modeling, and
control of these processes in pursuit of transformational technologies. The
project integrates components of experimental and theoretical plasma research to
create a diverse and skilled workforce to strengthen PSE capacity in the state.
FTPP will be administered by the University of Alabama in Huntsville in
collaboration with nine other institutions: Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical
University, Alabama State University, Auburn University, Oakwood University,
Tuskegee University, University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, and University of South Alabama. The Computational Fluid Dynamics
Research Corporation will partner with the project to advance plasma
technologies for materials processing, aerospace, electronics, and energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of the Future Technologies and
Enabling Plasma Processes (FTPP) project is to: 1) develop transformative
technologies in hard and soft (or bio-) materials, food safety and
sterilization, and space-weather prediction; and 2) build capacity in Plasma
Science and Engineering (PSE) research and its supporting workforce, making
Alabama a world-renowned hub for PSE. Foundational plasma research will
incorporate the complexity of particle kinetics and energy flow into theory,
models, and experiment to understand: 1) energy transfer from electromagnetic
fields to plasma species mediated by collisions and collective processes (e.g.,
turbulence, self-organization); and 2) the transfer of energy and momentum from
large-scale flows and magnetic fields to the creation of highly energetic
particles in laboratory, ionospheric, magnetospheric, solar, and heliospheric
environments. These foundational research activities in PSE will enable future
transformational technologies including: 1) data-driven approaches in plasma-
synthesized, high-entropy, and quantum materials (addressing two of NSF’s 10 Big
Ideas, “Harnessing the Data Revolution” and “Quantum Leap”); 2) plasma-processed
polymer composites from waste materials; 3) surface-modified biomaterials with
antimicrobial properties and plasma-treated seeds with increased yield
potential; 4) food safety and sterilization; and 5) space-weather
fore/nowcasting to predict the geospace radiation environment and protect space-
based technologies. The requested resources and activities of the project will
establish and strengthen collaborations among academic institutions and
industries, thereby enhancing the research and education capacity for the
advancement of low-temperature-plasma science and technology across the state.
The core research program is well integrated with education, workforce
development, and diversity plans that span academic, public, and private
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.