* 2148543
* Engaging African American Young Women in STEM and Entrepreneurship Through Community-Centered Making
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Ken Rafanan, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,239,952.00

The project will develop and research a model for engaging high-school-aged
African American women from low-income families in STEM-related making and
entrepreneurship educational programs. Making is a culture that emphasizes
interest-driven learning by doing within an informal, peer-led, and creative
social environment. The project will introduce participants to a product design
and build cycle, involving three Making disciplines (e.g., computer-aided
design, ceramics, and textiles integrated with STEM concepts, skills, and
entrepreneurship. New pathways to STEM careers will open for these young women
as they make connections among their strengths and interests, and the knowledge
and skills they develop in the makerspace. Each of the project’s partners,
including the Forge Greensboro makerspace, the Greensboro Housing Authority
(providing low-income housing near the Forge), and TERC (a STEM education design
and research organization), brings distinct and necessary expertise to the
project: the Forge Greensboro makerspace (making and entrepreneurship).
Participants will spend about 4 hours a week over 13 weeks in the program. They
will start with a mini-design challenge week that provides a brief overview of
the design cycle, making, and entrepreneurship, conducted via a mobile maker
space in the participants’ community. After this session, participants will
choose making disciplines that they wish to explore. Following this initial
week, participants will work through a series of design and build sprints and
entrepreneurship sessions, which will culminate in a product-pitch-and-feedback
community event with a panel of local business people. Mentors from the Forge
makerspace will work with participants as they develop their project ideas and
designs and support participants in developing appropriate and relevant skills.
Based on project research and evaluation, the project will produce a
comprehensive multimedia guide aimed at informal learning spaces on designing
and implementing a making-and-entrepreneurship program, including how to create
partnerships between community-based organizations and makerspaces to engage
minoritized youth. The guide and project research will be shared with relevant
communities of informal learning researchers and developers, community
organizations, and the maker community via journals, conference presentations,
and social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an iterative,
participatory design research (PDR) framework that will bring the participants,
young African American women, together with makerspace experts, learning
designers, and community leaders to co-create processes and products that
reflect the women’s STEM-related interests. The project’s research will address
questions regarding participants’ development and the development of the project
model: (1) What STEM and entrepreneurship practices do the participants develop,
including defining problems, planning and carrying out an investigation/design
cycle, using math and computational thinking, designing a solution,
communication, and entrepreneurship practices; (2) How do participants come to
view their futures, with regard to STEM-related careers and pathways to them?
(3) What features of the program hold promise for stimulating and supporting
participants learning of STEM and entrepreneurship practices, and awareness of
STEM career pathways? and (4) How does the introduction of a cadre of young
African American women into the makerspace change the existing makerspace
community? The research will use qualitative and quantitative methods such as
surveys, analysis of participant artifacts, focus groups, interviews, and
ethnographic field observations to iteratively develop the program model and
determine how its features affect participants’ STEM-related practices, STEM
career awareness, and their views of the future. The project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.