* 2148635
* Chromatographic separation and degradation of dissolved and particulate organic matter in permeable shelf sediment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Markus Huettel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 360,269.00

Chromatographic separation and degradation of dissolved and particulate organic
matter in permeable shelf sediment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
the role of sandy sediments in the carbon cycle. Sandy sediments cover about
one-third of the continental shelf but are not well studied. Like a sand filter,
marine sands separate and trap dissolved and particulate materials as seawater
moves through. These processes influence organic matter cycling in sediments.
Because smaller particles travel more easily through the pore space than larger
ones, they move deeper into the seabed. This causes a separation of particulate
matter by size. Likewise, changes in oxygen and dissolved chemicals with depth
alter the surface properties of the sediment grains. Molecules with different
properties are separated based on these surface characteristics. The fates of
organic carbon, dissolved nutrients and pollutants in the coastal ocean are
linked to uptake by sediments, physical and microbial processes within
sediments, and release. Thus, it is important to understand the processes that
control the transport and accumulation of materials in the seabed. This project
will study the separation of particulate and dissolved organic matter
transported through marine sands. It will provide information critical for
understanding the cycling of carbon and nutrients at the seafloor. Graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project will receive training in marine
sediment functions and state-of-the-art methods that can help solve pressing
environmental issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this research
are to: 1) demonstrate and quantify the chromatographic separation of organic
matter in shelf sediments through the analysis of sediment cores from silicate
and carbonate sand beds, 2) characterize and quantify the separation process of
dissolved and particulate organic matter and identify key factors controlling
this separation in the sands, and 3) quantify the influence of organic matter
chromatographic separation on sedimentary oxygen consumption and dissolved
inorganic carbon production in these sands. The researchers will test the
hypothesis that chromatographic separation of particles and solutes takes place
in both sand types but differs with respect to the substances affected and the
effectiveness of the separation. Intra-grain permeability of biogenic sands can
enhance separation in carbonate sands through exclusion chromatography effects.
The separation process is expected to enhance decomposition activities through
the concentration of degradable materials in specific sediment layers. The
research objectives will be addressed with a combination of field and laboratory
studies that include tracer experiments and the analysis of dissolved and
particulate organic matter distribution in sand sediment cores sampled in the
field. Oxygen consumption and dissolved inorganic carbon production will be
measured to reveal the relevance of this process for the sedimentary degradation
process. The demonstration of chromatographic separation of particles and
solutes in marine sands will close a gap in our understanding of the chemical
processes that govern the fate of organic matter, nutrients, and pollutants.
This project will provide research training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. Results from this study will help improve models of the
global cycles of elements that can be used for predicting global environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.