* 2148122
* Transitions: Creating a Trans-Disciplinary Approach to Discover Multi-Scale Control Mechanisms of Plant Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Daniel Szymanski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2024
* USD 412,639.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In crop species, the architecture
of the plant is a primary determinant of yield and can define its value as a
renewable biomaterial. Cells are the building blocks of architectural traits and
their growth is driven by a large internal pressure that makes the cells turgid
and subjects the tough outer cell to very high tensile forces. The material
properties of the cell wall determine the patterns of growth across a wide range
of spatial scales. A major challenge in plant biology is to understand how
genetic pathways and proteins inside the cell control the extracellular
properties of polysaccharides to dictate growth patterns. The protein
machineries inside the cell need to interpret information from the cell wall so
that changes in cell size and shape can be predictable. Plant growth systems can
be thought of as genetically encoded biomechanical machines that self-assemble
in predictable ways. Progress in unravelling the underlying control mechanisms
has been hindered by the lack of interdisciplinary approaches that combine the
concepts of physics and material science with those of plant genetics and cell
biology. There is a strong need for biologists to be able to develop and fully
characterize mechanical models of plant development that provide the knowledge
base for understanding the cellular mechanisms of plant morphogenesis and the
downstream application of this knowledge to agriculture. The research and
learning activities in this project will seed new approaches to analyze and
manipulate growth patterns. Established experts and junior scientists in
engineering and biology will broadly integrate mechanical modelling and
micromechanical analyses with plant cell biology. The research team will create
learning programs to make this cross-training generalizable and to make more
user friendly models that can be widely adopted by the research and educational
communities. American Rescue Plan funding provides support for this investigator
at a critical stage in his career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant morphology control
is a multi-scale integrated process in which cytoskeletal and cell wall systems
interact to generate adaptive growth patterns. However, our understanding of how
subcellular growth patterns are determined and how they scale to influence
cell-, tissue-, and organ-level phenotypes are not known. Historical assumptions
about uniform diffuse growth are likely incorrect as most cell types have
heterogeneous growth patterns. In addition, it has been difficult to
quantitatively predict tensile force patterns in the wall, because they depend
on turgor pressure, multiple types of geometric features, and the material
properties of the wall. Finite element modelling provides an efficient path
forward because it simulates the cells as a thin-walled pressurized shells and
can be used to quantitatively simulate the tensile forces and growth patterns
with realistic cell and tissue geometries. The model also makes specific
predictions about the location and type of cell wall heterogeneity that drive
plant cell growth and how cell wall forces can be sensed by the cytoskeleton.
This “Transitions to Excellence” project will develop a novel learning and
research program that will broadly enable biologists and engineers to rigorously
integrate finite element modelling, experimental validation, and model
refinement. This approach and the single cell and organ systems that will be
analyzed, have the potential to define generalizable morphogenesis “rules” that
operate from the nanometer to centimeter scales to program functional traits.
This research will serve as a framework to create more sophisticated models with
sufficient detail to inform strategies to genetically engineer plant
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.