* 2148677
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: QUICCHE: Quantifying Interocean fluxes in the Cape Cauldron Hotspot of Eddy kinetic energy
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kathleen Donohue, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,096,551.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
ivestigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cape Basin in
the southeast Atlantic is a global hotspot of eddy kinetic energy, fed by a
leakage of waters from the subtropical Indian Ocean via the Agulhas Current. A
proportion of warm and salty Agulhas waters is vigorously stirred and mixed into
the cooler and fresher Atlantic by co-interacting rings and eddies. This project
will address the hypothesis that a large proportion of the Indian Ocean waters
that leak into the Atlantic is to be found in submesoscale (less than
approximately 1 km) features generated by deformations of the mesoscale (tens to
hundreds of km) flow field. The project will observe and characterize, for the
first time, submesoscale features generated by mesoscale recirculations within
the Cape Cauldron. The observations will be used to estimate Agulhas leakage
fluxes with theoretical eddy diffusivity and eddy flux frameworks. The results
will be related to new and existing satellite altimeter observations to infer
variability in Agulhas leakage. Outreach and education activities include
production of two short films aboard ship, student and intern visits to the
ship, hands-on experience building ocean drifters at Miami high schools, and
creation of a popular science article and an educational, oceanographic card
game for school children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will entail the
collection of new observations within the Cape Basin of filamentation and eddy
interaction to measure the related submesoscale features and estimate
diffusivities. These measurements will be used to quantify eddy heat and salt
fluxes. Observations will be made using both Eulerian and Lagrangian
instrumentation, including moorings, an undulating CTD system, gliders,
drifters, profiling floats, and microstructure turbulence profilers, capturing
time and space scales from hours to seasons and from 1 to 100 km. The
observations will be synthesized and analyzed with other datasets including
measurements from the SWOT crossover in the Cape Basin and output from an ocean
model. The observations will also be used to evaluate the new NASA SWOT (Surface
Water and Ocean Topography) satellite mission at a swatch crossover point in the
study region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.