* 2148783
* Socio-Cultural Effects of the COVID-19/Extreme Heat Syndemic
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Courtney Cecale, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 0.00

Extreme heat has become a heightened issue of municipal concern, with some
cities experiencing not only hotter average temperatures but also more high heat
events and more days of high temperatures annually producing differential
effects in structurally harmed communities. This research aims to provide
greater understanding of how climate change and infectious diseases impact one
another. Specifically, this project examines how extreme heat compounds the
effects of long-covid (post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2), and vice versa, how
does this newly emergent disease compound the burdens of extreme heat. The
funding for this project supports research that examines the social, political,
and cultural effects of this intersection, as well as support for a graduate
student to learn how to conduct socio-environmental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using ethnographic methods such as surveys, interviews,
participant observation, and focus groups, this research will provide frameworks
for understanding the intersections and compounding effects of these issues.
Research questions include: In what ways are peoples’ social lives affected by
the intersecting crises of heat and the pandemic? How do people understand and
conceptualize the intersection of these two crises? And finally, how are people
managing these challenges (technologies, social landscapes, mutual aid,
residential groups)? By producing experiential data about the unfolding of these
two intersecting crises (climate change and the pandemic), this study aims to
improve scientific understanding of the ways that peoples’ social and cultural
worlds are challenged and transformed in the context of syndemic crises. The
data from this study should reveal important information about shifting social
formations, including increased burdens on existing networks like family
formations, as well as the recruitment of new communities of care (including the
expansion of mutual aid networks that formed in the first year of
COVID-19).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.