* 2148879
* Drinking Water Governance, Equity, and Health
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Constance McGuire, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2024
* USD 351,229.00

Disparities in drinking water quality pose harm to public health. Several tap
water crises have demonstrated that fragmented access to safe water is a
national issue. While water quality concerns are often framed as technological
issues, the relevance of water governance is increasingly apparent. This project
illuminates the governance failures that cause inequities in drinking water and
public health. An interdisciplinary team of scientists combines expertise in
spatial statistics, epidemiology, and community-based research to understand how
differences in accountability and information can cause disparate exposure to
water contamination. Datasets and publications generated by this project have
the potential to reveal new governance solutions and more equitable water
policies. The dissemination plan allows knowledge sharing with the public, water
system managers, environmental justice groups, and policymakers. In addition,
the project advances undergraduate training at a minority-serving institution
through problem-based research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
contributes to understanding how access to safe water is shaped by
accountability and information failures. Inadequate accountability takes the
form of uncontested water board elections and limited practices at water systems
to build community trust. Elections create incentives for officials to serve
public interests; yet, a majority of water systems fail to hold regular
elections. Besides inadequate accountability, information failures are also
common. The full scope of water challenges is not publicly known, due to a
substantial number of water quality violations that are undeclared or
unreported. Uninformed communities can face health consequences. Statistical
models of waterborne disease burdens examine how incomplete information can
create health disparities. The project uses spatial statistics to identify
linkages between electoral accountability and water quality; in addition,
community-based focus groups and interviews document water systemsâ€™ practices
for public participation and customer trust in tap water. Overall, the project
analyzes and generates data to document how governance issues influence drinking
water quality and public health. Notably, statistical approaches are combined
with the lived experiences of communities, allowing improved modeling to reveal
promising policies to expand safe water access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.