* 2148764
* REU Site: Ole Miss Nanoengineering Summer REU Program
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Dana Reinemann, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2025
* USD 403,106.00

This three-year project at the University of Mississippi aims to establish an
interdisciplinary research and educational program in nanoengineering that
provides seminal, transformative experiences in research to ten undergraduate
students. This program will promote the advancement of nanoengineering research
in the state of Mississippi and the Southeastern United States by catalyzing
research collaborations as part of the REU activities. The project will
contribute to the development of a diverse future STEM workforce by providing
research training opportunities with underrepresented minorities. The REU
activities will contribute solutions to major societal challenges of the 21st
century, particularly in the areas of health, energy, and manufacturing. This
project will contribute significantly to the development of nanotechnology-based
solutions to today’s major societal challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-
year Nanoengineering Summer REU Program at the University of Mississippi will
immerse ten students per year in the growing field of nanoengineering through
research in one of three cognate areas: nanobiotechnology, sustainable
nanoengineering, and computational nanoengineering. Nanobiotechnology leverages
innovative technologies such as nanoparticles, nanodevices, and surface coatings
that can be used to study biological systems and produce novel biosensors,
diagnostics, imaging agents, and therapeutics. Computational nanoengineering
involves the use of computational tools to solve theoretical problems at the
nanoscale and/or augment experimental techniques in nanoengineering. Sustainable
nanoengineering seeks to harness the unique energetic properties of
nanomaterials to produce environmentally-friendly solutions to problems in
industrial processing, energy development, and pollution, among other
applications. The Nanoengineering REU will also serve as an outreach opportunity
to engage students who might not otherwise have research opportunities,
including students from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM. Overall, the REU
will increase student interest in pursuing careers in STEM research by: (1)
exposing students to innovative interdisciplinary research, (2) integrating
educational seminars, (3) promoting mentorship from graduate student and faculty
role models, (4) providing training for national scholarship and graduate school
applications, and (5) organizing social activities to promote a congenial and
inclusive atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.