* 2148566
* The Impact of Covid-19 on the Educational and Career Outcomes of First-Generation College Students and their Families
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sarah Willen, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 355,166.00

The Covid-19 pandemic has greatly disrupted the education of first-generation
college students—those whose parents did not complete a college degree. These
students and their parents are often low-income, racial/ethnic minorities,
and/or of an immigrant background. Compared to other families, they have fewer
resources to absorb the impact of the educational and social crises stemming
from the pandemic, but also have more at stake in completing a college degree.
In families of first-generation college students, parents and children strive
together for individual and collective success based on the belief that higher
education will advance the family's economic mobility, improve their social
status, and help them fulfill their obligations to each other. This research
examines how the Covid-19 pandemic has affected the educational and life goals
of first-generation college student families and the actions taken in support of
these goals. The project findings, to be shared in public-facing documents and
web-based formats including a public archive, informs university supports and
social services for vulnerable learners and families. This project is jointly
funded by Cultural Anthropology and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project hypothesizes
that the Covid-19 pandemic has led first-generation college students and their
families to prioritize caretaking actions aimed at immediate practical needs
over the longer- term goals of better lives enabled by education. This
hypothesis will be investigated through three years of data collection and
analysis. Sixty parent-student pairs will each participate in: 1) two years of
monthly journaling on the Pandemic Journaling Project (PJP) platform, created by
two of the PIs in May 2020; 2) two one-on-one interviews with researchers; and
3) two interviews conducted between parent and student. These varied methods
will capture families' shifting thinking, goals, and actions in relation to
education and well-being. Understanding these perspectives and choices will
advance theories of how families seek to create meaningful lives through both
education and caregiving in the wake of crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.