* 2148732
* A Culturally Relevant Approach to Spatial Computational Thinking Skills and Career Awareness through an Immersive Virtual Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Perla Myers, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,181,969.00

The project will design and research a project for developing upper-elementary
Latinx students' spatial computational thinking skills and awareness of
computationally-intensive careers. The project will design immersive, culturally
relevant, and active learning experiences in Minecraft: Education Edition (MEE).
Minecraft, which is used by millions worldwide, enables participants to explore
a three-dimensional world, discover and use raw materials, engineer new
environments, create tools and structures, and simple machines. This videogame
platform emphasizes family engagement, near-peer mentorship, peer collaboration,
and expert modeling. The project will develop a unique set of extended and age-
appropriate spatial programming functions and engage participants in developing
Spatial Computational Thinking Skills (SCT). These skills will support the
ability to learn to abstract key spatial features, to decompose shapes with
geometric representation and recognize patterns, and to use programming and
computing tools for spatial algorithm design. The project will introduce
participants to computationally-intensive STEM careers where these skills are
increasingly demanded in areas such as robotics, virtual reality, and smart
geospatial systems. The project will develop a unique set of bilingual, extended
and age-appropriate visual programming functions to enable thousands of upper
elementary school students to engage in high-quality spatial programming
learning experiences. Participants will be able to access the game in school or
at home. Due to low-cost materials and the self-paced learning design, the
learning activities are flexible and affordable for families and educators who
have different needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through design-based research, the
project will address two research questions: 1) How can an immersive virtual
learning environment be designed to support upper-elementary school Latinx
students' spatial computational thinking skill development, career exploration,
and family engagement? 2) What are the immediate and sustained impacts of the
program on participating elementary school students, parents/guardians, and
college students? The project will begin with usability and feasibility studies
that will inform the iterative design of the learning experience and
environment, followed up by experimental, controlled studies. The project will
collect data using mixed-methods including participant reflections, think-
alouds, surveys of career interest development, observations, interviews, data
analytics, and assessments of computational, spatial skills and self-efficacy.
The research findings revealed through this project can provide rich insights
into program designs that foster Latinx studentsâ€™ interest and awareness in
computing and effective strategies to support family engagement, peer
collaboration, and near-peer mentor facilitation in an immersive virtual
learning environment. The project learning environment, teacher professional
development sessions, and lesson plans will be shared in the Minecraft World
Library to be scaled to a national level, incorporated in afterschool programs,
and used in elementary school classrooms as part of computer science education
integrated STEAM curriculum. Project research findings will be shared with
researchers, developers, and STEM educators through conference presentations and
professional journals. Family participation will be supported through bilingual
resources and other supports available through the project website. The project
is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.