* 2148678
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Acoustoplasticity through Multiscale Computational and In-Situ, Time-Resolved Experimental Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2023
* Leonard Bond, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Materials, especially metals, can be deformed more easily when exposed to high
frequency elastic waves. Such phenomenon is called acoustoplasticity and has
been used in several applications, such as metal forming, extrusion, welding,
flip-chip bonding, and ultrasonic additive manufacturing. Despite its widespread
use, these processes are still at a “trial and error” stage due to the lack of a
clear understanding of the underlying mechanisms. This award supports
fundamental research to unravel the deformation processes that drive
acoustoplasticity through a combined computational and experimental approach,
from the atomistic up to the microstructural scale. The knowledge gained from
this award can improve vibration/ultrasonic assisted manufacturing methods,
especially ultrasonic additive manufacturing, which has the potential for on-
demand, in-space manufacturing. This award will support cross-cutting research
between mechanics, high performance computing, data science, material
characterization, and testing. Student recruitment, including for summer
undergraduate research opportunities, will focus on underrepresented minorities.
Additionally, hands-on computational and experimental workshops will target K-12
school children and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms behind
acoustoplasticity in metals are not fully understood because: (1) acoustic
excitation occurs in the macroscale, but its effects can be spread over orders
of magnitude in the spatio-temporal scale; (2) single-scale models smear out the
mechanisms spread over multiple scales and cannot address the full complexity;
and (3) probing the acoustic-affected dislocation plasticity is challenging due
to the fast time scale of the events. This research will fill these knowledge
gaps by combining multiscale simulations, time resolved nonlinear waves, and
microscopy. The complex dynamics of plastic deformation under ultrasonic
vibrations will be characterized through concurrent atomistic-continuum
simulations. The in-situ, time-resolved experiments will be used to capture the
microstructural evolution under ultrasonic vibrations, e.g., with the use of
scanning electron microscopy and electron back scatter diffraction. Finally, a
mechanism-based parameter will be calibrated to bridge the simulations and
experiments across multiple spatio-temporal scales for a multiscale
understanding of acoustoplasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.