* 2148920
* Memorialization, Contested Knowledge, and the Sociopsychological Impacts of Disinformation in the Context of COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sarah Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 350,415.00

The waves of infection and variants of SARS-CoV-2 causing social disruption,
sickness, and death continue to reveal a crisis in scientific expertise and
authority, as well as the widespread politicization of the pandemic among
policymakers and their constituents. This project examines how disinformation
(the intentional airing of misleading information), misinformation (falsehoods),
and the “infodemic” (a condition of excessive information that makes the
solution to a problem more difficult to achieve), influence how individuals and
communities in the United States mourn the dead. It focuses on how people manage
their social and psychological lives when COVID-19 deaths are variously mourned,
dismissed, or blamed on others in a politically fractious environment. The study
contributes to understanding the social impact of misinformation and informs
public policy responses to both the current pandemic and future public health
crises that result in mass fatality, incomplete mourning, and politicized death.
The project will also train eighteen graduate and undergraduate students in
scientific research methods over the course of the three-year
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most studies of public debates focus on texts,
such as political speeches, newspaper and scholarly articles, this project
explores what behaviors, in the context of the pandemic, have become central to
the experience of mourning, and how mourners seek accountability in homes,
cemeteries, grief counseling sessions, rituals, virtual commemorations, and
social media posts, among other venues. In doing so, it addresses: (1) how
COVID-19 misinformation has shifted over the course of its evolution; (2) how
contested knowledge has shaped the mourning process for COVID-19 victims and
their families; (3) how COVID-19 mourners have defined and pursued
accountability in their efforts to counter misinformation; and (4) how altered
burial, funeral, and commemorative practices affect mourning. Through social
media analysis, in-person and virtual ethnographic engagement, and in-depth
interviews, the project analyzes claims and counterclaims in their linguistic,
media, and social relational contexts of use. Data and findings will contribute
to anthropological understanding of ritual, particularly its efficacy in a
contested environment, as well as provide important insight into the processes
and consequences of incomplete mourning during a prolonged public health
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.