* 2148120
* Improving understanding of coupled impacts of oceans and waves on air-sea fluxes in the US Northeast Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* James Edson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 831,828.00

The goal of the project is to determine if and how understanding and
representing air-sea interactions improves the hindcast capabilities of high-
impact weather events in the US Northeast Coast. The project will improve the
simulations of turbulent fluxes of momentum, heat, and moisture in the surface
layer and their coupling with the atmospheric and oceanic boundary layers. The
research will also develop detailed diagnostic techniques for utilizing the
existing ocean-atmosphere coupled boundary layer datasets to evaluate the high-
resolution coupled model simulations. The results will help solidify the
dynamical framework for enhancing our scientific understanding of upper ocean
processes, air-sea fluxes, coupled boundary layer responses, and their
imperative roles in regional weather and climate. The planetary boundary layer
is recognized as a critical source of uncertainty for weather and climate models
in the broader earth science community. The project will improve atmospheric
modeling capabilities over the oceans, benefiting the weather and climate
modeling communities and leading to improved weather and climate
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve our understanding of the
ocean and surface wave processes controlling air-sea fluxes and the structure
and evolution of the marine atmospheric boundary layer in the US Northeast
Coast. Included are detailed validations of high-resolution fully coupled ocean
atmosphere-wave model simulations against in situ and remotely sensed
observations of coupled boundary layer variables and directly measured air-sea
fluxes uniquely available in the region. The project will refine and correctly
incorporate the latest Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment (COARE) bulk
flux algorithm in the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) atmospheric model. The
research team will then undertake comprehensive modeling and validation efforts
of the planetary boundary layer and surface-layer processes under various
atmosphere conditions, including extreme extratropical cyclones and stable
boundary layers. Through extensive sensitivity experiments and climate scale
simulations to quantify the impacts of the Gulf Stream current, sea surface
temperature fronts and eddies, surface waves, and tides, the project will
determine the critical roles of the oceans, surface waves, and air-sea
interaction in shaping regional weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.