* 2148400
* RINGS: Just-in-Time Security: Adaptive Physical-Layer Security for NextG Low-Latency mmWave Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Madhavan Swaminathan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 666,459.00

The active deployment of wireless networks worldwide and the growth of machine-
to-machine communications are exacerbating concerns for privacy and secrecy.
Physical-layer security, which exploits the random imperfections inherent to
wireless channels and devices to provide, e.g., secrecy or authentication, using
physical-layer signal processing and coding algorithms, offers an approach to
treat security on par with other system-level metrics, such as power
consumption, throughput, and latency, at the design stage. There remains,
however, a wide gap to bridge between the theory and practice of physical-layer
security. This project addresses this challenge by combining hardware and
software efforts, including milimeter-wave radio-frequency front-ends with
beamforming capability and algorithms with low-latency, to create a physical-
layer security monolithically integrated hardware platform. The outcome of this
project will be hardware offering "just-in-time secrecy," in the sense of
adapting to link conditions and achieve cost-effective tradeoffs between power,
latency, and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first thrust of this project
investigates a hardware platform that integrates a broadband antenna array to
engineer a physical-layer link suitable for physical-layer security together
with a low-latency mixed-signal implementation of codes for secrecy. Efforts
also include a security analysis to evaluate the system level tradeoffs incurred
by secrecy. The second thrust of this project considers the development of novel
front-end capabilities to further the resilience of the physical-layer security
scheme, including a hybrid solution for ultra-low latency high precision beam
forming and a reconfigurable power amplifier with antenna load variation
resilience. The third thrust studies the integration of feedback in the system
to sense the wireless environment and adapt the secrecy provided to
instantaneous channel conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.