* 2148354
* RINGS: Resilient Wireless Systems for Future Uplink Traffic through Cell-Free, Loosely Coordinated Access
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 660,479.00

Existing wireless systems are designed to support human-generated traffic, which
is predominantly a monolithic class with a few dominating applications such as
voice telephony, Internet browsing, and video streaming. The success of current
cellular systems is in large part due to the design of an efficient connection-
based downlink for transferring data from the base station to the user
equipment. This has been facilitated by the fact that we have not placed
stringent demands on the quality of service. Indeed, design metrics have
centered around peak/average downlink data rates and aggregate data throughput
rather than on strong statistical guarantees for individual users or resiliency.
Two factors are likely to upend the status quo in the design philosophy of
wireless systems: the changing profile of traffic and the focus on resilience
rather than on average performance measures. Growth in wireless traffic will
come from distributed content creators, a massive number of unattended machines
enabling distributed learning, mobile robots, and video monitoring devices.
These devices will demand a substantially robust and efficient uplink from the
user equipment to the base station. In addition, these devices tend to generate
a rich diversity of traffic profiles and demand profiles, thereby creating the
need for adaptable and resilient infrastructures. With this in mind, this
project addresses the need to optimize and improve the robustness of uplink
wireless access for heterogeneous devices. From a broad perspective, the project
seeks to strengthen wireless network infrastructure. It provides opportunities
for collaboration with industry for technology transfer to wireless standards.
Concurrently, the project seeks to create educational materials that contribute
to the training of a globally competitive science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) workforce and offers skill-development opportunities to
practitioners in the wireless industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical
viewpoint, the project considers the paradigm of cell-free multiple input
multiple output (MIMO) systems with distributed signal processing as a solution
to improve resiliency of cellular systems. It explores unsourced multiple access
as a means to reduce coordination at the physical and medium access control
layers, thereby enabling the operation of an efficient uplink within the cell-
free paradigm. It seeks innovative solutions to several key problems that must
be addressed in order to design a robust uplink based on cell-free unsourced
random access with multiple transmit and receive antennas, especially to enable
distributed learning. The problems tackled in this project can be grouped into
three interrelated categories: (i) the design of codes and receiver signal
processing algorithms for uncoordinated, non-orthogonal multiple access in cell-
free MIMO systems; (ii) the design of novel joint compression, coding and
multiple access algorithms for federated learning and edge computing; and (iii)
the joint design of radio-frequency (RF) front ends and baseband signal
processing for mitigating non-linearities that result from multiband receivers
that are emblematic of future devices. The proposed solution methodologies are
based on promising recent results leveraging connections between multiple access
and sparse recovery, over the air federated learning, new RF front end designs
based on machine learning, and combining model-based signal processing and
machine learning. Some aspects of the solution methodologies are also based on
classical and highly-effective results in multi-terminal information theory and
rateless codes, but used in the context of distributed
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.