* 2148318
* RINGS: Harnessing the Complexity of Modern Electromagnetic Environments for Resilient Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 670,596.00

We have all come to expect faster and faster download speeds every year from our
hand-held devices – a kind of Moore’s Law for wireless communications bandwidth.
To maintain this relentless increase in data rates we need to harness every
technological feature available to us, and utilize it to the maximum extent. A
particular challenge is improving wireless communications in enclosed
environments, like a room or building, where the signals reverberate in a
chaotic manner and appear to be hopelessly scrambled, as compared to free space
propagation. One approach is to use a programmable wall or ceiling-mounted
pixelated surface to literally mold the reverberating waves to increase the data
transfer rates to targeted receivers. The science and technology of reliably
improving the data rates is the subject of this work. This science is advanced
through intelligent use of the random reverberant properties common to all
enclosed spaces, combined with wave control enabled by our programmable
pixelated surfaces. The outcome is further improvement of wireless communication
data rates even in situations where present-day technology is severely
handicapped, or fails to operate altogether. This project provides enhanced
infrastructure for research and education by developing a multi-institutional
effort sharing the proven techniques and experiences of all partners, thus
intertwining engineering culture and liberal arts
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extraordinary complexity and sensitivity
generated by multiple scattering and the consequent interference of many ray
paths in spectrally crowded reverberant settings is typically considered
anathema for resilient communications and spectrum management. This effort aims
to invert this narrative, by developing novel reconfigurable intelligent
surfaces (RIS) that take advantage of this complexity to harvest the enormous
number of environmental degrees of freedom in order to actively modify, and
control, the electromagnetic environment. The developed RIS is able to
manipulate, both spatially and temporally, the wavefronts reflected from them in
order to create hot- or cold-spots in real space, and they enable frequency-
shifting of signals to specific users for advanced spectrum management. They
also rapidly adjust to disruptive events using stochastic algorithms together
with machine learning techniques. In addition, cells within the RIS are designed
using RF and mixed signal circuits, antennas, and components to capture
disruptive short pulse events that can occur randomly through the interaction of
broadband signals, or due to a deliberate attack on the network, supporting
adaptive and resilient communications. The outcome is a more robust and capable
wireless communication network that fuels further innovations in wireless
content and usage, resulting in increased satisfaction for the
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.