* 2148021
* RINGS: Wideband NextG Tb/s mm-Wave Communication and Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Borivoje Nikolic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 661,113.00

The proposed sixth generation (6G) of wireless connectivity may involve much
higher frequencies and bandwidths than current 5G systems, operating at
approximately ten times higher frequency and offering up to ten times higher
bandwidth, which will enable increased communication speed, sorely needed by the
growing computational complexity of artificial intelligence and machine learning
networks. But operating at higher frequencies has many shortcomings, namely
higher loss in the channel, and more opportunity for blockages and other
impairments to the connection. Additionally, the extremely high frequency of the
data modulation requires novel signal processing techniques due to the
infeasibility and energy expense of digitizing signals at such high speeds. To
overcome these limits, a proposed analog approach that divide and conquer the
frequency bands to save power and to make the systems feasible for mobile
applications will be pursued. Taking advantage of the fact that transmission is
accomplished with a large array of antennas, rather than a single high-power
transmitter, can lead to energy savings and interference reduction by dividing
the transmissions to various antennas to cause less inter-user interference.
Finally, the resilience of such communication systems can be improved by
incorporating more dense networks, which can form so-called mesh networks, which
allows multiple paths from source to destination, which is needed when one path
is lost due to blockages or other impairments. Such mesh networks also
potentially increase interference and noise in the network, the directional
nature of the transmissions can be utilized to realize a hierarchical mesh
system. To test these ideas, a mm-wave testbed will be upgraded to support these
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed goal is to increase the
resilience of mm-wave networks both at the circuit and system level for 6G/NextG
networks. At the circuit level, high throughput can be achieved by utilizing
multiple carriers and efficient architectures for circuit building blocks that
can simultaneously modulate/demodulate a large swath of bandwidth over an
aggregation of non-contiguous sub-bands, similar to OFDM and OFDM-A, but using
mixed-signal and analog techniques to reduce requirements on ADCs, DACs, and
DSP. The main innovations are in increasing the bandwidth in the circuitry and
exploiting system level innovations at the circuit architecture level to improve
performance metrics, in particular noise, impact of phase noise, quantization
noise, and output power and efficiency. The techniques proposed can help
alleviate path loss, signal blockage, and beam tracking with minimal energy
consumption. The benefits will be most pronounced when building large-scale
NextG MIMO beamforming systems. Our systems research vector focuses on building
robust and rapidly adaptable NextG networks by utilization of spatial mesh
networking. By utilizing more degrees of freedom, in particular a wider channel
bandwidth, and multiple carriers, the network can be further optimized for
reliability and resilience. Frequency dependent beamforming, frequency selective
fading, and many other channel impairments can be handled more easily in the
frequency domain. However, OFDM modulation of a 30 GHz wide-band channel is not
practical, instead mixed-signal techniques that can garner most of the benefits
of a fully digital solution will be explored. Interference aware array
transmitters will minimize inter-user interference by exploiting redundancies in
the array. The proposed ideas will be tested both with integrated circuit
prototypes and by demonstration using an upgraded mm-wave (E-band) MIMO
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.