* 2148731
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Molecular Sentinels: Secondary Metabolites as Indicators of Environmental Change in an Antarctic Polar Desert
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Lesley-Ann Giddings, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2025
* USD 89,000.00

Antarctica habitats are unlike any others found on the planet with extreme
combined variations in cold, salinity, moisture content and light availability.
Soils and sediments from the Antarctic McMurdo Dry Valley’s region harbor unique
microorganisms that can cope with the unique combination of extreme conditions,
but specifically how extremophile microbes function or respond to change in
these extreme habitats is still largely unknown. This team is utilizing
previously collected Antarctic McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) samples to evaluate
differences in microbial extremophile function in response to changes in strong
salinity gradients caused by warming temperatures. Comparative analyses of gene
expression patterns and secondary metabolite production are being undertaken in
lab-based microcosm studies with varying salinities. This work is helping to
elucidate the genetic underpinnings for life in Antarctica and show how
Antarctic biota evolve and adapt to a changing environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the work is showing how environmentally
relevant changes in salinity will induce differential expression of secondary
metabolites in isolates previously collected from the hypersaline Don Juan Pond
in the western end of Wright Valley, Victoria Land in the Dry Valleys region.
Transcriptomes of cell cultures under varying salinities are being sequenced and
compared to determine significant changes to cellular metabolism, particularly
secondary metabolic pathways. Additional previously collected sample types
(soils, glacier ice, sediments, and brines) collected from a range of salinities
are being used to refine methodologies for future field work and provide
training opportunities for students. This program includes a variety of other
broader impacts. This project is led by two female PIs, one of whom is a faculty
of color, which will broaden the participation of Black women and girls in
Antarctic Science. Women and people of color are still underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) fields, especially in the
Geosciences. The program is also designed to provide strong opportunities to
integrate STEM research with undergraduate education, especially at Smith
College, a predominantly undergraduate women’s institution. At least one
graduate student and 4 undergraduates will be involved in the project, and some
will participate in presenting results at international meetings. The program is
also developing related curriculum in partnership with education specialists to
be used with middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.