* 2148187
* CPS: Small: Developing a Socio-Psychological CPS for the Health and Wellness of Dairy Cows
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Asif Salekin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Across the country, dairy farmers are extremely vulnerable to a variety of
factors, including cattle health and wellness. For example, when a cow is ill or
stressed, she produces less milk. Subsequently, she might develop secondary
conditions because she doesn’t want to compete for food or water. For example,
if a cow has separated herself from a herd, this may indicate that she is sick.
Modern farmers already use a great deal of biometric information to monitor
their animals, but social and psychological factors of cattle have not been
well-studied. The purpose of the proposed project is to build a cyber-physical
system that integrates the social interactions of dairy cattle with other
biometric data, develop predictive models that use such data to perform early
identification of sick or vulnerable cattle, and create algorithms to provide
adaptive interventions to the cattle farmers. This project has the potential to
lead to substantial impacts, both scientific and commercial. The decline of
small farms is a well-known problem across the country, and anything that helps
improve farmers’ profit margins is valuable. This project will result in general
guidelines about herd management- which could act as a “tutorial” of sorts to
new farmers- as well as technologies for individual herd management.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will be one of the first to study the
interaction networks of domestic cattle herds and attempt to tie those networks
to biometric data and illness. On the sensing side, major contributions will
include merging location/interaction data with other biometric data to detect
social behaviors. On the analysis and action side, contributions will include
connecting network behaviors of dairy cattle to their health and wellness,
learning recommendation rules from farmers’ responses on different cattle
management scenarios through inductive logic programming, and designing
explainable algorithms to provide recommendations for addressing health and
wellness problems. Experimentation will be conducted using selected dairy farms
in Northeast USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.