* 2148753
* Understanding mechanisms of semantic memory through intracranial recording and stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Kleen, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The color of the sky, a list of fruits, the capital of France—the ability to
access facts and other general information at astonishing speed is a remarkable
and vital part of being human. Our vast stores of knowledge are known to be
spread throughout multiple widespread regions in the brain. Yet, when a person
hears a question and retrieves an answer, these disparate areas coordinate and
sift through an ocean of details and associations, on-demand, to pull up
specific facts. This ability is sometimes impaired with aging, and markedly
deteriorates in a host of neurological conditions -- such as semantic dementia,
Alzheimer’s disease, and epilepsy. Despite its clear importance, and multiple
scientific studies, the actual mechanisms of semantic memory have been an
elusive and enduring mystery. Understanding its neural basis could lead to
transformational advances in education, ameliorate the effects of aging on
semantic memory, and help treat neurological diseases that ravage memory. In
addition to these broader impacts, this project will engage in community
outreach through public science talks and create opportunities for the promotion
of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM careers in neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves a unique and precious source of
data: recordings directly from the brain in awake, behaving humans, that are
being performed for clinical (medical, surgical) purposes to treat intractable
epilepsy. Using these intracranial recordings, researchers will seek to decipher
how neural populations in key cortical hubs process semantic information while
participants perform custom-designed tasks of both verbal and non-verbal
semantic memory. The researchers will measure neural population responses from
high-density electrodes (intracranial electroencephalography – iEEG) and use
machine learning to understand and predict how information flows between key
regions in the semantic system and medial temporal memory regions in the brain.
The project will also directly test whether electrical stimulation of brain
tissue during cognitive tasks results in predictable effects, revealing whether
these same structures play causal roles in semantic memory processing. Together,
this human iEEG research will yield a better understanding of how semantic
knowledge retrieval is encoded and supported by local neuronal populations
across distributed semantic and memory circuits and broader brain networks. This
work may also lead to future therapies, including emerging brain stimulation
approaches that may help rescue memory loss in neurological
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.