* 2148008
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Networks of Support and Solidarity in Carceral Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Jarrett Drake, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

The carceral experience encompasses not only the over two million people
currently incarcerated in American prisons, but also those within the broader
social, affective, and kin networks with which incarcerated individuals are
connected. This doctoral dissertation project seeks to investigate how
relationships of solidarity, kinship, and affinity are created, changed, or
maintained during imprisonment. In exploring such a question, this research
examines how imprisoned people and the people with whom they share close ties
manage to build affective networks, bonds of mutuality, and reciprocity within
and across prison borders. In addition to providing funding for the training of
a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the project strives to enrich the public's
understanding of science and the scientific method by sharing its findings
through public-facing venues and organizational dissemination. The project also
broadens the participation of historically underrepresented groups in the
production of scientific knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core hypothesis of
this research is that incarceration impacts the strength of social bonds among
imprisoned people and their social networks in ways that parallel the
systematicity of chattel slavery. The doctoral student tests this hypothesis
through an in-depth, rigorous analysis of archival sources from historical and
contemporary epochs. The researcher will complement these data with twelve
months of participant observation and approximately seventy-five semi-structured
interviews with interlocutors in two organizations that facilitate
communications with incarcerated individuals. Thus, while many generative
studies insinuate a link between enslavement and imprisonment in the United
States, the present study will be one of the first to test a hypothesis about
the link with a scientific and ethnographic eye. In so doing, this doctoral
dissertation project advances the ascendant, interdisciplinary scholarship that
seeks to uncover a usable carceral past in order to better comprehend the scope
and scale of the contemporary prison system. The project integrates analysis of
archival, sociolegal, and ethnographic data to improve scientific understanding
of how people navigate institutional bureaucracies and spatial challenges to
forge and maintain affective and kin-based
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.