* 2148680
* Engaging Rural Students in Artificial Intelligence to Develop Pathways for  Innovative Computing Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Bradford Mott, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,166,886.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) are fundamentally reshaping the
workplace of the future and accelerating the demand for creating and sustaining
an AI-literate workforce. This growing demand has highlighted the importance for
all K-12 students to develop an understanding of AI to prepare them for future
careers. Middle school years are crucial in shaping youth dispositions toward
STEM. There is an urgent need nationally to develop a deep educational
understanding of how to engage students during these years in learning AI and
how to train and support teachers in AI education. The need to provide AI
learning experiences is especially pronounced in rural areas, where students
often lack access to advanced STEM educational opportunities. This project will
introduce AI concepts to middle school students and teachers through summer
camps, workshops, and school-based programs in rural communities of North
Carolina. Over the course of the project, through co-design cycles with students
and teachers, the project will iteratively develop an AI learning environment.
With a focus on fostering students' creative expression, the learning
environment will infuse AI learning into interactive digital game design
activities that enable students to create personally meaningful and relevant
game scenarios. In partnership with Boys &amp; Girls Clubs in North Carolina,
the project will offer summer camps for youth from underrepresented and
underserved populations. The project will investigate which AI principles and
concepts in the context of learning digital game development are most
appropriate and engaging, and what are the support and scaffolding that teachers
will require in integrating AI education into their instructional designs. The
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide AI learning experiences
to over 500 middle school students and AI-focused professional development to
more than 20 teachers. Researchers will address three research questions: (1)
How can we create engaging AI learning experiences for diverse rural populations
of middle school students through game design activities? (2) How do we best
support teachers in integrating AI learning experiences in their school-based
programs? and (3) What is the impact of the learning program on diverse
populations of rural middle grade students' knowledge of AI concepts, attitudes
toward AI, and interest in AI careers? The project will leverage a design-based
research approach to iteratively refine the program called AI Play, including
the AI concepts to be addressed, the features to incorporate in the learning
environment, and the scaffolding tools and pedagogical approaches to utilize.
The research will use a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods such
as surveys, assessments, analysis of student artifacts, focus groups, and field
observations to determine how the program impacts targeted outcomes for students
and teachers. The deliverables of the project will include the AI Play program
model and its associated curricular materials, the professional development
model and its associated materials, the AI Play community website, and the
research findings from the project. The aims of the project are to build
knowledge on how to best help rural students develop foundational knowledge of
AI concepts, how to promote meaningful explorations of AI for rural students,
and design principles for creating engaging AI learning experiences that lead to
increased student interest in AI-intensive fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.