* 2148950
* Collaborative Research: How are estuarine carbon and alkalinity dynamics influenced by macrobiota?
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lora Harris, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2025
* USD 454,696.00

The global carbon cycle consists of the processes that transform and transport
carbon on Earth. Interest in the global carbon cycle stems from its intimate
connection with ecological processes and its control on atmospheric carbon
dioxide, an extremely important greenhouse gas. A key feature of the global
carbon cycle is the transport of carbon from land to the open ocean. Before
reaching the open ocean, the carbon carried by rivers must past through
estuaries, where significant transformations take place, including the
interconversion of organic forms (such as carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids)
and inorganic forms (carbon dioxide, bicarbonate, and carbonate) through
photosynthesis and respiration. In addition to carbon, alkalinity is another
important chemical quantity that is relevant to climate and life on Earth. The
alkalinity is the capacity of a water body to neutralize acid and determines the
extent to which carbon dioxide reacts with water to create chemical species that
do not interact directly with the atmosphere. While many transformations of
carbon and alkalinity in the ocean are dominated by microscopic life, like
phytoplankton and bacteria, these transformations are also influenced by
macroscopic life (macrobiota), such as oysters, clams, salt marshes, mangroves,
and seagrasses. However, macrobiota are generally ignored in conceptual and
computational models of carbon transformations in estuaries. The overall
objective of this project is to improve understanding of the role that
macrobiota play in estuarine carbon and alkalinity dynamics. The research will
also support numerous undergraduate students, two graduate students and three
post-doctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be
carried out through a coordinated program of field measurements, laboratory
experiments, historical data analysis, and numerical modeling. Two contrasting
tidal tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay, the Potomac River Estuary and the York
River Estuary, will be sampled because they span much of the range of carbon and
alkalinity dynamics found in estuaries worldwide and hence will facilitate the
generalization of the project findings. The interdisciplinary research team will
evaluate four hypotheses: (1) Tidal wetlands, such as marshes and mangroves, are
a source of alkalinity to estuaries and this source increases with salinity,
tidal wetland productivity, and tidal range. (2) Alkalinity sinks in estuaries
are favored when riverine alkalinity is high and when benthic fauna (e.g., clams
and oysters) or submerged aquatic vegetation (e.g., seagrasses) are present in
sufficient quantities. (3) Alkalinity sources and sinks in estuaries are highly
seasonal, with summer fluxes dominated by net calcification (due to benthic
fauna and submerged aquatic vegetation, an alkalinity sink) and sulfate
reduction (due to tidal wetlands, an alkalinity source) and winter fluxes due to
net CaCO3 dissolution (an alkalinity source). (4) Estuaries with high-alkalinity
rivers and low tidal marsh areas are sinks of alkalinity and sources of
atmospheric carbon dioxide while those with low-alkalinity rivers and high tidal
marsh areas are sources of alkalinity and sinks of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
The research plan includes seven main elements: (1) carbonate system
measurements, (2) benthic fauna distribution measurements, (3) measurements of
macrobiota carbon and alkalinity fluxes, (4) development of macrobiota carbon
and alkalinity flux maps, (5) historical analysis of carbonate system
measurements, (6) 3-D numerical modeling, and (7) a meta-analysis that extend
findings to other systems. Mentoring and inclusion will occur through the
development of a research affinity group of at least eight students that will
connect existing regional undergraduate research programs. Students will present
their research to managers and policy makers from the Chesapeake Bay Program
during annual summits and we will engage estuarine managers through
presentations on macrobiota influence on biogeochemistry. This research will
advance the understanding of how macrobiota influence estuarine carbon and
alkalinity dynamics and, ultimately, the large-scale marine cycles of carbon and
alkalinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.