* 2148343
* Does Gender Impact the Neural Basis of Mathematical Cognition in Early Childhood?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jessica Cantlon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 934,036.00

Mathematics is key to understanding science and engineering. Recent neuroscience
evidence suggests that language and mathematics are processed in different parts
of the brain. How do children learn mathematical concepts? The research in this
project studies the universal neural and cognitive bases of mathematics in young
children and measures the biological and environmental factors that lead to
individual variations in mathematical cognition. By non-invasively measuring
brain activity in young (4-8 year-old) children, this novel study will assess
for the first time, how neural representations of numbers and spatial concepts
change over time as children develop greater capacity with mathematics, and how
patterns of brain activation relate to childrenâ€™s mathematical competence in
school. This is important because educational studies show that early
proficiency in mathematics can predict later success in mathematics. In addition
to studying the neural basis for math processing in all children, the
researchers also seek to discover whether there are differences in the ways that
boys and girls learn mathematics. To this end, the project explores the impact
of gender as well as the learning environment on children. The study
specifically aims to test the hypothesis that boys and girls exhibit similar
patterns of neural development during mathematical learning in early childhood
(4-6 years-of-age, and that later gender differences begin to emerge (around 7-8
years-of-age) and are limited to specific areas (spatial skills) that are
influenced by socialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop a full
picture of mathematical learning, aptitude and outcomes in childhood, the
proposal collects longitudinal functional magnetic brain imaging (fMRI) data in
young children, as well as multiple behavioral tests and also track scholastic
performance. The researchers will seek to define the brain networks that are
selectively activated during mathematical cognition. To rigorously test for
possible gender differences, the proposal will utilize new statistical
approaches. This research is highly relevant at a societal level, because
despite equal levels of ability among boys and girls, a math gap grows over time
as girls are discouraged and tracked away from STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Mathematics) subjects. By the time students reach college, women
are significantly underrepresented in STEM majors. The results of this study
will lead to deeper insights which will have profound implications for child
education. This study will also have the potential for influencing educational
policy and will encourage all children, especially girls, to engage with math
and science in school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.