* 2148034
* Collaborative Research: Long Term Process of Cultural Melding
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Erin Nelson, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 181,302.00

Researchers will investigate how communities form and hybrid cultural traditions
develop through migration and settlement in new ecological contexts. The
manufacture, exchange, and use of objects are embedded in social relationships
that include processes of teaching and learning, negotiation, and everyday use.
Thus, objects actively forge relationships among the people who create and use
them, despite differences in backgrounds, lifeways, and belief systems. In a
time of increasing migration and environmental instability worldwide,
archaeological research that centers networks of people linked by material
culture and practice reveals how people contend with the universal challenges of
negotiating physical and cultural borders. Anthropological approaches such as
this, grounded in archaeological data, contribute resilient strategies for a
changing world. This project will emphasize the participation and training of
first-generation and Indigenous students in archaeological research. The team
will also collaborate with tribal nations to help them define direct historical
connections with their ancestors and refine their areas of historical interest,
to better facilitate consultation and repatriation processes outlined by the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project emphasizes how daily practice—in this case,
the production and use of pottery—facilitated different types of social
connections among groups of people living in a US coastal region some of whom
were recent migrants. Rather than assuming shared identities or affiliations,
the researchers will examine the structure of these relationships using a social
network analysis approach that incorporates fine-grained elemental,
technofunctional, and iconographic attributes of pottery. Making use of extant
collections, the researchers will develop a geographically and temporally
sensitive spatial model. This region presents a new context for investigating
increasing social complexity in coastal environments, and among people who did
not rely on agriculture to provide the food surplus that typically underpins
complex societies. The methods employed will provide a model for examining 1)
how fine-grained distinctions in material culture practice reflect various
connections among the people who create and use these objects, and 2) how
objects are fundamental to connecting people through kinship, trade and exchange
networks, political alliances, and/or religious
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.