* 2148359
* RINGS: Enabling Data-Driven Innovation for Next-Generation Networks Via Synthetic Data
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Vyas Sekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 649,534.00

Next-generation networked systems are increasingly data-driven, meaning they are
developed, tuned, and tested on real data. For instance, data-driven techniques
can enable better quality of experience for content distribution over the
Internet, better wireless communication techniques, and better attack detection
techniques for emerging cybersecurity threats. Unfortunately, a pervasive lack
of data limits the potential of data-driven research and development. Data
holders are often reluctant to share datasets for fear of revealing business
secrets or running afoul of regulations. These data access challenges will
become (and already are) a fundamental stumbling block for innovation in next-
generation networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tackle this
impasse with synthetic data —-- data that exhibits the same statistical patterns
as real data, without the need to explicitly share the original source data.
Synthetic datasets can be safely released to enable cross-stakeholder
collaboration. Synthetic data generation techniques, however, have classically
suffered from poor data quality. This proposal explores how to leverage and
extend recent advances in machine learning to use Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) to generate synthetic models of networking datasets. Realizing
the potential benefits of GAN-generated synthetic data for networking systems,
however, is challenging on multiple fronts. First, network traffic datasets
(e.g., packet captures) entail complex relationships that raise new fidelity and
scalability implications for prior GAN models. Second, networking use cases pose
new (and traditional) privacy requirements, and the resulting privacy-fidelity
tradeoffs remain poorly understood. Finally, several networking use cases entail
studying rare or extreme events (e.g., outages, flash crowds, attacks). Data for
such extreme events by definition is rare and challenging for GANs (or any
synthetic data model) to learn. This project will tackle interdisciplinary
challenges spanning networking, machine learning, and privacy to develop novel
foundations for GAN-enabled workflows for supporting data-driven operations in
next-generation network systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.