* 2148467
* QuEST: Quantum Education for Students and Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Stephen Uzzo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,499,999.00

The National Quantum Initiative Act stipulates the growth and acceleration of
quantum information science and technology research and education. However, high
school science teachers may not have a background in quantum physics, and this
creates a challenge for them to keep track of academic and industrial
development of quantum technology, causing a substantial gap in early quantum
education. Quantum Education for Students and Teachers (QuEST), a partnership
between Stony Brook University and the New York Hall of Science, will advance
quantum education, physical science literacy, and the diversity of the STEM
pipeline through quantum science and quantum computing learning opportunities
for precollege students (grades 8-12) and secondary science teachers, directly
impacting 800 students and 160 teachers. The research plan will measure both
immediate and long-term outcomes for secondary students and teachers. The
broader impacts of this work relate to increased introductory quantum science
and computing participation for students from diverse backgrounds who may not
have equitable access due to restricted school resources, lack of science course
offerings, and limited teacher knowledge about quantum principles and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QuEST will develop and research practices in
precollege quantum science and computing instruction that are aligned with the
Next Generation Science Standards. The goals include the development of (1)
quantum knowledge and quantum computing practices that promote critical
thinking, reasoning, and communication skills; and (2) student awareness and
interest in quantum computing careers and academic pathways. Strategies include
onsite school day activities and summer camps in quantum science disciplines for
diverse groups of students (QuEST Lab). In QuEST Lab, quantum science conceptual
learning and quantum computing laboratory experiences will relate physical
science principles to modern technological advances, which will enhance
studentsâ€™ knowledge, skills, sociocognitive domains, STEM career interests, and
intentional academic behaviors. EduQation is a science teacher professional
development program in quantum science principles and applications; this will
result in a multiplicative effect on student learning as these teachers
implement quantum science and computing in formal physical science instruction.
Science teachers will improve their disciplinary content knowledge, ability to
differentiate classical and quantum concepts, comprehension of technological
advances in quantum industries, and understanding of how to educate students
about quantum career pathways. These cognitive and affective outcomes will be
measured by surveys, focus groups, and interviews with project participants;
data will be analyzed through inferential statistics and qualitative coding
methods. This project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also co-funded by the CS
for All: Research and RPPs program, and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.