* 2148451
* A Learning Ecosystem for Teaching High School Students Machine Learning Concepts and Data Science Skills in Healthcare and Medicine
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Michael Cassidy, EAST BAY EDUCATIONAL COLLABORATIVE
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,499,546.00

Healthcare is rapidly changing into a multidisciplinary field. Data science and
artificial intelligence (AI) have become integral for healthcare and medical
services. Machine Learning (ML), a branch of AI, is broadly applicable for
developing predictive models that drive research, development and healthcare
practices. Unintentional bias within the datasets and computer programs used for
ML creates healthcare outcomes which benefit some people more than others. This
project will develop an innovative and inclusive learning and teaching ecosystem
for high school students. The ecosystem consists of educational agencies and
teachers, cross-disciplinary expertise from data scientists and medical
clinicians, community members and college students from diverse background as
mentors. Authentic cross-cultural discussions amongst community members and
students will be a key component of students’ learning experience. The ecosystem
will provide a data science and ML laboratory course and an annual datathon.
Computer science teachers will facilitate the course, and will also receive
professional development in problem-based data science approaches. Students in
the course will explore student-led, inquiry-based strategies on how to navigate
and visualize large healthcare sets using the same programming languages and
tools that data scientists use. During the datathon, students will team with
their local community members and Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) teachers to solve authentic data-driven healthcare issues
which are important and personal to them. Community members will share their
experiences to ensure all voices are heard. Datathon participants will be
introduced to culturally-responsive methods. The project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST), which seeks
to engage underrepresented students in technology-rich learning environments,
including skills in data literacy, and increase students’ knowledge and interest
in information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the project period, researchers will
develop and study a semester-long program that engages up to 1000 Rhode Island
high school students, with an emphasis on recruiting racial minorities and young
women from 12 Title 1 schools. The researchers will investigate how students
engage in the program and datathon, the usability and sustainability of this
program, and the enactment of the innovative learning ecosystem. The following
questions will guide this study: 1) How do the data laboratory and datathon
contribute to student learning and efficacy in data science, and their interest
in data science and healthcare careers? 2) What are teachers’ perspectives about
the usability and effectiveness, including challenges, of the materials,
curriculum, and supports? 3) How do teachers take up and enact the activities
and tools to support student learning and interests in data science? Researchers
will collect and analyze data using mixed methods, including data from a digital
learning platform, surveys, interviews, assessments, and observations. The
outcome will include a novel pedagogy for teaching high school students about
rapidly evolving technologies. Deliverables will consist of annual professional
development for the teachers; a public website for all Rhode Island district
leaders, teachers, and parents; a vetted data science and ML laboratory course;
and designs of the multidisciplinary, cross-cultural datathon. These will be
freely shared and promoted online, presented at professional conferences, and
published as research articles in peer-reviewed
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.