* 2148182
* RINGS: Walk For Resiliency &amp; Privacy: A Random Walk Framework for Learning at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Hulya Seferoglu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 663,455.00

Learning in Next Generation (NextG) wireless systems is expected to bring about
a technological and societal revolution even bigger than that which data brought
to early voice-centered systems. Learning will have to be performed on data
predominantly originating at edge and user devices in order to support
applications such as Internet of Things (IoT), federated learning, mobile
healthcare, self-driving cars, and others. A growing body of research work has
focused on engaging the edge in the learning process, which can be advantageous
in terms of a better utilization of network resources, delay reduction,
resiliency against cloud unavailability and catastrophic failures, and increased
security and privacy. Present proposed solutions, however, predominantly suffer
from having a critical centralized component, typically in the cloud, that
organizes and aggregates the nodes’ computations. This rigid centralized
infrastructure can inhibit the full potential of resiliency and privacy in NextG
systems. By relaxing the centralized infrastructure, the proposed research aims
to advance Random Walk learning algorithms as the basis of a unified framework
for the joint design of distributed learning and networking, with resiliency and
privacy being the overarching goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Random Walk
learning, the model can be thought of as a “baton” that is updated and passed
from one node (cloud, edge node, end-devices, etc.) in the network to one of its
neighbors that is smartly chosen. This baton can be then passed to the cloud at
a prescribed schedule and/or adaptively as part of the random walk, allowing
thus a fluid architecture where centralization and full decentralization
constitute two corner points. The proposed work will focus on major challenges
and opportunities specific to the applicability of random walk learning in
NextG, namely: (i) Adaptability to the heterogeneity of the data and the
heterogeneity and dynamic nature of the network; (ii) Resiliency and graceful
degradation in the face of failures via coding-theoretic redundancy methods;
(iii) Model distribution across nodes and random walking snakes; and (iv)
Privacy of the locally owned data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.