* 2148614
* Catalytic: Distributed Acoustic Sensing Data Analysis Ecosystem (DASDAE)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eileen Martin, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 356,194.00

Distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) is a technology allowing one to repurpose a
fiber optic cable as a series of many vibration sensors. DAS allows
geoscientists and civil engineers to collect seismic vibration data more easily
and at low cost, to opportunistically use telecommunications infrastructure, to
leave sensors in place for long-term studies with little maintenance, and to
collect data in new locations such as glaciers, cities, and offshore
environments. DAS could transform approaches to numerous societally important
problems: environmental monitoring, groundwater studies, earthquake hazard
analysis, infrastructure resilience monitoring, and other applications requiring
high resolution vibration data across large regions. However, the scientific and
societal benefits of these DAS-enabled applications will only become reality if
appropriate user-friendly software is freely available to scientists and
engineers. This Geoinformatics Catalytic Track project will develop new
software, the Distributed Acoustic Sensing Data Analysis Ecosystem (DASDAE), to
lower the barrier to entry for the growing community of scientists working with
DAS. DASDAE will provide convenient programming interfaces to read/write DAS
file formats and for analyzing and visualizing data. The DASDAE team will build
a user and developer community by organizing tutorial workshops, distributing
training videos and notebooks (i.e., documents that mix text explanations,
computer code, and images), and hosting hackathons. This project will support
cross-disciplinary training for diverse students and postdocs, including through
use of software in course materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large DAS data volumes
and ongoing development of data standards have created a barrier for many
geoscientists wishing to use DAS in their research projects. Without an open-
source community software package to complement investments in DAS
instrumentation, the data acquired are unlikely to be fully utilized. DASDAE
will be an open-source software development environment for the geoscience
community to collaborate, share methods, access open data, and efficiently
reproduce results from DAS experiments. It will be integral to new geoscience
discoveries, particularly for disciplines that rarely use large-scale seismic
data. DASDAE will include a broad suite of DAS data analysis tools, implemented
for dense arrays with modern software optimizations, integration with existing
open-source computational science software for array analysis where appropriate,
and robust testing and verification practices. This software will follow a
modular design to allow for reuse of code across computing paradigms: field
laptops, desktop workstations, high performance computing (HPC) clusters, and
future cloud and edge computing. The DASDAE team will develop three scientific
analysis modules that advance earthquake hazard, smart city, and near-surface
geophysics related research, which also serve as examples for future software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.