* 2148549
* Collaborative Proposal: Facility: Magnetics Information Consortium Catalyzes Enhanced Cyberinfrastructure and FAIR Data Access Enabling Science Across Community Subdomains
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Lisa Tauxe, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 307,718.00

The Magnetics Information Consortium (MagIC) provides a web-based research
facility that allows researchers and other users free access to archive, search,
visualize, manipulate, download, and reuse data that address many grand
challenges in the geosciences. Over the past six years, the number of
contributors uploading data more than tripled and MagIC usage and dataset
downloads increased more than sixfold. These large increases in contributors,
contributions, and data usage are possible because of a community-driven unified
MagIC data model and because the MagIC Facility deploys highly scalable
databases and a highly adaptable web interface. Although there is still a
noticeable sparsity of data on the internet that can be characterized as being
easily findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable—these FAIR data
principles lie at the heart of MagIC. In addition, training of the next
generation of researchers and members of underrepresented groups in the
development and use of modern data analysis methods form another central
component in the MagIC Facility. In the next three years, the MagIC Facility
will focus its efforts on making enhancements to ensure efficient access to data
in a wide range of subdomain science disciplines, transparency in data
processing, and reliable documentation—altogether to allow questions of
reproducibility and standardization to be readily addressed by researcher and
student users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MagIC Facility will develop several
novel geoinformatics products including an Integrated Contribution Development
Environment using template notebooks on https://jupyterhub.earthref.org with
guided steps for programmatically editing, visualizing, reproducing data
analysis results, and updating user contributions without leaving the browser;
two specialized Subdomain Views with featured filters, relevant data summaries,
and subdomain-specific calculations and visualizations; a Dataset Enrichment
tool to further reduce efforts to prepare an online data contribution for
publication; and Superuser Private Workspaces to support large facility and
laboratory data management needs within MagIC. In particular, the new team from
Oregon State University, the Institute for Rock Magnetism (IRM) at the
University of Minnesota, University of California, Berkeley, and the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography at University of California, San Diego, will work
collaboratively to integrate PmagPy (an open-source and cross-platform software
package for curating and analyzing paleomagnetic data) and preexisting IRM rock
magnetic computational tools into the MagIC back-end server to allow for
advanced online calculations, interactive visualizations, and integration on
JupyterHub and EarthCube’s Pangeo; to make MagIC interoperable with other online
data repositories that also follow FAIR principles; and to keep strengthening
MagIC as a community facility by engaging researchers from historically
underrepresented groups and varied institution types. Over the next three years,
the MagIC Facility will be transferred to FIESTA (Framework for Integrated Earth
Science and Technology Applications) technology that is being finalized under
funding from EarthCube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.