* 2148760
* HRRBAA: Infrasonic Communication in a Cryptic Primate
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Michelle Brown, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,343.00

There is widespread evidence that social and vocal complexity co-evolve: animals
have larger repertoires of call types when they need to manage more long-term
social relationships. By this logic, the very quiet L’Hoest’s monkeys are an
anomaly because, despite being highly social, they appear to produce only 10% of
the expected number of call types. New preliminary evidence contradicts previous
assumptions that this species is merely quiet. Instead, most of its
communication may be concentrated within such low frequencies that they are
inaudible to humans – i.e., infrasound. This study is designed to produce high-
quality recordings of L'Hoest's monkey calls to document routine use of
infrasound for within-group communication. The recordings can be disseminated
through publicly accessible, online repositories. The data can inform future
studies of physical mechanisms by which relatively small-bodied mammals produce
and perceive such signals, the environmental and social pressures likely to have
shaped this communication system, and whether related species also use
infrasound. The project will advance training and mentoring of undergraduates,
including individuals from underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L’Hoest’s monkeys face two conflicting challenges: as
relatively small-bodied, terrestrial animals, they need to reduce the severe
risk of predation by felids and other carnivores; yet the dense vegetation of
their preferred habitats limits their visual contact with group-mates,
necessitating reliance on acoustic signals to maintain group cohesion. This
species may have adapted to these pressures through the use of low-frequency
vocalizations that are likely to be inaudible to predators. Specialized
equipment is necessary to create sound files as evidence of these signals and to
explore their characteristics, because standard equipment is unable to reliably
detect signals outside the range of human hearing. These audio files are paired
with simultaneous video and distance measurements to nearby animals. Together,
these records are used to (1) make a preliminary assessment of the number of
call types that occur in the infrasonic (&lt;20Hz) and near-infrasonic (20-40Hz)
frequencies, (2) describe the acoustic characteristics of these calls, (3)
document the behavioral context associated with specific calls, and (3)
determine the transmission distance of low-frequency signals. This study is an
initial assessment of a novel communication system and establishes a foundation
for future research into this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.