* 2148177
* RINGS: Accelerating the NextG Protocols Definition to Code Generation with an Automatic and Secure Verification-Compilation Tool-Chain
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Hai Zhou, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 611,817.00

Cellular networks have become an inseparable part of everyday lives. Newer
generations of cellular network infrastructure such as the 5G have become more
complicated, and their developments will take larger effort and longer time. In
order to reduce the dependence of cellular infrastructure on foreign providers,
and thus to improve the security of the national information framework, it is
necessary to facilitate the rapid development of open-source and secure software
for new generations of cellular networks. A big challenge in these efforts is
how to quickly generate secure open-source code according to the changing NextG
protocol standards. This research project develops an automatic, secure, and
scalable tool-chain to accelerate the translation of NextG protocol documents
into executable code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages technical
advancements in formal language for protocol description, formal verification
for security analysis, and program synthesis for code generation. These
components are tightly integrated to explore a radical and game-changing
approach to the protocol software synthesis. The output of the research is a
sequence of tools that start with NextG documents, produce I/O Automata
representation of the protocols, and finally generate secure open-source code.
Formal security analysis is also conducted on the I/O Automata representation to
identify and remove vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.