* 2148897
* REU-Site: Regional Initiative to Promote Undergraduate Participation in Experimental and Computational Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 384,789.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or in
part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) in
partnership with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUâ€™s) in
Alabama will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)-site in
experimental and computational materials research. This REU-site project plans
to recruit students from underrepresented groups and academic institutions where
research opportunities are limited. This project offers a broad range of
interdisciplinary materials research experiences to undergraduate students with
a diversity of backgrounds in physics, chemistry, applied mathematics, and
engineering. The undergraduate students will gain experience in materials
synthesis, materials characterization and computer modeling and simulations
during their ten-week research stay at the UAB campus. The scientific research
projects have been specifically developed for undergraduate students by an
interdisciplinary team consisting of science and engineering faculty at UAB.
This project will continue to provide lecture series and workshops in materials
growth and characterization, research ethics and professionalism, innovation and
entrepreneurship and preparation for graduate school to all participants. The
REU participants will publish their findings in peer-reviewed journals and/or
present at professional meetings leading to a broad dissemination of new
knowledge created in the undergraduate research projects. This REU-site plans to
develop a pipeline of undergraduate researchers who will become leaders in
advances in science and discovery of novel materials and contribute to economic
development and national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU-research projects are organized in four research
clusters: (1) materials under extreme conditions (2) machine learning and
simulations in materials research, (3) infrared lasers and spectroscopy, and (4)
polymeric biomaterials and capsules for drug delivery applications. The
undergraduate research projects will contribute to fundamental understanding of
phase transformations and degradation of materials under extreme conditions,
machine learning enabled materials discovery, materials for mid-IR lasers and
quantum information systems, and 3-D printed biomaterials and stimuli responsive
polymers. Some research projects will also involve the use of national x-ray
synchrotron facilities and neutron diffraction facilities in materials research.
The undergraduate student projects have short-term achievable milestones, while
simultaneously contributing to longer-term scientific goals and technological
applications. Our teaming arrangement of REU-participants with faculty and
graduate students, giving poster and oral presentations, writing a research-
style paper, and attending training seminars in scientific communications and
ethics will help REU students see the big picture of what it takes to develop
into a research scientist with the critical skills needed for analyzing,
interpreting, and presenting scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.