* 2148777
* Enhancing Early Childhood Educators' Knowledge of Computer Science and Engineering Concepts to Spark Young Children's Early Interest in STEM Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* B. Clifford Neuman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,042,809.00

High-quality experiences with science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) in the pre-kindergarten years pave the way for learning about computer
science and engineering in K-12 classrooms. Early, high-quality STEM learning
experiences are also an essential way to attract more students to STEM course
work and STEM careers. Currently however, the number of high-quality STEM
education resources and materials available to preschool educators is limited.
This 3-year project addresses this gap in teachers’ capacity to support young
children’s STEM content knowledge by developing (1) a play-based computer
science and pre-engineering education program for pre-K children, (2) a web-
based, early childhood teacher workforce development program, and (3)
accompanying child and early childhood educator assessments. In designing these
elements, the project will follow four principles of early learning: (1)
technology-mediated learning and pre-engineering is a natural and critical part
of children’s early learning; (2) children’s curiosity about the world around
them abounds and their engagement with technology is a powerful catalyst for
children’s play; (3) with appropriate guidance and equity in access, children’s
natural curiosity becomes the foundation for beginning to use technology-
mediated inquiry skills and early problem-solving to explore the surrounding
world; and (4) early exploration can be a rich context in which children use and
develop important early computer science and pre-engineering skills, including
programming, working as a team, communication using “pre-engineering”
vocabulary, applied mathematics, and design thinking. Project partners include
the University of Southern California’s STEM faculty and four Los Angeles
community colleges, all of which are Hispanic-Serving Institutions. A set of Los
Angeles-area preschools that serve linguistically and culturally diverse
communities will serve as research sites. A total of 30 early childhood
education teachers with their 600+ children will participate in the
implementation research; matched numbers of children will be recruited for the
control condition (1200 children total).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s
research questions include: (1) In what ways does the project’s infusing of
play-based early computer science and pre-engineering into child development
programs impact young children’s early computer science and pre-engineering
knowledge, and their knowledge of and early interest in STEM careers? (2) What
is the relationship between the project’s teacher professional development model
and participating teachers’ content knowledge of early computer science and pre-
engineering and instructional performance? and (3) What impact does the
teachers’ cyber-safety focused professional development have on the cyber-safe
practices of participating preschool teachers and their young students? The
project will use a modular, web-based, teacher professional development program
that allows preschool educators and university STEM faculty to co-create
materials and engage in teacher professional development together. In years two
and three, the project will test the development, feasibility, and fidelity of
its approach using a randomized controlled trial (RCT). The RCT will be scaled
annually, beginning with two pilot test sites, and continuing with testing
across six large sites by the project's final year. Data to be collected include
observation of classroom teaching and children’s behaviors, teacher interviews,
teacher focus groups, and parent and teacher surveys. During the 2-year RCT,
multivariate analyses will be used to examine whether teachers and children in
the intervention group have significantly higher post-test scores than their
peers in the control group. The team will regress the post-test scores on a set
of control variables (race, gender, socioeconomic status), pre/baseline-test
scores, and a variable representing intervention versus control to further
examine whether teachers and children in the intervention group have
significantly higher post-test scores than teachers and children in the control
group. Cross group comparisons will be made. At the end of the project,
multilevel hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) will be employed comparing
teachers and children in Year 3 of the RCT. The project aims to produce a fully
tested set of bilingual, bicultural products for national dissemination.
Products would include a fully exportable, web-based, modular early childhood
educator STEM workforce training and professional development model which
focuses on “junior computer science and pre-engineering” through play. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.