* 2148989
* Collaborative Research: Linking iron and nitrogen sources in an oligotrophic coastal margin: Nitrogen fixation and the role of boundary fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Angela Knapp, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2025
* USD 586,791.00

This project will investigate how groundwater discharge delivers important
nutrients to the coastal ecosystems of the West Florida Shelf. Preliminary
studies indicate that groundwater may supply both dissolved organic nitrogen
(DON) and iron in this region. In coastal ecosystems like the West Florida Shelf
that have very low nitrate and ammonium concentrations, DON is the main form of
nitrogen available to organisms. Nitrogen cycling is strongly affected by iron
availability because iron is essential for both photosynthesis and for nitrogen
fixation. This study will investigate the sources and composition of DON and
iron, and their influence on the coastal ecosystem. The team will sample
offshore groundwater wells, river and estuarine waters, and conduct two
expeditions across the West Florida Shelf in winter and summer. Investigators
will participate in K-12 and outreach activities to increase awareness of the
project and related science. The project will fund the work of six graduate and
eight undergraduate students across five institutions, furthering NSF’s goals of
education and training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by preliminary
observations of unexplained, tightly-correlated DON and dissolved iron
concentrations across the West Florida Shelf (WFS), the proposed work will
quantify the flux and isotopic signatures of submarine groundwater discharge
(SGD)-derived DON and iron to the WFS, and evaluate the bioavailability of this
temporally-variable source using four seasonal near-shore campaigns sampling
offshore groundwater wells, estuarine, and riverine endmembers and two cross-
shelf cruises. The work will evaluate whether SGD stimulates nitrogen fixation
on the WFS, and the potential for the stimulated nitrogen fixation to further
modify the chemistry of DON and dissolved iron in the region. The cross-shelf
cruises will investigate hypothesized periods of maximum SGD and Trichodesmium
abundance (June), and reduced river discharge and SGD (February), thus comparing
two distinct biogeochemical regimes. The concentrations and isotopic
compositions of DON and dissolved iron, molecular composition of DON, and the
concentration and composition of iron-binding ligands will be characterized.
Nitrogen fixation rates and Trichodesmium spp. abundance and expression of iron
stress genes will be measured. Fluxes of DON and iron from SGD and rivers will
be quantified with radium isotope mass balances. The impacts of SGD on nitrogen
fixation and DON/ligand production will be constrained with incubations of
natural phytoplankton communities with submarine groundwater amendments. Two
hypotheses will be tested: 1) SGD is the dominant source of bioavailable DON and
dissolved iron on the WFS, and 2) SGD-alleviation of iron stress changes the
dominant Trichodesmium species on the WFS, increases nitrogen fixation rates and
modifies DON and iron composition. Overall, the work will establish connections
between marine nitrogen and iron cycling and evaluate the potential for coastal
inputs to modify water along the WFS before export to the Atlantic Ocean. This
study will thus provide a framework to consider these boundary fluxes in
oligotrophic coastal systems and the relative importance of rivers and SGD as
sources of nitrogen and iron in other analogous locations, such as coastal
systems in Australia, India, and Africa, where nitrogen fixation and SGD have
also been documented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.