* 2148567
* Rossby Wave Breaking Archetypal Patterns, Processes and Projected Changes from the 20th (twentieth) to the 21st (twenty-first) Century
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Melissa Gervais, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 486,069.00

The weather that typically occurs in the middle latitudes is driven in part by
the jet stream - a corridor of strong winds found 8-13 km above ground - and
atmospheric undulations associated with Rossby waves that propagate with it.
These waves typically have a pattern that resembles a swell in the ocean, in
that they are relatively broad and rolling. However, in certain circumstances,
they can break, resembling closely the appearance of a wave breaking on a
shoreline. When Rossby waves break in the atmosphere, they are frequently
associated with high-impact weather phenomena like extended heat and cold waves,
extreme precipitation, and atmospheric blocking that can significantly alter the
path of the jet stream. These Rossby wave breaks can take on a variety of
different shapes and sizes (i.e., flavors) which may determine where and how
they modulate mid-latitude extreme weather. To date, a comprehensive analysis of
the different wave breaking flavors has yet to be undertaken. The goal of this
research is to understand the common flavors of Rossby wave breaking in the
Northern Hemisphere in the present and future climate using machine learning.
The investigators will assess the flavors of Rossby wave breaking in past
observations and seek to identify how well climate models can represent such
patterns and their associated impacts on the jet stream and weather. The
proposed work will also explore how these Rossby wave break flavors,
frequencies, and impacts may change over the 21st Century.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Given the close linkage between Rossby wave breaking, the jet stream,
and high-impact weather, a better understanding of these events in the present
and future is societally important. The exploration of how Rossby wave break
patterns change over the next century should shed light on a critical area of
interest to both the science community and the broader public. As part of
proposed activities, the investigators will mentor a graduate student as well as
two undergraduate students. One undergraduate researcher will help to develop a
real-time Rossby wave break tracking tool for operational forecasters, while the
second will explore the impacts of changes in Rossby wave breaking over the
climate-sensitive Mediterranean region. This research will thus serve to improve
our fundamental understanding of these high impact events, train the next
generation of scientists in the intersectional study of weather and climate, and
provide information that is of interest to members of the research community,
operational forecasters, and policy/adaptation decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.