* 2148845
* How Government Policies Reduce Security Threats from Environmental Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sara Mitchell, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2025
* USD 401,774.00

Natural disasters like earthquakes, floods, and droughts have become more
frequent and threaten to displace as many as one billion people by 2050. This
project examines government policy responses to natural disasters to better
understand which types of policies increase political violence risks. The
research team identifies several disaster policy responses and predicts when
political violence is more likely to occur given different policy responses. The
project involves collection of government disaster responses for all countries
from 1900-2020 as well as case studies of disaster responses for countries. The
study will result in a new publicly available dataset, scientific publications,
and the results will inform the security and preparedness of the U.S. government
to respond to natural disasters abroad, an important task given the size and
scope of US disaster aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research connecting
climate shocks, disasters, and civil conflicts reaches divergent conclusions
about the conditions under which environmental shocks lead to political
violence. This project explains these disparate findings by examining how
government policy responses intervene in the disaster-conflict relationship. The
researchers theorize that political violence occurs more often when governments
1) restrict movement of disaster affected populations, 2) restrict third party
actor aid efforts, 3) give aid unequally to politically favored areas, 4) rely
on decentralized disaster management strategies; and 5) when pre-disaster
remittances are small. To test these claims the researchers will statistically
analyze a new global dataset on government responses to disasters from 1900-2020
and undertake twenty-four case studies. The results of this project will advance
basic research on the relationship of climate change to conflict, the resilience
of countries to natural disasters, and international disaster aid
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.