* 2148067
* Collaborative Research: Straight to the Source- Mineral Weathering in Snowbanks and Supraglacial Ice, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Melisa Diaz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 240,969.00

Glacial erosion produces large quantities of sediment that can change the
chemistry of surrounding land and ocean ecosystems. While the nutrients
underneath glaciers are known to be important for nearby biological communities,
comparatively less is known about the chemistry and importance of glacier
surfaces and snowpack, which can trap dust - small particles of rock that are
deposited by wind and with snowfall. The dust is darker than ice and snow and
therefore can warm during sunny periods and melt the surrounding frozen water,
generating small amounts of liquid water. During cloudy and cold periods, solar
radiation can no longer heat the particles and the liquid water around the dust
freezes again. These thawing and freezing cycles can break down the dust and
release nutrients, such as iron, which can potentially be used by organisms in
the ice or can be transported to streams, lakes, and/or the ocean during periods
of high melt. This research will combine computer modeling and laboratory
experiments to understand 1) what happens (chemically and physically) to glacier
and snowpack dust during freezing and thawing and 2) how to model freezing and
thawing of water and dust in glacier ice. Two traveling exhibits exploring the
connections between science and art will result from this project, allowing for
diverse audiences to connect with the Antarctic continent and understand how
small-scale science influences large-scale systems. The results of this study
will determine the geochemistry of glacial meltwater due to freezing and
thawing, and whether the meltwater contains critical nutrients for surrounding
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite low temperatures and the relative
scarcity of liquid water, glacial systems can be a major source of trace metals,
nutrients and other weathering products to proglacial and marine systems. While
the importance of weathering has been established in subglacial and proglacial
environments, less is understood about weathering mechanisms or the composition
of major and trace nutrients at the most upstream source: within snow and
supraglacial ice. Wind deposits fine-grained sediment on ice surfaces, which can
then melt or become incorporated into the ice profile and experience a range of
thermal regimes and freeze-thaw conditions. Daily freeze-thaw cycling drives
physical and chemical weathering of sediment grains, yet few studies have
explicitly examined the frequency and intensity of freeze-thaw cycles and how
they control major ion and trace metal release, alteration, and mobility. This
interdisciplinary study will use geochemical and energy balance modeling,
freeze-thaw experimentation, and scanning electron microscopy to advance
knowledge of mineral weathering in ice and snow active layers. Existing samples
collected from the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica, an ecosystem that relies
on runoff derived from supraglacial ice and snow melt, will be utilized. Two
traveling exhibits exploring the connections between science and art will result
from this project, the first focused on connecting the macro-scale Antarctic
continent to micro-scale microscopy images, and the second a contemporary art
exhibit that will explore the Antarctic continent and our perceptions of scale.
Findings from this research will contribute to knowledge of nutrient
bioavailability and delivery to proglacial environments and polar oceans,
watershed-scale weathering in glacial systems, and the conditions that create
microsites for life on glaciers and other icy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.