* 2148768
* Facility: Leveraging feedback from the MorphoBank community to modernize analysis of paleontological data for phylogenetics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Mark Miller, Phoenix Bioinformatics Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 664,768.00

MorphoBank (www.morphobank.org) is a freely accessible online resource that
scientists all over the world use to collect and share information for
reconstructing the evolution of living and extinct species. Users of MorphoBank
can collaborate in real time to document relationships in anatomical features
among living and fossil species, which facilitates reconstruction of
evolutionary trees. They can also add text and standardized labels to 2D and 3D
images, and link the entire data set to peer-reviewed publications, making it
easier to find, reproduce, and reuse past work. MorphoBank facilitates our
understanding of how all organisms evolved and informs our predictions of future
evolution. In addition, MorphoBank supports education and outreach efforts,
including through partnerships with schools and museums that seek to broaden
participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MorphoBank is a widely-used community tool that
supports real-time collaboration for creating and annotating phylogenetic
matrices. This award will support software development in three key areas to
advance the MorphoBank capabilities in response to feedback provided by the user
community. First, the project team will connect MorphoBank’s data management
tools to computational resources for building phylogenetic trees using
parsimony, maximum likelihood and Bayesian analysis algorithms. Second, they
will improve the existing MorphoBank data organization tools, such as the
morphological matrix editor, the premium and most complex part of MorphoBank’s
data management tools, to speed workflows and permit new research activities not
possible in any other software package. Third, they will expose paleobiological
research at MorphoBank through direct connections to ORCID and the Paleobiology
Database. This work will lead MorphoBank to become a sustainable, scalable, and
cost-efficient modern online resource for geoinformatics, paleontology, and
morphology. These efforts will enhance infrastructure that accelerates research
while enabling education of new scientists. In collaboration with the Museum of
Paleontology at the University of California, Berkeley, this project will
introduce paleobiology undergraduates to scientific data organization. Paid
interns will be trained in applying these skills to the domain of
geoinformatics. The funded team will continue outreach to students from
educationally disadvantaged backgrounds in the MESA (Mathematics, Engineering,
Science Achievement) programs at community colleges in the San Francisco Bay
Area by participating in their STEM speaker series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.