* 2148781
* Teachers and Researchers Advancing Integrated Lessons in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Joshua Nelson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,406,838.00

High school students in rural underserved populations often lack STEM role
models, have deficiencies in career readiness, and have limited access to
advanced technologies. Although students may be interested in STEM careers, they
often lack place-based STEM learning experiences and advanced technology
necessary to pursue information and communication technology (ICT) and STEM
careers. The project, Teachers and Researchers Advancing Integrated Lessons in
STEM (TRAILS 2.0), will expand, scale, and innovate a tested model of integrated
STEM instruction and teacher professional development to enhance rural students’
learning of STEM content while generating interest in technology-rich and ICT
careers. Over four years, TRAILS 2.0 will involve up to 90 in-service secondary
biology or agriculture (life science) and engineering/technology education
teachers to impact over 10,000 students in the eastern Chesapeake Bay (Maryland
and Virginia), Southeastern Colorado, Northern New Mexico, and native Hawaiian-
serving schools. TRAILS 2.0 will increase STEM teachers’ self-efficacy and
expand and sustain their community of practice network. TRAILS 2.0 will also
advance rural school students’ learning of STEM content and career
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TRAILS 2.0’s goals for teachers are: 1)
strengthen and increase STEM teachers' community of practice, and 2) increase
integrated STEM teaching self-efficacy. TRAILS 2.0’s goals for students are to:
1) improve students’ capacity to pursue STEM careers by strengthening their
21st-century skills and 2) enhance socio-emotional outcomes (STEM career
awareness, engagement in STEM learning, attitudes toward STEM learning, and STEM
and ICT careers). TRAILS 2.0 will address Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) by blending science inquiry and engineering design to promote STEM
practices and identify crosscutting concepts, which provides teachers with
authentic STEM learning contexts they often struggle to locate on their own.
TRAILS 2.0 will use local rural knowledge contexts, funds of knowledge, and
Indigenous science knowledge (ISK) to create place-based STEM learning through a
community of practice, 3D printing, and biomimicry engineering design that
promote 21st-century skills. TRAILS 2.0 teacher professional development
features a proven exemplar STEM lesson integrating biomimicry with engineering
design called D-BAIT. In the D-BAIT unit, students research, design, and produce
a biomimicry-inspired fishing lure that mimics aquatic insects or marine life
using CAD and 3D printing to create testable prototypes. Teachers will integrate
STEM content and promote 21st-century skills while engaging in the D-BAIT lesson
as active learners, just like their students. Teacher teams then cogenerate and
later implement their own place-based integrated STEM lessons using 3D printing
and biomimicry engineering design challenges. TRAILS 2.0 will research place-
based integrated STEM teacher professional development on teachers’ practices,
teacher self-efficacy, and expanded community of practice networks, expanding
the knowledge base in STEM education. TRAILS 2.0 will also establish evidence of
impact on students’ socio-emotional outcomes, 21st-century skills, and STEM
career awareness through multiple place-based and ISK STEM learning experiences,
exposure to local STEM professionals, and collaboration with peers. This project
is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.