* 2148886
* How do sedimentary rocks become part of the lower continental crust?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Roberta Rudnick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2024
* USD 353,586.00

Sedimentary rocks are important constituents of the continental crust. Whereas
most reside in the upper crust where they form, geologic processes can transport
sedimentary rocks into the lower crust. This is important because sedimentary
rocks contain up to ten-times higher concentrations of the radioactive heat-
producing elements K, Th, and U, compared to the rocks that otherwise dominate
the lower crust. Therefore, the addition of sedimentary rocks to the deep
continental crust has a profound impact on its heat production, the geothermal
gradient within the crust, and the global inventory of heat-producing elements.
There are different geological processes by which sedimentary rocks might enter
the lower crust and each has implications for how common lower crustal
sedimentary rocks may be. This project seeks to determine the processes
responsible for transport of sedimentary rocks into the lower crust beneath
southern New Mexico and central Montana, where such rocks are returned to the
surface as accidental fragments in volcanoes (a poor-man’s drill hole), allowing
scientists to study their history. The pathway and timing of sedimentary rock
transport into the lower crust will be determined through geochemical analyses
and radiometric dating. The project supports a female PhD student from a
significantly under-represented demographic group, several undergraduate
research assistants from UC Santa Barbara, two summer interns from California
State University North Ridge and a senior female principal investigator. The PI
and PhD student will train the undergraduate assistants and interns in
geochemical research methods and provide career advice and guidance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to determine the process(es) by which
sedimentary rocks are emplaced into lower continental crust. Determining process
will shed light on how common metasedimentary rocks might be the deep crust.
Several tectonic scenarios are possible, which can potentially be distinguished
on the basis of the prograde P-T paths followed by the rocks, as well as by the
ages of detrital zircons and age and compositions of metamorphic minerals (e.g.,
monazite) they contain. The project focusses on two suites of lower crustal
metapelite xenoliths carried in Cenozoic basalts from Kilbourne Hole and
Potrillo maar, New Mexico, and the Eocene magmatic province of Montana. The
prograde path these rocks followed will be ascertained using conventional
thermobarometry, pseudosections, and Zr-in-rutile and Ti-in-zircon thermometry,
and Ti-in-quartz thermometry. U-Pb dating of accessory phases will constrain the
depositional age and timing of metamorphism. The study of these two sample
suites, the lessons learned and the methods developed, will pave the way for
future investigations of additional lower crustal metapelites in order to
determine the dominant processes involved in sediment emplacement into the deep
continental crust. The project will support the research of a female PhD student
who is from a significantly under-represented group. It will also support
several undergraduate research assistants from UC Santa Barbara and two summer
interns from California State University North Ridge; both are Hispanic-serving
institutions. The undergraduates will be trained in geochemical research methods
and mentored in terms of career planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.