* 2148301
* RINGS: Language-Agnostic Resilience Engineering at the Edge with WebAssembly
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2026
* USD 626,185.00

As public clouds and Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) race to enable compute
capabilities at the edge of their networks, software developers are no longer
deploying just static files (video, images) at the edge, but significant
application code as well. This presents a dramatic departure from current
development practices. With this new breed of applications on the horizon, the
security, performance, and feature requirements of the underlying execution
platform grow commensurately. Second, the harsh reality of unexpected network
failures at the edge forces every mainstream developer to become a distributed
systems engineer. Distributed systems engineering multiplies complexity and
difficulty manyfold, as partial failure (unavailability of one or more services)
can adversely impact the system in unknown or hard-to-predict ways, even leading
to catastrophic cascading failures. This research proposes an approach to full-
stack “resilience engineering” to enable secure, effective, and performant edge
computation in NextG systems. Our work focuses on and builds on WebAssembly,
which is emerging as the common underlying language-agnostic execution platform
in new edge computing environments. We propose a robust, performant, and secure
experimental runtime engine with support for instrumentation and rapid
prototyping that will facilitate fault injection and program repair. On top of
this foundation, this work proposes a set of tools for programming language-
agnostic fault injection, testing, and repair of resilience (distributed system-
related) errors in distributed and networked systems. This would allow software
developers to quickly and effectively test and fix resilience defects before
application code is deployed to users, rather than simply deploying and hoping
for the best without any indication of how that application behaves in the face
of partial failure (which is the current state of the art). If widely adopted,
the results of this work would, in turn, reduce the occurrence of catastrophic
cascading failures that cause widespread outages in critical networked
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essentially all software that we use as a society
is now networked, meaning apps connect to multiple servers and coordinate
together to complete a task (such as online banking, searching for nearby
restaurants, and even streaming media). This project directly supports the
development of dependable networked services. Prior to this research, apps are
typically released to users without testing for issues at the network level
between services. This work develops new ways to test this brave new world of
networked software, making it possible for software developers to automatically
discover and automatically repair bugs before that software is released to
users. As a result of this research, we will have new tools that, if broadly
used, can result in fewer outages of critical networked services that society
depends on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.