* 2148878
* RII Track-1: Adaptive and Resilient Infrastructures driven by Social Equity (ARISE)
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Belinda Sturm, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 05/31/2027
* USD 8,085,169.00

Considerations of equity and underrepresented groups are currently missing from
resilience and relief efforts in response to extreme events. The Adaptive and
Resilient Infrastructures driven by Social Equity (ARISE) project will develop a
social-equity-driven paradigm for resilience analysis as well as a pipeline of
decision makers and community leaders for the transformation of how communities
invest in and manage physical and human infrastructure. Framed around four
themes, ARISE research aims to innovate and transform how communities in Kansas
consider resilience in the face of hazards and disasters. These themes are
supported by extensive community engagement, community engaged research, and
education and outreach components. The ARISE project will increase research,
education, and training capacity in data science, machine learning, complex
network modeling, decision and risk management science, and social equity. This
project will also develop the foundation for “smart” communities and cities
while creating new industries that retain highly qualified Kansas professionals.
ARISE will be administered by the University of Kansas in collaboration with
Kansas State University, Wichita State University, Baker University, Donnelly
College, and seven Kansas community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Adaptive
and Resilient Infrastructures driven by Social Equity (ARISE) project is framed
around four research themes. Theme 1 focuses on understanding equity
measurements and interdependent infrastructure systems; Theme 2 develops an
evaluation framework; Theme 3 considers four case studies for hypothesis
testing; and Theme 4 integrates research into decision-lever case studies and
decision support tools. ARISE will build academic research capacity in Kansas
for technology-enabled “smart and resilient” infrastructure research to
transform rural and vulnerable communities that are typically underrepresented
in “smart cities” research. The project is based on the recognition that
disaster recovery policies and programs have been systematically biased against
underserved community members such as the homeless, the disabled, those living
in poverty, minorities, and ethnic and indigenous populations. The major gap the
project seeks to address is this lack of attention to equity in resilience
frameworks, policy, and tools. ARISE will examine the relationship between
disasters, resources, and equity and will develop a stochastic hetero-
functional, graph-theoretic framework for understanding interdependent human and
physical infrastructures. The research will apply a six-dimensional approach for
measuring social equity (community capitals). ARISE research is integrated with
capacity building and outreach activities including interdisciplinary summer
research experiences for undergraduates, partnerships with museums and libraries
in underserved communities to promote youth and family STEM engagement, and
workforce development programs for municipal planners and utility operators. The
project will enable researchers and educators to be at the forefront of the
resilience science and engineering arena, leading to enhanced research capacity
in Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.