* 2148230
* RINGS: Reshaping the Last Mile for High Availability and Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Scott Shenker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2025
* USD 599,703.00

A key part of the Internet infrastructure is the access or “last mile” link over
which a user’s device connects to the Internet. This last-mile infrastructure is
essential in ensuring that users enjoy high-quality access to Internet services.
It is thus important that the last-mile infrastructure is highly available,
protects user privacy, offers high performance, and yet is cost-efficient with a
healthy ecosystem of innovative last-mile vendors. Unfortunately, today’s last-
mile ecosystem — and the cellular ecosystem in particular — falls short on all
of these dimensions. The goal of this project is to take initial steps toward
transforming how our communication systems interact with the last mile. If
successful, the resulting infrastructure would be more available, and the
ecosystem would be incentivized to provide cost-effective and high-quality
connectivity to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current last-mile ecosystem
closely couples the usage of (scarce) access resources to whatever backend
provider the user has contracted with. For example, today’s cellular
architecture limits users to the facilities associated (directly or indirectly)
with their mobile network operator This coupling limits resilience (i.e.,
surviving failures of individual access points or providers) as well as
efficiency (since last-mile costs cannot be shared across operators). The latter
in turn discourage deployment in rural areas and hence constrains the reach of
network services. To improve both the resilience and efficiency of our cellular
networks, this project explores a new access architecture that decouples last-
mile resources from a user's choice of mobile operator. This enables users to
make use of all available access resources, providing far greater protection
from last-mile failures and making more markets financially viable. Realizing
this decoupling requires three main areas of technical innovation. First, to
achieve the desired decoupling, mobility should be handled outside the cellular
core while preserving performance and feature parity with today's cellular
networks. Second, recent developments have shown how current cellular protocols
do not provide adequate levels of privacy. The decoupling of the last mile from
the backend must be done in a way that not only matches but instead greatly
exceeds the current privacy protections. Third, to allow users to seamlessly
switch between cellular and Wi-Fi access, there must be a uniform way to
authenticate users, and this approach should not require hardware or firmware
changes to the underlying technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.