* 2148620
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Properties and processes impacting other trace element and isotope cycles using noble gas and stable isotope tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gisela Winckler, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2025
* USD 157,955.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. This
project will undertake measurements of noble gas concentrations, helium and
oxygen isotope abundances, and tritium on two upcoming U.S. GEOTRACES
expeditions to the South Pacific, Southern Ocean, and Amundsen Sea. The noble
gas and isotope tracers will be used to determine the contributions of
hydrothermal venting, glacial meltwater, and sea ice formation to the water
masses of the region. Glacial melt and sea ice production are considered
important drivers of trace element cycling on the Antarctic continental shelf.
These processes also help establish the properties of Southern Ocean-sourced
deep water. Upwelling of deep-sourced hydrothermal water could deliver limiting
micronutrients such as iron to the surface waters of the Southern Ocean, driving
enhanced primary productivity. Deeper-lying hydrothermal plumes may export
fluxes of hydrothermal trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) through the Drake
Passage. The project will support a graduate student, teacher professional
development, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the GEOTRACES
GP17-OCE expedition, the team will measure helium-3, helium concentration, and
neon concentration. On the GP17-ANT expedition, they will measure the
concentrations of all five noble gases, helium-3, the stable isotope composition
of water, and tritium. Specific aims include (1) to study pathways for
hydrothermal inputs throughout the South Pacific, (2) to quantify other
hydrothermally-sourced TEI fluxes and scavenging rates, (3) to quantify the
inputs of snow and sea ice melt in relation to iron and other TEIs in the
Amundsen Sea, (4) trace the ice shelf pump mechanism in the Amundsen Sea, and
examine the spread of northward spread of meltwater and TEIs from the ice-
covered marginal seas to the open Southern Ocean. In addition, since there is
evidence that not all the hydrothermal inputs to the Southern Ocean have been
discovered, the expeditions have the potential to expand knowledge of where
additional hydrothermal systems, important to the biogeochemistry of the water
column, are located.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.