* 2148165
* DNA Uptake By Naturally Competent Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kyle Costa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 666,225.00

Microorganisms can acquire genetic material directly from their environment
through a process called transformation. These organisms belong to two broad
groups, the bacteria and the archaea. Transformation is well studied in
bacteria, but little is known about how this works in archaea, despite the fact
that archaea represent at least a third of the biodiversity on Earth and
catalyze essential reactions in both global biogeochemical cycles in large-scale
industrial and municipal bioreactors. To address this deficiency, this proposal
will be the first characterization of transformation in a member of the archaea.
Through this work, the necessary genes and proteins needed to carry out this
process will be identified. These results may further efforts to study organisms
from the archaea through genetic techniques. This research has the potential to
impact directly and positively research in any process that archaea catalyze.
Additionally, transformation is important in natural populations, and the
results generated here will help develop a broader understanding of gene flow in
the environment. Finally, the techniques developed as part of this research will
directly contribute to the education of the next generation of scientists
through graduate student training and enhancing hands-on experimentation in
undergraduate and graduate classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
characterize the process of natural transformation - the direct uptake and
genomic incorporation of DNA from the environment by competent organisms - in
the archaeal domain. This will be accomplished by identifying and characterizing
components of the archaeal DNA uptake machinery involved in three distinct steps
of transformation: extracellular binding of DNA, transport across the cell
membrane, and maintenance of DNA in the cell cytoplasm. Identifying the genes
and proteins involved in these steps will facilitate in silico predictions of an
organismâ€™s ability to take up environmental DNA. This project will leverage
transposon mutagenesis, in vitro biochemical analysis, and phenotypic assays to
characterize transformation in Methanococcus maripaludis, a model organism for
the study of members of the archaeal domain. To further facilitate the
characterization of archaeal transformation machinery, the work in this proposal
will develop and utilize a system for live cell fluorescent imaging of anaerobic
archaea to analyze protein localization and protein-protein interactions in
competent archaea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.