* 2148345
* Bolstering STEM Pathways for Students in Rural New England Through a Comprehensive, Multi-Year Learning Community
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Alyson Michael, NEW HAMPSHIRE ACADEMY OF SCIENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,447,987.00

This project addresses access to STEM educational experiences for rural
students. Students from rural areas and small towns make up about 30% of the
U.S. secondary school population but often lack inspirational STEM educational
opportunities and experiences. This makes them less likely to pursue STEM majors
in college, which is a potential loss of human talent in STEM innovation. This
investigation will explore how providing a comprehensive, multi-year academic
and personal support system can attract and retain underrepresented rural high
school students, especially girls, from underserved rural areas of NH and VT. It
studies how the experience affects students' identity as STEM researchers and,
in turn, their pathways to post-secondary STEM/ICT activities. One of the
challenges faced by rural students is the geographic inaccessibility of
opportunities to participate in outside-of-school STEM/ICT activities. This
long-term investigation will compare the experiences of rural underrepresented
students who participate in-person in authentic STEM/ICT research with those who
participate remotely. The impact of a supportive STEM/ICT community will also be
investigated as students, regardless of remote or virtual research, will be
provided with mentorship from STEM professionals, near-peer mentors from their
rural communities, standardized test preparation, and financial planning that
draws in their parents and guardians as they prepare as a family to navigate the
college application and admittance process, a critical step in their career
pathways in STEM/ICT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research explores the
question, “How do rural high school students’ STEM identities develop over time
as they engage with peers and mentors in a comprehensive program that enhances
project-based learning with mentoring, college application support, and
community outreach?” Researchers hypothesize that collaborations with science-
minded peers, near-peers, and adults will strengthen rural students’ sense that
they, too, belong to a community of scientists who can make meaningful
contributions to a STEM field or discipline. All students will complete annual
surveys about science identity and belonging. A subgroup will be observed and
interviewed. Using Photovoice, a community-based participatory research method,
this subsample will also take pictures of what it means to do science in their
community, and who does science in their community. Aggregated results and
individual case narratives will illustrate commonalities and variations in
student experiences and outcomes, and speculate on the program features that may
contribute to those differences. The findings will contribute to a growing but
currently limited body of research on how to attract and retain rural students
in STEM and ICT post-secondary pathways. Progress and results will be shared
with the general public, and regional and national STEM outreach audiences.
Student participants will take a lead role in some of this dissemination. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.