* 2148332
* Integration of Complex State Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Miriam Stark, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 318,359.00

Ancient empires grew by expanding their territories; studying how frontiers
became provinces offers insights into local agency and the limits of state
control in such regions. Direct control of provincial zones is a common imperial
strategy that archaeologists have documented globally, and often involves either
resettling local populations to new localities or installing an elite from the
capital to oversee the new territory. Some documented cases offer an alternative
structure, in which provincial regions retained more autonomy provided they
adopted the state ideology and exported substantial local resources to the core.
Archaeological research in provincial regions can document long-term change
through time and address the nature of imperial control by focusing on impacts
of state policies on the everyday lives of people. Where documentary evidence is
available, the archaeological record can also provide a counterpoint to the
state propaganda that these documentary records offer. In this project
researchers will work with international colleagues to investigate habitation at
a provincial center and its dynamic relationship with the Angkor empire. Their
field-based investigations weave capacity-building and student training into the
research project, and community engagement will involve multiple activities that
include the co-production of a comic book describing the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will focus their field-based investigations
within site occupation areas to understand the amount of state control versus
local autonomy at a household level. In doing so, their work will facilitate a
deeper understanding of the nature and structure of state power. Research will
take place in an empire's outlying region. This region was of perennial interest
to the state, having some of the region's most arable land. Yet how this
provincial area articulated with the capital remains unclear. The team will
conduct field investigations at the site to determine its scope and occupational
history, attending to changes in material culture, diet, and the local
environmental through time. An international team of specialists will track
artifactual, geochemical, and zooarchaeological proxies produced through this
research to study core-provincial dynamics and the nature of state
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.