* 2148207
* Collaborative Research: Molecular mechanisms governing the cytoskeleton-mediated motility and distribution of peroxisomes and mitochondria in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Bo Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 981,302.00

This research is aimed at addressing a fundamental question in cell biology that
is directly associated with growth and reproduction of plants, including crops.
Plant cells mobilize their highly dynamic subcellular compartments, known as
organelles, to fulfill physiological functions in growth and development. This
project will uncover the poorly understood mechanisms by which organelles move
and distribute along molecular tracks called actin filaments within plant cells
in response to internal and external signals. The focus will be on peroxisomes
and mitochondria, two organelles that are physically and biochemically connected
and essential for energy metabolism and survival of plants. The molecular
machinery responsible for the motility and distribution of these two types of
organelles will be dissected, using the small mustard plant Arabidopsis.
Knowledge gained will provide fundamental insights into the principles
associated with the motility of plant organelles, thereby giving perspectives on
how these molecular machineries evolved. In addition, the project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in modern biological skills. Hands-on
research experience will be provided to first-year undergraduate students in the
classroom with the goal of retaining them in science majors. Discovery-based
summer trainings will be provided to undergraduates in molecular biology,
genetics, cell biology, physiology and computational biology in order to prepare
them for a scientific career or advanced training after graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytoskeleton-dependent active movement and distribution of
organelles are fundamentally significant for cell growth, division, and
signaling. However, how organelles recruit cytoskeletal motor proteins for their
directional transport along the cytoskeletal tracks is complex and often under
debate. This project focuses on molecular mechanisms underlying the motility and
distribution of plant peroxisomes and mitochondria, multifunctional and
metabolically linked organelles essential for energy metabolism and plant
viability. An exploratory effort detected directional transport of peroxisomes
along actin filaments and discovered candidate proteins functioning at the
interface between peroxisomes/mitochondria and the cytoskeleton for organellar
motility and distribution in Arabidopsis thaliana. It is hypothesized that the
active long-distance movement of peroxisomes/mitochondria along actin filaments
is regulated by organelle-specific receptor/adaptor proteins and GTPases, which
recruit the actin-associated Myosin XI motors that energize the motility. The
project includes three aims: (1) Determining the role of the actin-binding
protein Peroxisomal and Mitochondrial Division 1 (PMD1) in mediating the
tethering of peroxisomes/mitochondria to the actin filaments; (2) Dissecting the
adaptor complex that recruits Myosin XI to the peroxisome by testing the roles
of TONSOKU-associated protein 1 (TSA1), the RABE1c GTPase, and the peroxin PEX5;
and (3) Dissecting the adaptor complex that recruits Myosin XI to mitochondria
by testing the functions of Cardiomyopathy-Associated Protein (CMYA) and the
MIRO1 GTPase. Protein immuno-affinity purification, proteomics, live-cell
imaging, genetics and physiological phenotyping will be employed to untangle
interactions between peroxisomes/mitochondria and the actin cytoskeleton that
regulate organelle motility and advance the understanding of the impact of
organelle motility on plant fitness. In addition, the project will train both
graduate and undergraduate students in modern biological and computational
techniques at both universities. Hands-on research experience will be provided
to first-year undergraduate students in the classroom with the goal of retaining
them in science majors. Discovery-based summer trainings will be provided to
undergraduates in molecular biology, genetics, cell biology, physiology, and
computational biology in order to prepare them for a scientific career or
advanced training after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.