* 2148904
* Theory-based Measurement of Varieties of Power Using a Novel Semi-supervised IRT Model
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* David Siegel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 90,787.00

The concept of state power has been invoked to explain everything from decisions
to begin or end wars to trade policy to decisions nations make within their own
borders. Yet, despite the prevalence and importance of the concept, it has been
challenging to measure power in any consistent manner. What set of
characteristics might compel a nation to go along with the preferences of other
nations? And can we measure those characteristics ahead of time, in order to
better predict the behavior of states as they respond to their own and other
states’ absolute and relative power? Such predictions are essential to securing
the national defense. This project will produce a theoretically-informed set of
measures of power by using new semi-supervised machine learning techniques on a
wide range of data sources gathered for the purpose. That set of measures will
aid policy-makers in assessing the power dynamics between states, helping
decision-making and enhancing security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In both scientific
and policy circles, a wide range of theoretical conceptions of power are
employed, most notably hard and soft power. Measurements of power, however,
typically only capture some of its theoretical uses, while at the same time
including aspects that might be unrelated to the use of power in question. When
international relations scholars discuss “power,” for instance, they could be
referring to very specific types of power, and their conclusions, measures, and
models may not carry over to other types. For example, military power has been
operationalized by the size of the army and the Composite Index of National
Capability (CINC) score, but neither are likely useful as measures when elements
of soft power are in play. This project offers several improvements in the
ability to measure power. One, it provides a series of theoretically-informed
measures of types of power. Two, it gathers a large dataset of sources that
inform those different measures of power. Three, it provides a flexible tool—a
semi-supervised machine learning algorithm making use of a modified Bayesian
Item Response Theory model—to transparently construct alternate measures of
power. That opens the door to studies that consistently assess across contexts
the role of different types of power in international relations and allows
stakeholders to communicate clearly about the aspects of power most relevant to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.