* 2148596
* Collaborative Research: A global assessment of annual to decadal sea level predictability
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Stephen Yeager, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 191,762.00

This study will determine the robustness of our current ability to predict sea-
level variability at temporal scales from annual to decadal and at spatial
scales that span the globe. The study will use a community model that considers
processes in the ocean and in the atmosphere to simulate sea-level variability.
The model results will be compared to data that are already available and
determine the skill of the simulations and predictions, while elucidating the
causes for model-data disparities. Ultimately, the study will propose whether
sea-level variability can be described, and its predictability can be achieved,
with oceanic and atmospheric processes. Appropriate representation of sea-level
variability and predictability has fundamental implications for coastal
communities worldwide. The principal investigator has ongoing efforts with
government and private entities related to sea-level
predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the ability of
models to simulate and predict annual to decadal sea-level variability at a
global scale. The skill of the Community Earth System Model (CESM) will be
determined with horizontal resolutions of 1 and 0.1 degrees, while combining
model results with tide gauge data, altimetry measurements and atmospheric
pressure reanalysis. A mechanistic understanding of sea-level variability will
be achieved by partitioning of remote and local forcing, as well as via the
propagation of sea-level anomalies throughout the ocean. Sea-level anomalies
will be deconstructed into various components: static vs dynamic, externally
forced and unforced, manometric vs steric, local vs remote forcing.
Intercomparisons of model simulations will identify the effects of model errors
and random variability on the predictive skill throughout Earth. The mechanistic
analyses will increase reliability of predictions; recommend observational and
model experiments; and suggest limitations of ocean and climate variability
representations. In terms of broader impacts, the project will have impacts on
economic, cultural and ecological resources. The project will represent a
collaboration with NCAR, facilitating the model (CESM) implementation. As
predictions of sea-level variability are essential for coastal planning, this
project will contribute to assess errors of CESM at scales of annual to decadal
and relate them to heat, momentum and freshwater fluxes, advection and wave
propagation. The PI has ongoing predictability efforts with local and state
governments, as well as with the private sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.