* 2148914
* NSFDEB-NERC: Integrating Computational, Phenotypic, and Population-Genomic Approaches to Reveal Processes of Cryptic Speciation and Gene Flow in Madagascars Mouse Lemurs
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,399,798.00

Human beings, like all other species, require a healthy environment in order to
thrive and, ultimately, survive. Biodiversity — the variety of plants and
animals in a given habitat — is the key factor in the health of any environment.
We see that biodiversity is presently under extreme threat, however, largely
from human impacts such as deforestation and climate change. In order to
accurately gauge the nature of that threat, it is essential that scientists
establish agreed-upon methods for recognizing the distribution and abundance of
species, as well as the mechanism, known as speciation, by which they are
formed. This is a complicated task because speciation is usually driven by a
complex intersection of biological, geological, and climatological forces. To
address this challenge, the project will use an integrated approach that
combines computer science, field observation, and genomic analysis to reveal the
processes that generate and maintain biodiversity via speciation. The project
will focus on an area of Madagascar where habitat fragmentation is threatening
the survival of unique and irreplaceable biodiversity. In addition to generating
important new knowledge about the processes that drive and delimit speciation,
the project will include training and mentorship of students across a range of
educational levels. This training is critical for empowering the next generation
of conservation scientists so that they can mitigate the environmental
challenges that the world faces today and in the years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on mouse lemurs, which are the
world's smallest primates and are unique to Madagascar. These primates are of
special biological interest given that they are morphologically and ecologically
similar but are genetically highly distinct. This pattern of phenotypic
similarity and genetic divergence among species has been observed across the
tree of life and is generally referred to as cryptic species diversity. Cryptic
species are perplexing to speciation biologists because the indicators of their
species identity are hidden to the human eye, thus challenging our ability to
accurately measure threatened biodiversity. This project aims to develop and
apply a novel and generalizable approach for understanding speciation mechanisms
in mouse lemurs specifically, and cryptic species radiations generally. The
project builds on current research that indicates that mouse lemurs are highly
speciose having experienced episodic bursts of lineage diversification
consistent with the climatic cycles of the Pleistocene. Key outcomes of the
project will be (1) the development of computational tools for identifying the
magnitude, direction, and rate of genetic exchange among lineages, (2) a unique
understanding of the roles of ecology, metabolism, and sensory communication for
inhibiting reproduction among species, and (3) in those cases where
interspecific reproduction occurs, the project will illuminate the role of
genomic architecture in compromising the reproductive potential of hybrid
individuals. The research will leverage powerful computational innovations for
estimating patterns of gene exchange among diverging lineages, new technologies
for tracking and monitoring small nocturnal mammals, and methods for applying
long-read sequencing technologies for generating genomic resources. Ultimately,
this research will help differentiate the effects of natural versus
anthropogenic climate change for assessing the health of earth's
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.