* 2149106
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mobility and Environmental Toxicity in Wildfire Response Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kathryn Goldfarb, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Wildland fire response is increasingly important, but the health and wellness of
migrant and immigrant workers who contribute to these industries in the United
States is not well understood. This 12-month dissertation research project uses
qualitative and quantitative approaches to better understand exposure to air
pollution in an increasingly mobile environmental industry. This research offers
new ways of understanding exposure to environmental toxins in a migrant work
context, contrasting with previous approaches that have studied air pollution in
residential and stationary settings. This project has the potential to help
scientists understand the connections and relationships between workers,
policymakers and advocates who are responding to more severe natural disasters.
In addition to providing funding for a graduate student to train in qualitative
and quantitative data collection and analysis, this research addresses the needs
of underrepresented groups in climate resilience. It involves directly affected
community members in the research process and makes the data available to fire
management companies and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research project asks how mobility and toxic exposure correlate in
occupational settings. To what extent do climate disaster industries influence
pull factors in human mobilities and migrations, and how might worker, science
and policy communities understand toxic exposure in a mobile workforce? The
researcher will use participant observation and semi-structured interviews with
fire responders as well as their friends and family and non-frontline
policymakers to track the short, long-term, and relational impacts of exposure
to air pollution. Additionally, small-scale participatory air quality monitoring
will highlight differences between generalized air pollution models and the
highly concentrated pollution that migrant workers experience in the course of
firefighting. Through scientific inquiry that combines research into the
qualitative dimensions of toxic exposure with quantitative small-scale air
quality monitoring, this project provides a novel methodological approach to
understanding occupational health for a mobile and migratory workforce. It
contributes to research on the broader stakes of wildfire-produced air pollution
for human health and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.