* 2149531
* REU Site: Plant Genomics @ Michigan State University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Daniel Chitwood, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 374,498.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Michigan
State University, located in East Lansing, MI, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Plants are
fundamental to human civilization, providing food, fiber, fuel, and medicine.
Research in plant genomics and the training of the next generation of plant
scientists is of critical importance as the global population increases and
climate change places strain on natural resources, the environment, and
agricultural production. The next generation of plant scientists must develop a
foundational understanding of plant biology but simultaneously gain skills in
computational biology and data science. This integrated approach to training is
vital to develop scientists who can work across disciplinary boundaries and
utilize big data to address fundamental questions in plant biology and develop
improved crops. Students will learn how research is conducted through the
integration of training in plant sciences and computational biology and will
have opportunities to present their research at on campus research forums and
national scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be conducted
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will
join the laboratory of an MSU faculty member and will undertake a mentored
research project focused on plant genomics. Simultaneously, they will receive
training in computational biology through mastering the Plants&amp;Python
curriculum. Students will receive training essential for success in STEM,
including critical thinking, communication, responsible conduct of research, and
ethics. Seminars and workshops will provide exposure to diverse research topics,
advice on graduate school, and career opportunities within and outside of
academia. The goal of the program is to help participants realize their full
potential in science and train the next generation of scientists to solve global
challenges. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://plantgenomics.natsci.msu.edu/ , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Cornelius
Barry at barrycs@msu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Dan Chitwood at
chitwoo9@msu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.