* 2149553
* REU Site: Studying Race and Policing in the Complex Social Interaction Lab
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Dale Willits, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2026
* USD 433,081.00

This project is funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.
This REU provides both scientific and societal benefits. In terms of science,
this project engages the scientific method examining the role of race in how
interactions between police officers and community members unfold. In terms of
societal benefits, this research will help generate understanding of police
interactions, with a specific focus of understanding why police interactions
vary and how they can be improved. This program imparts the knowledge, skills,
and abilities to engage in scientific research to REU participants, while
demonstrating how such research can improve community prosperity and welfare by
affecting positive change in police-community interactions. In addition, this
project generates research that will increase the safety of community members
and officers involved in police-community interactions. Lastly, this program
supports education and diversity by recruiting students from diverse backgrounds
who will be embedded into a collaborative and interdisciplinary research
environment where they will develop research skills which improve their ability
to make meaningful contributions to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Complex
Social Interaction Lab REU trains undergraduate researchers, especially, but not
limited to, those from underrepresented populations, on data-oriented social
science approaches to the study of race and policing. The site emphasizes the
recruitment, training, and participation in research of promising students to
address three interrelated projects: race and police use of force, 2) race and
de-police escalation tactics, and 3) race and procedurally just policing. The
methodological approaches focus on coding video and audio data, basic to
intermediate quantitative methods, and advanced applications in GIS, time-series
analysis, data analytics, and data visualizations. Additionally, this project
reinforces the importance of methodological rigor and analytical creativity in
generating valid and reliable measures and interpreting those data by way of the
objective coding of body worn camera footage, making use of such footage as a
novel source of data for the study of policing. Students will have the
opportunity to use these methods to generate innovative data and the opportunity
to publish peer-reviewed research. The goals of this project are to 1) recruit
promising students, 2) provide real world research opportunities that integrate
theory, methods, and application, 3) increase knowledge regarding policing and
the race, 4) develop professional skills, and 5) prepare students for graduate
school and for other career opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the
NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.