* 2149371
* Collaborative Research: Labor Market and Public Policy Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Neil Thakral, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2025
* USD 264,325.00

What people want (preferences) is central to economic analysis and policy
formulation. Yet there is no easy or generally acceptable way of measuring
preferences from data. The proposed research develops a portable, scalable, and
easy to measure preference revelation (elicitation) method called the Bayesian
Adaptive Choice Experiment (BACE). BACE improves upon existing preference
elicitation approaches that are used in policy analysis, regulation, and
litigation. The method will be applied to study important and policy-relevant
questions: (i) preferences for job amenities such as workplace flexibility, and
firm provision of such amenities---important considerations in the face of
global technical and organizational changes. This is important as global
technical and organizational changes have the potential to alter the structure
of work as the costs of providing workplace amenities shift over time. (ii) in
preferences for public policies, the research produces method of comparing the
welfare benefits of various policies for different demographic groups. In
addition to these applications, BACE shows the potential for a new generation of
surveys and experimental methods to do much more in helping researchers and
policymakers value non-market resources. The results of this research will
contribute significantly to improve economic analyses as well as improve the
quality of public policies and business decisions and thus increase economic
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BACE provides an efficient dynamic elicitation
procedure for conducting choice experiments. It does so by generating the
information-maximizing sequence of choice scenarios based on a prior that gets
updated with previous answers to obtain individual-level Bayesian posterior
estimates. The procedure allows for a higher precision of the parameter
estimates with fewer choice scenarios presented to each subject while also
overcoming systematic biases in estimating average preference parameters from
commonly used static approaches. Applying the method to preferences for job
amenities, the resulting individual-level preference data makes it possible to
estimate a new model of compensating differentials that extends the classic
Rosen (1986) framework. Applying BACE to willingness to pay for public policies
produces new evidence on the correlates of policy preferences and leads to novel
estimates of the Marginal Value of Public Funds. The implementation of BACE in
this research is a step forward in allowing such procedures to be widely adopted
to measure important inputs for understanding a broad range of phenomena in
social sciences. The results of this research will contribute significantly to
improve economic analyses as well as improve the quality of public policies and
business decisions and thus increase economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.