* 2149315
* Collaborative Research: The Value of Data
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Jacopo Perego, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 02/29/2024
* USD 123,115.00

This research will investigate the value that the data of a consumer has for the
firm that uses it. In many digital platforms, consumer data is often used to
intermediate the needs of various agents with conflicting interests—such as
buyers and sellers, drivers and riders, or social-media users and advertisers.
This makes determining the value of data especially complex. This research will
tackle the complexity issue and provide a more complete account of the value of
data—especially its dependence on privacy-protection policies. By doing so, it
will advance our understanding of the demand for data in the digital economy and
provide insights into how data markets work and may be affected by policy
interventions. This research will also shed light on the debate about how to
individually compensate consumers for their data, which many scholars and
policymakers believe to be an essential aspect of a functioning data
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research project will study
what determines the value of an individual consumer’s data record for the
intermediary that uses it as an input in its business. For instance, such a
record can be the characteristics of a buyer that an e-commerce platform stores
on its servers. When data is used by a third party (like a platform) to
strategically direct interactions between multiple agents (like buyers and
sellers), assessing its value is complicated and calls for a new approach. The
project shows that this value is not just the payoff the intermediary derives
directly from a record (like a platform’s transaction fee). It involves other
components, which can significantly bias our assessments if ignored. They
capture externalities between the records of, say, different buyers not because
of a statistical correlation, but because of how the platform partitions its
knowledge of the buyers so as to direct sellers’ responses (e.g., by pooling
buyers into market segments). Such externalities can render the record of a low-
spending buyer more valuable than that of a high-spending buyer. The first part
of the project will study contexts where the intermediary already owns the data
and can use it without people’s consent. Its core contribution is to show how to
properly assess the value of individual records and characterize all its
components. The second part of the project will study how the value of data
changes when each consumer can withhold their data from the platform. One key
insight is that privacy rights may not only shift wealth from data-users to
data-sources (i.e., from intermediaries to consumers), but also change the value
of data records itself. For instance, it can increase the value of some people’s
records at the expense of others. Thus, privacy can have redistributive effects
across data-sources, which may contribute to social inequality and should be
taken into account by privacy-protection policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.