* 2149370
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Supporting Highly Qualified Kentucky Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Akhtar Mahmood, Bellarmine University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2027
* USD 807,918.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing and retaining highly
qualified STEM teachers who can implement culturally responsive instruction in
diverse classrooms. This project addresses the nationwide growing shortage of
certified STEM teachers in high-need communities. Many Kentucky STEM teachers
are teaching outside of their field, and school districts in Kentucky are
collapsing science courses and reducing STEM course offerings. Additionally,
STEM teachers do not reflect the demographic make of students in culturally and
ethnically diverse classrooms. Project outcomes will include the certification
of STEM teachers in high-need schools to remedy the 6-12 STEM teacher shortages
in Kentucky. A STEM Teacher Education Learning Community will form a new
ecosystem and provide synergy in STEM teacher education among the project’s
collaborative partners, which include the Jefferson County Public School
District, the Kentucky Community and Technical College System (KCTCS), Academies
of Louisville, the Kentucky Science Center, and the University of Kentucky.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project at Bellarmine University (BU)
include the recruitment, preparation, peer mentoring, academic support, and
retention of first-generation and minority STEM students that will produce 25
prospective highly qualified diverse 6-12 STEM teachers over five years. An
underlying goal is that these teachers will have an understanding of culturally
responsive teaching (CRT) and will be equipped to teach across cultural
boundaries in high-need schools. Scholarships/stipends will be awarded to high-
achieving undergraduates in their junior and senior years majoring in
Mathematics, and to graduate students in the final post-baccalaureate year, who
have a bachelor’s degree in Physics, Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, or Mathematics. Certification will be obtained via one of two
possible pathways. One pathway will be through a post-baccalaureate Master of
Arts in Teaching (MAT) middle and/or secondary teacher certification for STEM
students and STEM professionals who have completed a bachelor’s degree in a
targeted STEM discipline. A second pathway will be available to undergraduate
mathematics majors who are dual majoring in secondary mathematics education to
obtain secondary certification in Mathematics. This project will provide summer
internships in STEM education at the Kentucky Science Center to 16 high-
achieving undergraduate BU and KCTCS STEM students. The project team will also
implement a CRT-focused professional learning experience at the University of
Kentucky. Field experiences during senior and MAT years will provide classroom
teaching experience in a diverse setting. Relevant data for evaluation will be
gathered from surveys, observations, performance in CRT seminars and Maker
Fairs, summer internships, and MAT coursework/field experiences. Persistence,
retention, outcomes/perceptions, and success as prospective 6-12 STEM teachers
in high-need schools will be evaluated. This project will generate new knowledge
through data analyses of evaluation questions; results will add to the growing
body of knowledge in STEM teacher education and preparation relevant to CRT.
Project findings and outcomes will be disseminated through conference
presentations and peer-reviewed journal publication. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.