* 2149956
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Computational Biology (iCompBio)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Hong Qin, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 413,526.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC), located in Chattanooga, TN, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-
2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from a group under-represented in science,
will be trained in the program. Students will learn to conduct multi-
disciplinary computational research in the fields of cell biology, epidemiology,
biodiversity, protein structure, biomechanics, ecology, bacterial membranes,
climate, environmental sustainability, or others. Assessment of the program will
be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
participating in iCompBio will receive training in multidisciplinary research.
Students will engage in mentored research experiences in computational biology
across multiple research fields. In addition to short bootcamps and workshops on
classical computational training such as bioinformatics, high-performance
computing, mathematical modeling, and statistical analysis, iCompBio will
provide research training in the application of machine-learning/deep learning,
and quantum computing in computational biology, as well as research ethics and
the responsible conduct of research. Research projects will take place in host
labs under the guidance of research mentors. Students will meet weekly for joint
computing workshops, research project troubleshooting, and to share their
experiences and lessons learned. Informal lunch meetings will be held to discuss
topics such as career choices, equity in research, and work-life balance with
mentors, graduate students, or guests. Multiple group outings to local and
regional attractions will be taken. Two research seminars will be held with
other UTC-based summer research programs. Students interested in the program
should complete an online application form, and submit unofficial transcripts,
personal statement, resume/CV, and two letters of recommendation. Applications
will be reviewed by a team of faculty. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://utc.edu/icompbio or by contacting the PI (Dr. Hong
Qin at hong-qin@utc.edu ) or the co-PI (Dr. Yingfeng Wang at yingfeng-
wang@utc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.