* 2149484
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Development of Territorial Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 24,948.00

This project investigates the relationships among politics, economics, and space
in the development of territories in early complex societies. The territory,
understood as the political organization of space, is fundamental for the
characterization of both pre-modern societies and contemporary ones. Nowadays,
there are still debates between protectionist views that argue that polities and
regions can thrive by their own in isolation, and more globalists ones that
focus on issues of cooperation and competition at a larger, even global, scale.
This debate also raises questions on the territorial notion based on the nation-
state and the spatial correspondence, or lack of it, between political and
economic systems. By addressing these relationships at an early stage in the
development of complex societies, the project will contribute to the current
debate by assessing the relative weight of both economic and political
interactions in the rise of social and regional inequalities. The project will
address issues of territoriality, not only related to specific resources, but
embedded in a broader social network where connections and links may be as
important as the resources themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
test two alternative hypotheses regarding territorial strategies by assessing if
the locations of secondary sites are related to the control of accesses or
communication routes: 1) early polities locate themselves where they can take
advantage of the broad trade networks without an attempt to control a defined
geographical space, or 2) early polities tried to increase their access to, and
even control, trade networks by expanding their geographical dominance through
the establishment of dependent secondary sites in potential alternative routes
beyond its own location. To test the hypotheses, the project will use (1)
settlement patterns and spatial modeling to identify if site location was
associated with regional and interregional communication routes, (2) record
architectural layout patterns among sites to construct a rank hierarchy and
infer political dependency, and (3) analyze artifact distributions to infer
resource fluxes, relationships among sites, and identify extra regional
connections. With this data, the project will be able to characterize the
spatial organization of an early polity, and gain insight on the mechanisms
behind the development of early complex societies, their spatial relationships,
and the political construction of space, to ultimately contribute to our
understanding of the processes that have modeled the contemporary political
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.