* 2149356
* Collaborative Research: Group-Based Cloud Computing for STEM Education Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Walter Stroup, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 114,351.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by designing,
developing, implementing, and studying a socio-technological system for group-
centered STEM teaching and learning consistent with a nationally recognized pre-
service program. The project will use results from more than 30 years of
research to demonstrate how network supported, group-based learning grounded in
principles of Generative Design can improve learning for all learners, across
racial/ethnic backgrounds. The project will also offer detailed analyses of
activity designs and implementation strategies that will help pre-service
teachers to develop more fully participatory and socially-supported approaches
to classroom learning, using authentic STEM practices in group-centered learning
environments. This work will be particularly important to advancing knowledge in
the field for pre-service teacher preparation, since few pre-service programs
use this approach in preparing teachers for today?s classrooms. Through a focus
on the initial implementation of twelve model activities taught by pre-service
teachers in K-12 classrooms nationwide, this study will also provide concrete
and quantitative evidence that group-based learning is both appealing to early-
career and induction-years teachers, and that it is feasible to implement in
real classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a design-based research
approach to creating and studying technologies and materials that support
generative teaching and learning in STEM. Sites associated with a nationally
recognized and expanding approach to STEM teacher preparation and certification
will serve as incubators and testbeds for the project?s innovation and
development efforts. Computational thinking, including agent-based modeling, and
simulation across STEM domains as well as geo-spatial reasoning about personally
meaningful learner-collected data will provides an important scientific
foundation for the project. This will be achieved by developing a highly-
interactive and group-optimized, browser- and cloud-based, device-independent
and open-source architecture and by integrating and extending leading
computational tools including the NSF-funded NetLogo Web agent-based modeling
language and environment. The project will also achieve this outcome by
publishing its technology-mediated activities and materials in the public domain
and by capturing extensive qualitative and quantitative data on the intensity
and nature of use of these technologies and materials. Collectively, the project
will foster the growth of educational infrastructures to enable the
dissemination and effective adoption of generative teaching and learning in
STEM.