* 2149229
* Building Ecology: Examining Space/Place Dynamics in a Shared Indoor Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Timothy Baird, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 06/30/2026
* USD 349,703.00

This project examines building interiors to identify how spaces become
meaningful places in a shared indoor environment with diverse users. It provides
geographic insights on the ways that design thinking drives the distribution of
valuable resources (e.g., light, furniture, electronics) within buildings, how
diverse occupants use resources and attach meaning to them, how resource use is
also determined by other social and environmental variables, and how these
relationships are affected by resilience to disruptions. This project builds on
theories from geographical sciences, cultural anthropology, complex systems
science, computer vision, architecture, and mathematics. Its data collection
system establishes a smart and connected living-laboratory with potential to
extend to other projects. This project also supports interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate education and multiple forms of public communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to a growing area of research
that addresses the social value of buildings. In the United States, individuals
spend high amounts of time living and working indoors. As a result, buildings
are increasingly designed to promote certain behaviors such as movement,
collaboration, creativity, and community. Spaces are designed and built with
hopes that they become meaningful places to the people that use them, but
conceptual understandings of the space-to-place process remains underdeveloped.
Therefore, this longitudinal project examines this process within a mixed
residential/academic building that serves diverse functions. Using multiple
methods that include sensor-based technologies, interviews, and qualitative
ethnography, the researchers have multiple objectives. First, the research
examines how spaces and resources are conceptualized, created, and distributed
by administrators and designers. In addition, the researchers study when and
where resources are used, and what symbolic meanings are associated with their
use. The study also examines how the uses and meanings related to spaces respond
to disruptions in the patterns of use. The results of this work can help
administrators and designers to create more human-centric shared indoor spaces
with greater potential to facilitate positive outcomes. The project also
contributes to student training and broadening participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.