* 2149642
* REU Site: Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Undergraduate Program (MSRI-UP)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Helene Barcelo, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,051,040.00

MSRI-UP is a Research Experience for Undergraduates program that identifies
talented undergraduates —particularly those from groups underrepresented in
mathematics— who display great mathematical potential despite having had limited
opportunities and experience. MSRI-UP provides students with the research
experience, training, long-term mentorship, and social support necessary to
pursue a graduate degree and career in the mathematical sciences. The MSRI-UP is
led by a team of directors who have substantial experience creating a rigorous
and supportive research environment that emphasizes collaboration and
communication and encourages the active participation and success of every
student. This guarantees a high-quality research experience that leads to
presentations at national conferences and frequently to publications in refereed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSRI-UP contributes significantly to increasing
the number of graduate degrees in mathematics earned by U.S. students and by
members of underserved communities. The program, partnership with the
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, California, includes a
six-week summer research experience, colloquia and professional development
workshops, the opportunity to present at national conferences, an introduction
to a wide community of peers and mentors, and long-term follow-up and
mentorship. Each year, the mathematical activities are directed by a different
research leader who is an expert in an active area of research and an
established mentor, to ensure that MSRI-UP will contribute to the diversity of
different fields of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.