* 2149133
* RII Track-1: Change Hawaii: Harnessing the Data Revolution for Island Resilience
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 05/31/2027
* USD 7,455,359.00

The Change Hawaii: Harnessing the Data Revolution for Island Resilience
[Change(HI)] project aims to develop the appropriate tools and workforce in
Hawaii to study and understand the existential threat of climate change on the
state. The diverse and complex climate and geography of Hawaii presents unique
challenges to measure and gather reliable data to properly monitor weather-
related events. These events have been enhanced in frequency and intensity due
to the accelerated change in climate. While data at a larger scale is currently
available, there is lack of sufficient downscaled products in Hawaii to
facilitate modeling of climate impacts, alternative energy planning, and
improvement of present-day weather forecasts. Climate science depends on data
science, analytics, and visualization to close data gaps, and to develop
actionable science and models which in turn will support Hawaii’s transition to
a data-driven, “smart” economy. Change(HI) is committed to producing actionable
science resulting from data/climate interdisciplinary research. At the same
time, the project seeks to train a workforce in computational and climate
science that would help diversify and regenerate the Hawaiian economy, which is
dependent on tourism. Change(HI) will consolidate participants from four
Hawaii's higher education institutions: University of Hawaii Manoa, University
of Hawaii Hilo, University of Hawaii West Oahu, and Chaminade University. The
project will establish multi-campus and multidisciplinary teams in areas such as
data science, climate science, cyberinfrastructure, education, and workforce
development. Change(HI) will position Hawaii to “harness the data revolution” to
confront climate change and support the state’s economic diversification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii is currently considered underserved in climate
analysis products because national analyses and monitoring networks are often
restricted, resulting in data gaps and information scarcity for decision making
in Hawaii. In addition, the diverse topography of the islands as well as the
dynamic climate make it difficult to obtain the high-resolution data needed to
obtain reliable outcomes from different predicting models. The Change Hawaii:
Harnessing the Data Revolution for Island Resilience [Change(HI)] project
proposes to obtain the necessary data by using current and new sensors and
generating the proper downscaling climate products. The data will be easily
accessible for the various stakeholders through a data portal that is currently
operational and will be upgraded to handle the new climate information.
Change(HI) will focus on identifying critical gaps that are not duplicative of
ongoing and highly funded efforts in areas such as seawater inundation, coastal
ecology, coral resilience, and storms. The research plan is divided into four
focused themes: 1) monitoring, visualizing and communicating change; 2)
predicting and simulating regional climate change; 3) ecohydrology of change; 4)
characterizing land-use change tradeoffs. Change(HI) will deliver fundamental
and actionable advances in the science of climate change for Hawaii, including
data products, collection strategies, and analysis tools that will be applicable
to other Pacific islands. The project includes recruitment and inclusion
strategies that will increase participation of groups under-represented in STEM
and computational disciplines such as data science, promote indigenous
participation, and promote community co-production and agency in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.