* 2149880
* REU Site: Research in Radio/Radar Astronomy and Atmospheric Sciences   at Arecibo Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Carlos Padin, Universidad Metropolitana
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 03/31/2025
* USD 356,985.00

This project supports summer undergraduate research experiences at the Arecibo
Observatory in Puerto Rico. Supported students are drawn from Puerto Rico and
the mainland US. Students will engage in research using data from the Arecibo
Observatory. Projects will be related to studies of the Earth's atmosphere,
studies of the Sun and space weather, studies of neutron stars, and studies of
galaxies. Many projects are interdisciplinary and will train students in
science, data taking, data management, and communicating science. Students are
also introduced to career options, and lectures on Puerto Rican geology,
culture, and history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve hands-on
research in radio astronomy, space and atmospheric sciences, electronics,
computing, mechanical engineering, and big data analysis. Specific research
projects will include the study of pulsars, initiation and propagation of
coronal mass ejections, studies of the mesosphere and lower atmosphere, the
response of the ionosphere to geomagnetic storms, asteroid radar, and machine
learning. The project will target women undergraduates from underserved
populations in Puerto Rico, but will also engage students from across the US.
Students will obtain professional development instruction to prepare them for
graduate school and careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.