* 2149047
* Diapycnal mixing induced by breaking internal waves over topography
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Subhas Venayagamoorthy, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 332,306.00

Many noteworthy field observations indicate that diapycnal (irreversible) mixing
is primarily driven by internal waves interacting with underwater topographic
features. This project will model the nonlinear interactions of internal waves
with topography, and will lead to new knowledge/concepts for quantifying
diapycnal mixing induced by breaking internal waves. Model-data comparisons will
be used to test the adequacy of mixing parameterizations. Improvements in
understanding and parameterizations of diapycnal mixing from internal waves will
provide a wide range of scientific broader impacts, from global climate
prediction to the crucial role that internal wave driven diapycnal mixing plays
in transport of nutrients for the oceanic ecosystem. Broader impacts on
education stem from the training/mentoring of a graduate student through this
project. Outreach efforts include the PI’s involvement in summer campus/programs
coordinated by the Women and Minorities in Engineering at Colorado State
University (CSU) as well as through outreach to local high school students
through organized visits to the PI’s new Environmental Fluid Mechanics
Laboratory at CSU.

Highly resolved direct numerical simulations (DNS) and large-eddy simulations
(LES) using a combination of Eulerian and Lagrangian perspectives will be
employed to elucidate small-scale mixing processes/mechanisms with an eye
towards parameterization of the salient physics for near boundary mixing
resulting from the breaking of internal waves. The main objectives of the
project are to: (1) investigate the relationships between relevant length scales
and time scales for mixing of both momentum and scalar (density) using a series
of high-resolution “numerical” microstructure profile studies of internal wave-
topography interactions; (2) formulate parameterizations for diapycnal mixing
driven by internal waves interacting with single and multiple topographic
features; and (3) explain the fate of NLIWs as a result of the interaction
process with topography and determine whether they contribute significantly to
mixing and transport.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.