* 2149606
* Marine Diatom-Parasite Relationships in Upwelling Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Bess Ward, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2025
* USD 390,357.00

A recent global survey of surface ocean waters revealed that microbial parasites
comprise half of the eukaryotic plankton diversity and suggested that biological
interactions, including parasites, play an important role in the ecology of many
types of microscopic algae, which are the base of the ocean food web, but not
diatoms. Diatoms are among the most abundant microalgae, particularly in
upwelling areas where nutrient-rich deep currents feed the ocean's surface and
support the world's greatest fisheries. Yet this survey did not investigate
high-productivity regions, leaving a significant knowledge gap. Diatoms may be
successful in upwelling regions because they evade predators and parasites, but
it seems more reasonable that they, like all other microalgae, also have
biological enemies. In this study, the researchers use a large set of available
samples from upwelling regions to investigate the effect of parasites on the
proliferation of diatom communities and resulting primary production. The
project supports a graduate student and provides hands-on research experiences
for high school and undergraduate college students. The study data are also
integrated into courses taught by the principal investigator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery that half of the eukaryotic diversity in the
Tara Oceans sequence database belongs to putatively parasitic microbes implies a
revolution in our understanding of biological control of primary production.
Ecosystem models are only beginning to incorporate the effect of viruses on
production and community composition, but eukaryotic parasites add yet another
dimension with potentially vast biogeochemical implications. While viral
predation is generally thought to divert material flux away from grazers and
into the dissolved organic carbon pool, increasing community diversity and
microbial biomass, phytoplankton biomass diverted into parasite biomass becomes
available to grazers. Experimental determination of parasite activity is
difficult in natural systems, so most of the evidence for diversity, abundance,
and host interactions of eukaryotic parasites is based on DNA sequence data. The
Tara Oceans database suggests that diatoms have very few biotic interactions,
leading to a stronger dependence on bottom-up factors (e.g., nutrients).
However, this database did not represent high productivity upwelling regions.
This project addresses two hypotheses: 1) diatoms in highly productive episodic
upwelling systems are involved in host-parasite interactions that can be
identified in co-occurrence networks during blooms; and 2) the community
composition and abundance of host-parasite pairs vary over the course of the
bloom in a manner consistent with density dependence on the host. In this
project, abundance, diversity, and dynamics of parasites in upwelling systems
are investigated by tag sequencing, metagenomics, and targeted qPCR of diatom-
parasite pairs identified from archived samples from diatom-dominated upwelling
systems (California Current, Eastern Tropical Pacific), the North Atlantic
Spring bloom, and from two mesocosm experiments of diatom blooms induced by
inoculation of surface seawater into nitrate-rich Monterey Bay seawater.
Biogeochemical parameters (nutrients, primary production, nitrate assimilation,
etc.) for those samples are available. In addition, the research team is using
the outputs of the bioinformatics analysis in network and time series analysis
to discover links among hosts and parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.