* 2149113
* Collaborative Research: Regulating Electricity Markets: Impacts on Energy Transitions and Environmental Justice
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Ashley Langer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2025
* USD 257,455.00

While electricity generation is critical to modern economic and modern life, it
also generates substantial pollution, which falls disproportionately on minority
and lower income groups. The world is in the middle of two major transitions to
cleaner sources of electricity generation: first from coal to natural gas and
from natural gas to renewable energy. These transitions are occurring in a
highly regulated environment, raising the question of how regulation affects
energy transitions and for the distribution of pollution (environmental
justice). This project studies the effect of rate-of-return regulation on
previous energy transitions and evaluates how changes in this regulatory
structure may influence ongoing transitions. In addition, this project evaluates
how environmental regulatory agencies incorporate environmental justice into
their Clean Air Act Amendment enforcement decisions, and how alternative
enforcement decisions impact community well-being. The results of this project
will provide inputs into electricity regulation policies in order to hasten the
transition to clean energy as well as improve environmental
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the role of rate-of-return regulation
in energy transitions, this project develops and structurally estimates a model
where utilities invest in and retire generation capacity in the long run and
make usage decisions in the short run. In this model, the regulator attempts to
incentivize utilities to minimize costs while meeting electricity needs by
offering a fair rate-of-return on generators that are deemed “used and useful.”
Further, this project estimates how environmental justice enters regulators'
preferences over enforcement. The model allows regulators to incorporate both
communities’ and electricity generators’ welfare in enforcement decisions. This
project provides a framework for evaluating new approaches to regulating
electricity generators’ choices and the impact of these choices on local
communities. The results of this project will provide inputs into electricity
regulation policies in order to hasten the transition to clean energy as well as
improve environmental justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.