* 2149028
* Investigating ocean stratification changes with global warming by long-range internal tides
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Zhongxiang Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 615,534.00

Stratification is a key property of the ocean and plays an important role in
almost all ocean processes including mass transport, vertical mixing and
overturning circulation. It is of high priority to monitor its seasonal cycle,
decadal trend and interannual variation on the global scale. Long-range internal
tides, which attribute their existence to ocean stratification, are a natural
choice for monitoring ocean stratification changes. This project will further
mature a technique to accurately observe low-mode internal tides using satellite
altimetry. It will not only improve our understanding of internal tide
activities, but also develop a new technique for monitoring ocean
stratification, providing an independent long-term, low-cost, environmentally-
friendly observing system. The global ocean is subject to changes as evidenced
by frequent extreme weathers such as heat waves and tropical cyclones. Besides
ocean warming and sea level rise, it is well-known that stratification
intensification may change large-scale ocean circulations; one extreme scenario
is shown in the movie “The Day After Tomorrow.” The satellite-derived internal
tide models will be useful to the oceanographic community in designing field
experiments, modeling internal tides, primary productivity, ocean acoustics,
coral reef bleaching, ocean mixing, and internal tide correction. The new
information on ocean stratification changes will be made freely available to
researchers around the globe. This project will train a graduate student at the
University of Washington. The team will also make an animation to simply explain
the techniques to young kids and the public.

Ocean stratification plays an important role in many dynamics processes
including mass transport, isopycnal mixing and meridional ocean circulation.
This project will investigate ocean stratification changes using satellite
altimetry, the World Ocean Atlas, Argo floats, and two numerical models ECCO and
HYCOM. Its goals are to (1) construct a global network utilizing long-range
internal tide beams, (2) quantify seasonal cycle, decadal trend, and interannual
variation of ocean stratification in terms of internal tide speed, (3) validate
the satellite-derived ocean stratification changes with in situ measurements,
and (4) evaluate the performance of ECCO and HYCOM in reproducing ocean
stratification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.