* 2149191
* The Impact of Disruptions to Migration on Land Use and Resilience in Agricultural Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Amanda Carrico, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2025
* USD 415,617.00

This project will investigate the complex linkages between migration, rural
livelihoods and land use focusing specifically on mass return migration to rural
areas during the COVID-19 pandemic. Using a mixed-methods approach that
integrates longitudinal survey data with remotely sensed land cover data, this
project will reveal how pandemics effect rural communitiesâ€™ livelihoods. This
project builds on a previously conducted environment and migration survey in
2019 that collected detailed socio-economic data from 4000 households by
conducting a follow-up survey in 2022 of the same households. These survey
results coupled with the land cover change data will illustrate agriculture
changes over this four-year period caused by disruptions to migrant networks,
labor supply, and employment. The results of this study will explain how
migration impacts agriculture and land use, results that provide an
understanding of how rural communities cope with the socio-enviromental impacts
of disruptions like a pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of how
migration impacts land use change in rural areas is fundamental for
understanding factors that impact food security and livelihoods. To address this
question, this team of researchers will investigate how migration and land use
in rural areas vary over time and across contexts; how the large-scale return of
migrants has impacted land use; and how migration, livelihood activities, and
land use correlate with resilience during the pandemic. By linking historical
land cover data with detailed retrospective household survey data, the project
will reveal how field-scale land cover dynamics interact with household- and
community-dynamics over time and during periods of stress. Findings from this
work will be shared with community stakeholders who face pressing and difficult
questions about how to prepare and support rural communities during times of
economic stress and transition. The data, methods and tools developed from this
project will be widely available and are generalizable to rural
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.