* 2149716
* Novel Approaches to Estimating the Causal Effect of Policy Interventions in the Presence of Spillovers
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nandita Mitra, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

This research project will produce new causal inference methods to estimate
spillover effects of public policy interventions. Policy interventions can spill
over to portions of the population who are not directly exposed to the policy,
but nonetheless live close to regions, such as cities or counties, that are
directly affected. Failure to account for spillover effects can have serious
implications on the evaluation of public policies, possibly underestimating or
overestimating the overall effects of the policy. For instance, a tax on sugar-
sweetened beverages in one city may result in beverage drinkers traveling to a
nearby city to purchase beverages. This could undermine efforts to assess the
effect of the tax on the drinking of sugar-sweetened beverages in the city that
implemented the tax. The researchers will investigate the causal effects of
policy interventions under varying patterns and degrees of policy exposure in
neighboring regions. The methods to be developed will help researchers and
policymakers better understand the effect of policy interventions on outcomes of
interest in the presence of spillovers. Short courses and workshops will be
developed to disseminate the new methods to the broader community. In addition,
a graduate student will be mentored, and user-friendly software will be
developed and made available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop a novel causal estimator under more relaxed causal assumptions than
those commonly used in difference-in-differences approaches. Public policy
interventions are commonly evaluated using the difference-in-differences
approach. However, this approach does not directly account for spillover effects
to neighboring regions, such as nearby cities or states. Using the new
identification assumptions, the investigators will develop doubly robust
estimators based on flexible modeling and machine learning. The project also
will introduce a new causal estimand that can be used to evaluate the effect of
a policy intervention under various neighborhood treatment contexts. The
researchers will investigate identification conditions that ensure that
intervention effects are generalizable and transportable to target populations
with different compositions and neighborhood environments. The new methods will
be used to assess the impact of the Philadelphia beverage tax on volume sales in
Philadelphia and its surrounding counties that did not implement the tax. This
research also will provide guidance to other cities considering a similar excise
tax. The products of this research, including the statistical software and
implementation guidelines, can be used by policy makers to assess any public
policy that is implemented in a specific geographic region and has the potential
to affect its neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.