* 2149721
* REU Site: Creative Approaches to Materials Design and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Heather Hunt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 369,513.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site at the University of Missouri-
Columbia that focuses on materials design and processing is unique in that it
includes proven, theatre-based creativity training interwoven into the framework
of the more traditional research and professional development activities. This
program is deliberately designed to address the urgent need for innovation in
materials research in the United States. Creativity training is a necessary and
fundamental component to building innovative capabilities in scientists and
engineers but is rarely part of traditional curricula. This REU Site fills a
critical gap in workforce development in materials design and manufacturing and
addresses a national need for researchers who can solve complex, interconnected
problems. The site purposefully promotes inclusivity through national
recruitment of students, with an emphasis on non-Ph.D.-granting institutions,
institutions that support under-represented minority students, and institutions
that support deaf/hard-of-hearing students. Students work in teams and are co-
mentored by affiliated faculty in the research area of their choice. The program
leverages existing campus resources that include professional development
training, and both social and academic support. Combining this wrap-around
programming with interdisciplinary research in materials design/processing and
creativity training, this REU Site enables undergraduate students to explore new
avenues to materials innovation in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation
in materials design and processing requires a fundamental understanding of the
interrelationships among structure, composition, processing, and properties.
This is particularly critical for advanced functional materials, which are often
micro- or nano-structured, and built through either self-assembly or complex
fabrication processes, due to their unique and complex structure-function
relationships, and their potential use in applications critical to human health
and security. This REU Site at the University of Missouri-Columbia focuses on
understanding and predicting these relationships for micro- and nano-structured
materials across a wide spectrum of applications, including sensors, batteries,
reactors, and implantable devices. The approaches include atomistic simulation,
coarse-grain modeling, and materials design/fabrication/characterization
techniques. This research intends to not only advance the science in each unique
area, but provide students with unique, measurable skills in computational
modeling, materials science design, processing, characterization, and creative
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.