* 2149596
* Capacity Building: Creating and Sustaining a Pathway for Engineering Majors to Become STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Colleen Eddy, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 75,000.00

The project aims to serve a national need for building pathways for engineering
students to become grade 6-12 STEM teachers in high-need schools. The project
will develop a framework for recruitment, retention, and reshaping of graduate
teacher certification specifically for engineering students to become STEM
teachers. The effort is a collaboration between the College of Engineering and
the College of Education at the University of North Texas, a Hispanic Serving
Institution. The project will collect evidence from engineering majors and
advisors about interests in and barriers to careers in STEM teaching through
surveys and focus groups. Additionally, stakeholders will collaboratively
analyze this evidence in the context of current research on STEM teacher
education and model post-baccalaureate teacher induction programs. The expected
outcomes are to develop recruitment plans that will identify engineering majors
and then lead them to become STEM teachers. Additionally, outcomes will include
designs for a sustainable teacher induction program for post-baccalaureate
engineering majors that results from collaboration between local partner school
districts and the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of North Texas includes partnerships with six high-need school
districts in the region, including Aledo, Grapevine-Colleyville, Mesquite,
Plano, Roscoe Collegiate, and Sherman Independent School Districts. The
intellectual merit of the project is to build, strengthen, and sustain
partnerships with local high-need school districts where engineering graduates
can pursue careers in grade 6-12 STEM teaching. The broader impact of this
project lies in its potential to become a model for recruiting and retaining
engineering students as STEM teachers through post-graduate teacher
certification programs. The evaluation will assess the project's model, its
planning and implementation processes, and the potential for a for a future
Noyce Track 2 proposal. Dissemination includes presentation and publication of
the resulting framework and program designs locally and nationally. This
Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.