* 2149837
* NSFGEO-NERC: Understanding the consequences of changing phytoplankton elemental use efficiencies for global ocean biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Hutchins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2025
* USD 908,131.00

This project is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council
(UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
ivestigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth system
computer models that simulate the global cycles of carbon and other elements are
one of our most valuable tools to predict environmental change in the future
ocean. However, existing modeling methods cannot realistically test how
increasing ocean temperatures will affect the needs of marine micro-organisms
for the limiting nutrients that usually control their growth, including
nitrogen, phosphorus and iron. Because these limiting nutrients govern how much
photosynthesis occurs in the ocean, they strongly influence the fate of carbon
dioxide produced by human fossil-fuel burning. For this reason, determining how
nutrient use by plankton will respond to greenhouse warming of the surface ocean
is a priority for scientists and policy makers. This project supports a
collaboration between two marine microbiologists in the United States and an
Earth system modeler from the United Kingdom that is aiming to better understand
how oceanic limiting nutrient cycles and the biological communities they support
will react to global warming. The U.S. investigators are using laboratory
culture experiments, field work in the coastal ocean, and existing collections
of past open ocean chemistry and biology measurements to generate quantitative
estimates of rising temperature effects on nutrient elemental use efficiencies
(EUEs). An EUE is defined as the rate at which a marine microbe can take up
carbon dioxide via photosynthesis, per unit of limiting nutrient in the cell.
Preliminary results show that EUEs are highly sensitive to changing temperature,
which in turn has far-reaching consequences for how ocean ecosystems function.
The U.K. investigator is using these experimentally-determined values to build a
new Earth system model that is centered on how warmer conditions will affect
EUEs for important groups of marine micro-organisms. This novel approach has the
potential to yield much better estimates of the ways that ocean carbon uptake
and nutrient cycling will be altered as the ocean continues to warm in the
future. Broader Impacts include breaking new scientific ground in oceanography
and climate science through improved Earth system models, providing educational
opportunities for graduate students, undergraduate researchers, K-12 students,
and postdoctoral investigators, and strengthening collaborative ties between the
marine science communities of the U.S. and the
U.K.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative relationships between phytoplankton
nutrient limitation, primary production and globally-rising sea surface
temperatures are still not well understood, largely due to a lack of mechanistic
experimental data. This is problematic for Earth system modelers who are trying
to project future oceanic productivity levels that underpin predicted changes in
ocean ecosystems, information that is urgently needed to inform environmental
policy makers. This project addresses this knowledge gap in a closely
coordinated, collaborative project between two U.S. marine microbiologists and a
biogeochemical modeler from the U.K. The international team of interdisciplinary
researchers are applying the emergent concept of Elemental Use Efficiencies
(EUEs) to integrate flexible thermal and resource limitation responses into a
new generation of Earth system models. EUEs are defined as the amount of carbon
fixed per unit time, normalized to the amount of a limiting resource in a
phytoplankton cell, as represented by the cellular nutrient quota. Preliminary
work suggests that EUEs can be very sensitive to future ocean warning, with
major downstream consequences for nutrient-limited marine plankton assemblages
and thus also for ocean carbon and nutrient biogeochemistry. The investigators
are using high-throughput thermal block methodology to measure EUEs for the
limiting nutrients nitrogen, phosphorus and iron in a diverse set of four
different functional groups of laboratory phytoplankton isolates across their
entire thermal ranges. EUEs obtained for these three key limiting nutrient
resources as a function of temperature and degree of nutrient stress are being
applied in an iterative manner to inform a novel EUE-centric version of the
established NEMO-PISCES ocean model. Field EUE data from coastal and open ocean
regimes are being collected for comparison to and ground-truthing of both the
laboratory culture results, and the modeling output. This project will advance
the discipline of ocean global change biology by providing unique new insights
into how biogeochemically-critical marine microbial functional groups may
respond to simultaneous shifts in temperature and limiting nutrient resource
availability both today, and in the future changing
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.