* 2149899
* Collaborative Research: AGEP FC-PAM: Project ELEVATE (Equity-focused Launch to Empower and Value AGEP Faculty to Thrive in Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2027
* USD 299,856.00

Carnegie Mellon University, Johns Hopkins University, and New York University
will work as an Alliance team to develop a model to promote the equitable
advancement of early career tenure-stream engineering faculty from populations
of interest to the AGEP program. The goal of this AGEP Faculty Career Pathways
Alliance Model (FCPAM) is to develop, implement, self-study, and
institutionalize a career pathway model, that can be adapted for use at other
similar institutions, for advancing early career STEM faculty who are members of
populations of interest to the AGEP program: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. This AGEP FCPAM will provide a framework for institutional
change at private, highly selective research institutions that will enable all
faculty to be members of a collaborative community. Improving the experience of
these faculty can lead to increased diversity in the engineering faculty and
ultimately result in graduating more STEM students from diverse populations and
increasing diversity in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving
equity and inclusion is critical to advancing STEM faculty, educating Americaâ€™s
future STEM workforce, fostering individual opportunity and contributing to a
thriving U.S. economy. The NSF AGEP program, therefore, funds grants that
advance and enhance the systemic factors that support equity and inclusion and,
consequently, mitigate the systemic inequities in the academic profession and
workplace. FCPAM awards are intended to support the development, implementation,
evaluation, and institutionalization of Alliance models that will advance AGEP
populations, within similar institutions of higher education. FCPAM
collaborators also study how socio-cultural, economic, structural, leadership
and institutional variables affect the formation of the FCPAM, and the
strategies or interventions the collaborators implement to advance AGEP
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance interventions will focus on
three major areas, 1) equity-focused institutional change designed to make
structural changes that support the advancement of AGEP faculty, 2) identity-
affirming mentorship that acknowledges and provides professional support to AGEP
faculty holistically, recognizing all parts of their identity and 3) inclusive
professional development that equips all engineering faculty and institutional
leaders with skills to implement inclusive practices and equips AGEP faculty for
career advancement. Evidence-based practices from the Women in Engineering
ProActive Network and the NSF INCLUDES ASPIRE Alliance's Inclusive Professional
Framework, will be foundational for this AGEP FCPAM's activities. An internal
evaluator will lead the self-study and formative assessment which will advance
knowledge concerning the institutional barriers that negatively impact the
advancement of AGEP populations in academic STEM careers, with attention to the
role cultural and intersectional identities play in the success of AGEP faculty.
An external evaluator will provide summative assessment using a culturally
responsive framework to assess implementation of project activities and
development of the Alliance model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.