* 2149582
* REU Site: The National Summer Undergraduate Research Project
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Michael Johnson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,028,590.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of Arizonaâ€™s National Summer Undergraduate Research Project (NSURP),
located in Tucson, AZ, will support the training of 35 students for eight weeks
each summer during 2022 through 2024. NSURP is a virtual research program, so
accepted students will participate remotely (i.e., not at an institution in a
wet lab setting) and be matched to one of many laboratories around the country.
Although there is no travel required for this program, only full-time
participation, modest housing and meal support will be offered. It is
anticipated that all selected students, those from underrepresented groups, will
be trained in this program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Given
that this program focuses on microbiology and immunology, student training in
these areas is of great national interest to workforce development. Further,
this program will remain virtual for accessibility to those unable to travel in
person, thus providing great benefit to marginalized individuals seeking careers
in STEM fields. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSURP focuses on all fields within microbiology
(host-microbe, environmental microbiology, public health, etc.) and immunology
(computational, innate, humoral, cancer). Due to the virtual and national
participation, NSURP encompasses various departments around the country.
Participants will be required to attend weekly seminars, professional
development talks, and ethics training, complete assessments promptly, and
attend all events deemed necessary by the laboratory in which they are doing the
work. Selection of students will be done by a an NSURP board based on the
applicant answers (but not limited) to the following: what are your career
goals, and why working remotely is necessary. More information, including a list
and presentations of previous NSURP projects, can be found at https://nsurp.org.
Additional details can be obtained by contacting the PI (Dr. Michael D. L.
Johnson) or program administrator Ms. Holly Lopez at
nsurp@arizona.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.