* 2149630
* A Reference Vs and Vp/Vs Model for Young Oceanic Crust From Controlled-Source OBS Data
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Hanchao Jian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 389,704.00

Determining the properties of oceanic lithosphere and how they vary as the
lithosphere ages is one of the primary methods that scientists use to infer its
composition and evolution. Reference models of oceanic crust use the speed at
which seismic waves travel through the Earth (i.e., seismic velocity) as their
main parameter. However, current models use primarily compressional seismic
waves (waves that vibrate in the same direction as they travel). This project
will build a shear velocity (waves that vibrate at right angles to the direction
of travel) reference model for oceanic crust and upper mantle. The model will be
derived from data collected in 2012 across the Juan de Fuca tectonic plate
offshore Oregon and Washington. Crustal ages in this region vary from 0 to 9
million years. This model will provide a reference framework to interpret ocean
crust properties in terms of composition, modification by magmatic activity, and
extent of deformation, alteration, and fracturing. The model can also be used to
quantify the amount of water in oceanic crust entering deep-sea trenches that
influence natural hazards such as megathrust earthquakes and arc volcanism at
subduction zones. This project will support a postdoctoral investigator and a
graduate student. By making use of existing seismic datasets, this project will
also leverage previous investments in marine seismic
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 ocean bottom seismometer (OBS)
dataset includes high-quality recordings of converted waves that can be
exploited to constrain shear-wave (S) velocity structure through the sediments,
crust, and uppermost mantle at a plate scale from the Juan de Fuca Ridge near-
axis region to the Cascadia deformation front, encompassing crustal ages from 0
to ~9 Ma. This dataset will be used to: (1) Constrain S-wave velocity structure
in the shallowmost igneous crust by modeling the amplitude vs. offset of
compressional (P) and P-to-S reflections from the basement and performing
advanced pseudo-1D nonlinear Bayesian waveform inversion of OBS data based on a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo method and time-domain elastic finite-difference
simulation of P-Sv wave propagation. (2) Advanced processing of the OBS records
using the theory of supervirtual refraction interferometry for improving the
signal-to-noise ratio and detectability of mantle refracted S waves. (3) Conduct
traveltime tomography modeling of the 2-D S-wave velocity structure of the crust
and uppermost mantle along the Ridge-to-Trench transects using wide-angle
crustal and mantle refracted/reflected P-to-S converted phases. (4) Investigate
the azimuthal anisotropic character of the crustal and mantle S-wave velocity
structure. The results will be interpreted in terms of hydrothermal alteration
and porosity in-filling due to mineral precipitation within the crust and mantle
as a function of age using effective medium theory. The final deliverable
product of this project will be a reference model describing the shear-wave
structure of oceanic crust and uppermost mantle for crustal ages of 0-9 Ma built
from synthesizing the project’s results and integrating them with existing
results from other seismic experiments in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.