* 2149505
* Collaborative Research: Updating iVirus - the CyVerse-powered analytical toolkit for viruses of microbes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Sullivan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 669,038.00

Microbes are now recognized as fundamental to diverse ecosystem processes,
including oceanic biogeochemical cycling, the seeding and maintenance of soil
fertility and function, and modulating animal and plant microbiota between
healthy and dysbiotic states. However, viruses that infect these microbes are
increasingly recognized for strong ecosystem relevance through killing, gene
flow, and metabolic reprogramming. Thus, more and more researchers ask ‘how are
viruses affecting my system?’. This has led to diversity catalogs exploding and
the study of virus-infected cells, or virocells, as another window into
ecosystem impacts. At the root of these ecosystem- to planetary-scale advances
are big data (i.e., Next Generation Sequencing) and our ability to make sense of
it through scalable storage, searching, sharing, and analytical capabilities.
These capabilities are enabled by cyberinfrastructures that empower biologists
to handle data without expert programmatic knowledge and hardware maintenance
concerns. Over the last decade, the number and complexity of microbial analysis
platforms have steadily increased alongside sequencing data accumulating in
public data repositories. While such platforms are broadly empowering biologists
to make the most of big data, virus-focused tools are virtually non-existent
across these platforms, which greatly limits virome and microbiome science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iVirus is an NSF-funded ecosystem of apps and resources
that represent the go-to virus-focused analytical platform and it has been
democratized through training workshops and webinars, publications, and public
presentations to establish a large, active, and growing user-base. Through these
venues, new capabilities needs have been identified. This award seeks to fill
these needs by organizing virus sequence space to create reference genome and
taxonomic resources; augmenting the predominantly double-stranded DNA virus
toolkit with new tools for studying single-stranded DNA and all RNA viruses;
improving analyses for studying virus-infected cells (virocells); and developing
new long-read viromics analytics. The iVirus user-base will be broadened through
extensive training, outreach, and iVirus web portal improvements that include
feedback via a 25-person faculty advisory committee of collaborators, as well as
from iVirus ‘live protocols’ via protocols.io, VERVE-NET community pages,
dedicated twitter and email accounts, and a web-based comments form; training
opportunities for diverse trainees directly involved in the project (6 data
analytics undergraduates, 1 graduate student, 2 postdocs 4 research scientists)
and the broader research community through viromics modules / webinars and a
local hands-on course; and passive engagement opportunities from a new early
career researcher World Viromics Webinar Series, and (ii) 2 web portals specific
for technical support (the MAVERIC portal) and awareness and location for
iVirus’ resources, datasets, tools/apps, and protocols (the iVirus portal).
Together these efforts are expected to grow the iVirus user base to tens of
thousands of researchers in virome and microbiome science, and related fields.
To find iVirus online go to https://www.ivirus.us/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.