* 2149857
* REU Site: Coastal Infrastructure Resilience Research (CIRR)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* James Giancaspro, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 431,333.00

Coastal regions are facing increasing threats from erosion and flooding caused
by chronic degenerative events including sea level rise and heavy rainfall, as
well as discrete extreme events such as hurricanes. The "REU Site: Coastal
Infrastructure Resilience Research (CIRR)" program at the University of Miami
will recruit 30 students to participate in multidisciplinary research related to
various aspects of coastal infrastructure resilience. The University of Miami
(UM) is a hemispheric-focused institution located in Miami, which is one of the
most scrutinized epicenters for sea level rise and other climatic challenges.
Undergraduates will have access to interactions with the scientific community
including engineering, chemistry, biochemistry, biology, and the natural and
marine sciences. They will be encouraged to pursue a research-based or
practicing professional career in a STEM field. Increasing the number of
researchers particularly from underrepresented communities will result in a more
cohesive, accepting, and science-oriented citizenry who believe in the
importance of research in improving coastal communities' lives and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the "REU Site: Coastal
Infrastructure Resilience Research (CIRR)" program at the University of Miami is
to provide opportunities for talented and motivated undergraduates from
underrepresented groups to perform research in the area of coastal
infrastructure resilience. While there have been coastal infrastructure
resilience efforts in recent years, most efforts have been unidirectional and
primarily focused on a single specific discipline. The proposed program will
take a convergent approach to develop comprehensive and robust solutions by
integrating an interdisciplinary sphere of interest that includes engineering,
chemistry, biochemistry, biology, and the natural and marine sciences.
Specifically, the participants will (i) conduct collaborative research under the
supervision of at least two REU faculty mentors, (ii) engage in weekly seminars
led by both national and regional organizations, (iii) witness the societal
efforts of coastal resiliency mitigation through local field trips, and (iv)
experience professional growth and development through a series of "How-To"
workshops and a culminant in-house conference to present their research
findings. The overall effectiveness of the project will be measured using an
evaluation and assessment plan grounded on proven models in education
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.