* 2149565
* From Representation Theory to Mathematical Physics and Back
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Joshua Sussan, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 04/30/2023
* USD 30,713.00

The theme of the conference "From Representation to Mathematical Physics and
Back" is the continued influence of mathematics and physics on each other. This
symbiotic relationship has played a significant role in these disciplines for
centuries. For instance, Newton's discovery of gravity necessitated his
development of calculus. While the interactions between mathematics and physics
have evolved over time, some of the deepest aspects of these fields are still
intertwined. In particular, the discovery of quantum physics in the twentieth
century led mathematicians to study difficult problems in analysis, topology,
and algebra. In turn, solutions to these questions have then been reinterpreted
by physicists, and have led to new physics questions. Understanding how gravity
fits into our quantum mechanical universe remains one of the most important open
questions in physics and mathematics. Recent advances in these areas will be
presented at this conference. A primary goal of the meeting is to introduce a
young generation of researchers, including those from typically underrepresented
groups, to these fundamental mathematical and physical problems. For more
information see the conference website:
http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/34420&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will highlight progress in the areas of vertex operator algebras, conformal
field theory, categorification, low dimensional topology and representation
theory of affine Lie algebras, loop groups, and quantum groups. String theory
gave rise to the mathematical theory of vertex operator algebras, which led to
the construction of representations of affine Lie algebras and the Moonshine
module of the Monster group. These mathematical constructions have in turn led
to ideas about 3-dimensional quantum gravity. In another direction, the
discovery of the Jones polynomial led to a physical construction of
3-dimensional TQFTs, which in turn led to many mathematical discoveries in
quantum groups and low dimensional topology. Crane and Frenkel introduced the
categorification program with the goal of upgrading 3-dimensional TQFTs coming
from representation theory of quantum groups to 4-dimensional TQFTs. They
suggested that one should try to construct categorical quantum group actions to
achieve this aim. These ideas led to the discovery of Khovanov homology. Other
link homologies have been constructed from representation-theoretic, algebraic-
geometric, combinatorial, and physical structures. Consequently,
categorification has become a truly interdisciplinary
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.