* 2149858
* Collaborative Research: The AGEP Massachusetts State University System Equity-Minded Model for Recruiting and Advancing Early Career Faculty in the STEM Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Nicole Glen, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 06/30/2027
* USD 65,387.00

Three collaborating institutions in the Massachusetts Public Higher Education
System, Framingham State University, Bridgewater State University and Worcester
State University, are working together to develop and implement an equity-minded
model for advancing early career STEM faculty who are members of AGEP
populations: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. This AGEP Faculty
Career Pathways Alliance Model’s (FCPAM) goal is to develop, implement, evaluate
and institutionalize a FCPAM for transforming institutions to be more supportive
and culturally sensitive such that the faculty successfully advance through
recruitment and retention along early career pathways to tenure in teaching
intensive comprehensive universities. This FCPAM is improving the success of
early-career faculty such that faculty demographics will mirror student
demographics at the three collaborating institutions. This change in faculty
demographics will ultimately result in graduating more STEM students from
diverse populations and increasing diversity in the STEM workforce. Enhancing
diversity within the STEM workforce will contribute to mitigating systemic
racism, boosting innovation in the workplace, and enhancing the economy and
prosperity within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and our
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving equity and inclusion is critical to
advancing STEM faculty, educating America’s future STEM workforce, fostering
individual opportunity and contributing to a thriving U.S. economy. The NSF AGEP
program, therefore, funds grants that advance and enhance the systemic factors
that support equity and inclusion and, consequently, mitigate the systemic
inequities in the academic profession and workplace. FCPAM awards are intended
to support the development, implementation, evaluation, and institutionalization
of Alliance models that will advance AGEP populations, within similar
institutions of higher education. FCPAM collaborators also study how socio-
cultural, economic, structural, leadership and institutional variables affect
the formation of the FCPAM, and the strategies or interventions the
collaborators implement to advance AGEP populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foundation of this FCPAM includes a cluster hiring strategy to recruit diverse
faculty who will have a shared learning experience and support system across the
universities, including a joint faculty development initiative, a faculty
mentorship program, common events and shared resources. In addition, the
Alliance has a collaborative plan focusing on equity to examine, change, and
align institutional policies and procedures in support of a welcoming and
supportive academic climate for a diverse faculty. The Alliance will use
formative and summative evaluations to document results and evaluate strengths
and weaknesses of the model throughout the life of the project. The self-study
of the FCPAM development and activities will advance knowledge concerning how
socio-cultural, economic, structural, and institutional variables impact the
development and success of the Alliance model and the institutional culture
changes. An intersectional lens will be used to examine the impact of the FCPAM
activities on the success of recruited faculty in relation to their identities,
including race, ethnicity, gender, sexual identity, immigration status or
national origin, abilities, and being a caregiver or a
parent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.