* 2149631
* The Aptamer BioResistor: A Broadly Applicable Protein Biosensor with Dip-and-Read Simplicity for Point-of-Care Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

The urine test administered by an individual’s physician is not designed for the
detection of any diseases. The goal of this project is to develop a simple,
single-use, disposable sensor that can be dipped into a urine sample for the
purpose of detecting a variety of diseases, including urinary tract infections,
kidney disease, and cancers. These sensors must be inexpensive, reliable, and
fast enough to test urine in a few minutes in a doctor’s office. Sensors capable
of such performance are not yet available, but in previous research, a new
sensor design was developed that could meet these requirements. It’s called the
Impedance Transduced BioResistor or ITBR. The ITBR uses virus particles as
“receptors” to do sensing. But virus particles capable of detecting disease, as
required for the ITBR, are difficult to produce. The goal of this project is to
adapt the ITBR so that a more common and more versatile receptor called an
aptamer can be used in place of virus particles. Aptamers for some diseases are
already commercially available. For other diseases, the investigators will
prepare the aptamers. Aptamers are much smaller than viruses so the design of
the ITBR will need to be appropriately modified. The Broader Impacts of this
project include the inclusion of high school students into a summer research
program in which they will learn how to make ITBRs containing
aptamers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an Aptamer
BioResistor (AptBR), in which aptamers are substituted as receptors for M13
virus particles in the Impedance-Transduced BioResistor (ITBR) developed in
previous research. The Intellectual Merit of this project is in the development
and characterization of an ultra thin (~100 nm) aptamer-presenting a bioaffinity
layer that is compliant with the BioResistor architecture. The AptBR requires a
process for the rapid and highly reproducible deposition of aptamer-conductive
polymer composite films that: (1). present aptamers to a contacting solution,
(2) facilitate permeation of the bioaffinity layer by target protein, and (3)
electrically transduce the binding of a target protein, using the unique
mechanism that operates in the ITBR. With clear design rules for the AptBR
bioaffinity layer and for a new biosensor employing it, the AptBR will emerge
from this project. The project has four Broader Impacts: First, the AptBR will
increase the number of disease markers that can be measured using the
BioResistor architecture. Second, the AptBR will be able to operate at the
point-of-care to detect these diseases in animals and humans. Third, the
proposal supports NEXTech 202X, an outreach program for high school students,
providing hands-on laboratory science and classroom training that is keyed to
the biosensor development theme of the project. Fourth, this grant will support
graduate training emphasizing versatility and problem solving. These graduate
students will become experienced with a broad range of tools including electron
microscopy, XPS, AFM, and many others, as well as electrochemistry and
microfabrication methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.