* 2149551
* Deep learning-based serological test for point-of-care analysis of COVID-19 immunity with a paper-based multiplexed sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Dino Di Carlo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2025
* USD 393,222.00

Deep learning-based serological test for point-of-care analysis of COVID-19
immunity with a paper-based multiplexed sensor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19, caused by the virus SARS-CoV-2, was declared a
pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on March 12, 2020. Diagnostic
testing has been a critical focus of the response, with an urgent need to
rapidly develop, scale, and distribute new tests. Despite all the successful
testing methods developed for the direct detection of SARS-CoV-2 genetic
material, there is still an urgent need to create new serological assays that
can detect virus-specific antibodies as they can ascertain complementary
information to direct detection methods by indicating previous exposure and
potential immunity, especially important due to various emerging variants. In
addition, as vaccines against new variants roll out, these serological tests can
be used to evaluate the efficacy of vaccination campaigns, including the ability
to elicit SARS-CoV-2 and variant antigen-specific antibodies across vaccinated
and unvaccinated populations. In contrast to the current direct detection
methods, serology tests that detect antibodies can be low-cost and conducive to
a point-of-care (POC) setting, enabling broad screening efforts like widespread
immunity testing to indicate individuals in need of vaccine boosters, qualify
individuals for travel, return to work, and/or identify convalescent plasma
donors. To serve this urgent need, this project will create a smartphone-based,
cost-effective platform that can sense and measure the many different antibodies
specific to SARS-CoV-2 a person may develop, in a testing format that is easy to
use and can be completed within 15 min using an inexpensive paper-based test.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers will develop a multiplexed POC
immunoassay and serodiagnostic algorithm that will infer the
vaccination/immunity status from up to 10 unique immunoreactions to distinguish
an array of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. For this, the research team will create a
multiplexed vertical flow assay (xVFA) to simultaneously detect IgA, IgM, and
IgG antibodies to the S protein (as well as variants of the S protein, such as
delta, lambda, and other emerging variants), with separate immunoreaction sites
dedicated to S-1, S-2, and the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the S-protein in
the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its most recent variants. Using existing and de-
identified human serum samples, with the xVFA platform, the research team will
screen COVID-19-positive samples, including those resulting from common variants
(confirmed through reverse transcriptase-Polymerase Chain Reaction and
sequencing) along with vaccinated samples and pre-pandemic un-vaccinated
negative control samples. A neural network will then be trained using
quantitative information from the multiplexed immunoreactions and the ground-
truth clinical state over a set of remnant human serum samples. This training
phase will (1) create a serodiagnostic algorithm to identify a positive immune
response to SARS-CoV-2 infection (including common variants) or vaccination
status using the multiplexed antibody measurements, and (2) identify the key
subset of antibody-antigen interactions that most accurately represent and
quantify an immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection or protection via
vaccination. A blinded testing phase will benchmark the performance enhancement
of the multiplexed and data-driven approach to rigorously validate the trained
inference network's generalization. By validating a new multiplexed vertical
flow assay and serodiagnosis algorithm for COVID-19 immune protection, the
research team aims to determine the significant improvements in sensitivity and
specificity gained through the multiple measurements and computational analysis,
which come with little added cost or operational steps, or required sample
volume. This project will also establish a complementary educational outreach
program that will involve (1) public interviews and popular science articles in
news media and the internet; (2) undergraduate research opportunities involving
underrepresented students; and (3) graduate student training through the
organization of workshops, seminars and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.