* 2149902
* REU Site: Molecular Aspects of Pharmaceutical Sciences at UPR (UPR-MAPS)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Torsten Stelzer, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2025
* USD 291,594.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Puerto Rico-Medical Sciences Campus, located in San Juan, PR, supports the
training of 8 students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. In this
project, jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), participants will engage in
collaborative STEM research that defines the interdisciplinary pharmaceutical
sciences (non-clinical), with a focus on organic, analytical, solid-state, and
(bio)chemistry, molecular biology, materials science, and chemical engineering.
The UPR-MAPS program is also enriched with a variety of skill building
activities designed to develop the participants professional abilities related
to research project development, raising the awareness of societal and ethical
responsibilities, and communication with a focus to prepare students to succeed
in a STEM career. Participants are recruited nationally from 2- and 4-year
institutions with an emphasis on students from underrepresented groups in STEM
and limited research opportunities at their undergraduate campuses. The goal of
this site is to train talented underrepresented scientists to capture their
interests and awareness of the multidisciplinary nature of pharmaceutical
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse pool of experienced faculty
members will mentor students in individual projects encompassing chemistry-
centric projects that have an overall pharmaceutical sciences sub-theme. These
projects focus on the entire value chain of chemical structures from discovery,
to design, to synthesis, to purification, to formulation, and biochemical
function. Learning and training activities in form of seminars, webinars, and
workshops will be hosted to help students develop skills to succeed in their
STEM careers. Ultimately, the program is expected contribute to the mentoring
and matriculation of highly skilled, talented students on their way to becoming
key members of the future STEM workforce for the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.