* 2149489
* GOALI: 3D-printed biomimetic structures for enhanced boiling heat transfer and thermal management
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gerard Jones, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,999.00

Boiling heat transfer is one the most efficient ways of removing heat from a hot
surface by changing the coolant from liquid to vapor. Boiling has been widely
employed in thermal management of power generation, refrigeration and air
conditioning systems, electronic devices, and other high-power density systems.
This GOALI project will study fundamental aspects of liquid supplies and boiling
heat transfer as affected by surface structure characteristics that include a
novel biomimetic structure. This will be integrated into commercial heat
exchangers that can potentially achieve significant increase in heat transfer
performance. The biomimetic structures will be designed by a leaf-vein growth
algorithm and manufactured by 3D metal printing. In addition to liquid supplies
and boiling heat transfer tests, the biomimetic structures will be tested in
commercial products for durability and fouling. The results of the study will
assist both in developing basic understanding of boiling heat transfer by
biomimetic structures and in developing next-generation commercial products for
electronic devices and data center cooling. Research results and activities will
be integrated into educational and outreach programs for underrepresented groups
and the public, including hands-on 3D biomimetic structure design and
manufacture, and heat transfer tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancements of the
critical heat flux and heat transfer coefficient in boiling heat transfer are
dictated by the maximum liquid supply and the bubble generation rate. The limits
for enhancements will be examined and optimized through numerical simulations
and experiments. A biomimetic structure will address the limits of hydrodynamic
instability and viscous choking of liquid supply perpendicular to the heating
surface, and of liquid wetting/wicking parallel to the heating surface. Critical
structural characters and surface properties will be fabricated by 3D metal
printing and tuned by atomic layer deposition. The structural characters and
surface properties will be directly correlated to liquid supply and bubble
nucleation and quantified by models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.