* 2149865
* REU Site: Multi-mentored Mathematical Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students at Towson University
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Lindsey-Kay Lauderdale, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 314,634.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in the Towson University Department
of Mathematics. Each summer, nine undergraduate students will participate in an
eight-week research program, with students split into three teams each
containing three students. This REU program will promote undergraduate research
by providing authentic research experiences for both underrepresented students
and students who otherwise may not have mathematical research opportunities. In
addition to being exposed to a wide range of research areas in mathematics, the
REU participants will benefit from multi-mentoring by a diverse group of faculty
members, as well as numerous professional development opportunities. The multi-
mentoring approach will not only benefit the REU participants; it also will
benefit the mentors and build capacity within the mathematical community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series of research experiences and professional
development activities, the REU participants will build a strong mathematical
foundation for future study and work. The faculty mentors have crafted nine
research projects on topics in the mentors’ areas of expertise (applied
mathematics, combinatorics, graph theory, group theory, number theory, and
probability) and part of their active research programs. Each project contains
open problems and previously unexplored avenues of research, and it is
anticipated that some products will be suitable for publication. As a result,
this REU program will also advance knowledge within the field of mathematics.
Moreover, the REU research projects will develop students’ interests in
attending graduate school and/or continuing to engage in research after their
REU program has concluded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.