* 2149422
* Collaborative Research: New Techniques for High-Dimensional and Incomplete Network Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric Auerbach, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 291,152.00

This research project will develop new statistical and econometric resources for
researchers working with social network data. Social networks often play a
central role in shaping the outcomes and decisions of economic agents. For
example, they can predict the diffusion of a new technology or spread of a
contagion, determine the influence of key agents in crime or research
production, or account for treatment spillovers in many social programs.
However, incorporating social network data into empirical work can be difficult.
Networks are fundamentally high-dimensional objects, and often it is unclear
which features will be relevant for a particular social or economic phenomenon
of interest. In addition, the researcher may only observe some of the relevant
connections between agents in the social network for reasons of privacy or cost
of data collection. This project will develop new techniques for incorporating
social network structure into econometric and statistical modeling that
accommodates these limitations. The project will train graduate students and
develop a new course on the use of network data in causal inference. Software
also will be developed and disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will build new econometric methodology for models with high-dimensional
and incomplete social network data. First, the project will develop a new
nonparametric regression framework for networks, characterize its statistical
properties, demonstrate its use for empirical work in the social sciences, and
provide software for implementation. Second, the project will investigate the
informational content of partial network data generated by referral-based
sampling and contingency-table data. The project will develop new theory,
methodology, and empirical practices for identification, estimation, and
inference using these nonstandard data types. New insights will be provided into
exactly what features of social network structure are relevant for economic
outcomes and decision making and when and how this information can be recovered
from incomplete data in practice. The results of this research will help
empiricists better understand the role that networks play in economics and the
other social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.