* 2149482
* Understanding past linkages between hydrothermal activity, climate change, and ecosystem dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Cathy Whitlock, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 559,324.00

Yellowstone is one of the most geologically dynamic places on Earth, and its
active volcanism, recent glaciation and ongoing hydrothermal activity provide
unparalleled opportunities for scientific discovery. Interactions and feedbacks
between geology, glaciation, and climate have long shaped the biologic history
of Yellowstone, but the relative influence of climatic and geologic processes
through time remains unclear. This investigation seeks to better understand the
history of Yellowstone’s geyser basins using an interdisciplinary approach to
examine lake-sediment records and test hypotheses about past hydrothermal
activity and environmental change. The project will include training for
students and a postdoctoral research and collaboration with Yellowstone National
Park to develop educational materials for public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has three major objectives that focus
on the sedimentary analysis of small lakes within and near the Yellowstone’s
Lower Geyser Basin: (1) develop a millennial-scale history of hydrothermal
activity in Yellowstone for the first time activity (from lithology,
geochemistry and diatoms); (2) evaluate the relationship between climate
change—occurring over multiple timescales—and past hydrothermal activity,
specifically investigating the hypothesis that hydrothermal systems are
sensitive to periods of drought (from stable isotopic records and paleoclimate
model simulations); and (3) examine the ecological consequences of past
hydrothermal activity in a setting where hydrothermal landscapes create unique
vegetation communities at present (from pollen, plant macrofossils and
charcoal). Unraveling these connections will increase our understanding of past
geo-ecosystem interactions in hydrothermal settings in Yellowstone and around
the world and help build a framework for evaluating the paleobiological
consequences of volcanic-driven events in deep time. The findings will also
assess the sensitivity of Yellowstone’s geyser basins to changes in climate in
the past as well as the future. The project will develop new formal and informal
educational materials designed to inspire students and inform diverse public
audiences—a primary mission goal for Yellowstone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.