* 2149572
* REU Site: From the Clouds to the Core: A Place-Based REU for Southwestern US Community/Tribal College Students to Increase Under-Represented Group Recruitment to the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Andrew Cohen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2025
* USD 133,625.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Arizona (UA) will provide summer research experience opportunities to geoscience
students from two-year community and tribal colleges around the southwest. The
goal of the program is to stimulate interest in the geosciences early in the
academic careers of these students and create a clear and inviting pathway to
transfer into four-year college geoscience programs for these students. This REU
program will also provide post-research project mentoring conducive to retaining
the students through completion of their four-year degree. The project is
intended to create a lasting network of collaboration between the University of
Arizona and partner two-year colleges in the region that will ultimately
facilitate stronger transfer pathways for all two-year college students. The
results of this program can also serve as a model for historically excluded
group-focused research experiences for undergraduates for other STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program will work to address the
ongoing challenge of limited enrollment and retention among historically
excluded groups from the geosciences through a program specifically targeting
student recruitment from ~15 predominantly Hispanic/Latinx, Black, and Native
American-serving regional community and tribal colleges from around the
southwestern US. An initial 2-week campus immersion for all participants,
introducing them to the breath of geosciences academic and career opportunities,
campus life and the university educational setting, will be followed by a
~5-week mentored research project, working either at the UA in the lab, in a
field-based setting, or in a co-mentored setting from their home base with
community college and tribal college co-mentors. During the final week of the
program all students will return to the UA for summative activities, including
formal research presentations of their work, and allowing for family
participation in recognition of their studentâ€™s
achievements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.