* 2149219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Do Firms Indeed Pursue Profit Maximization? An Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Charles Noussair, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 03/31/2024
* USD 4,519.00

Profit maximization is a simple tool that economists use to model firms'
behaviors; and this assumption of profit maximization is pervasive in economics.
However, it is doubtful that profit maximization is the only way to describe
firms’ behaviors. In a modern economy, ownership and management are separated
for many firms, except for family-owned businesses. Owners are usually
shareholders, and they get dividends from their own companies. Managers, such as
a CEO and workers, get salaries from companies based on their working
performances, indicated as profit and sales, revenue, market shares, or other
quantitative indices. For example, suppose a manager’s salary is decided by his
sales. Then, he will focus on increasing sales, which leads to a different
outcome compared to the case where the manager’s salary is decided based on the
firm’s profit. In other words, firms’ behaviors depend on how managers’
incentives are determined. Managers (delegated by owners) make decisions related
to firms’ operations, and this does not necessarily result in profit-maximizing
behavior. Though there was some research about strategic delegation before, most
economic research has assumed profit maximization, without considering strategic
delegation. Therefore, this research will examine how firms’ behaviors under
strategic delegation are different from those obtained under pure profit
maximization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental study uses a two-stage
Cournot duopoly game to describe strategic delegation in a market (Vickers,
1985; Fershtman and Judd, 1987; Jansen et al., 2007). In the experiment, there
are two firms in a market. Each firm consists of one owner and one manager. In
Stage 1, both firm owners choose a contract determining the managers’
incentives: profit delegation (only profit), revenue delegation (profit and
weighted revenue), and market share delegation (profit and weighted market
share). In Stage 2, managers choose whether or not to collude. Owners’ and
managers’ selections will determine market output under strategic delegation.
Theoretically, the market outcome under strategic delegation is more aggressive
than that under profit maximization. Thus, this study will investigate whether
the theoretical results are held under strategic delegation. This research will
help understand firms’ behaviors are more/less competitive than analyzed before.
For example, Spierdijk and Zaouras (2017) show that the Lerner index obtained by
profit maximization assumption is not appropriate to describe market power if
firms do not maximize profit. As an extension of such research, this study will
use experiments to identify firms’ behaviors that are not profit-maximizing.
Also, this project will contribute to improving structural models. Since the BLP
model (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995) was proposed, demand estimation has
been advanced, but the ‘supply’ part from the model still assumes profit
maximization that leads to underestimating the marginal cost. Thus, the results
of the experimental study will potentially help improve structural
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.