* 2149866
* REU Site: Conservation, Restoration, and Communication
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Linda Walters, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 456,626.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of Central Florida, located in Orlando, FL, will support the training
of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022- 2024. It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or from under-represented groups, will be trained through this
program. The program focus meets a critical national need to train students in
the fields of conservation and restoration using cutting-edge tools and
techniques. Interwoven into the experience will be science communication
training. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. Targeted field trips will
include visits to regional zoos, national and state parks, urban conservation
sites, as well as the opportunity to watch sea turtles nest, hands-on oyster
reef restoration, honey bee keeping, and job shadowing with local conservation
specialists. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this REU Site is the
conservation and restoration of diverse taxa (e.g., sea turtles, oysters,
mangroves, frogs, honeybees, wading birds, captive bred species in zoos, etc.)
and ecosystems (oceans, beaches, estuaries, wetlands, etc.) with a focus on
Florida. Human activities often seek to improve natural systems through
conservation and restoration. Limited understanding of these processes, however,
makes success difficult. The University of Central Floridaâ€™s Biology Department
is home to many experts in these ever-expanding fields. Our REU mentors combine
field data collection with cutting-edge laboratory research (e.g., eDNA,
metabolomics). This REU program focuses on inquiry-based research projects
developed by students with support from their mentors. Directly connected to
both conservation and restoration is communication. Students participating in
this REU will enhance their communication skills with the goal of each student
developing a science identity by the end of summer. Professional development
training is designed to remove common barriers to success; workshops include
ethics and responsible conduct of research, career choices and job shadowing
opportunities, how to navigate graduate school admissions, and time management.
More information about the program is available by visiting
https://academicsuccess.ucf.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Linda Walters
at linda.walters@ucf.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Kate Mansfield at
kate.mansfield@ucf.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.