* 2149281
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Transport Café - A Virtual Gathering for the Thermal Transport Community
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Matteo Bucci, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,486.00

Thermal Transport Café (TTC) is a virtual community gathering on a regular basis
to keep the thermal transport research community innovative and connected. The
TTC series launched in Fall 2020 in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic that
disrupted academic interactions and limited the exchanges of ideas and
collaboration. This is particularly detrimental to junior faculty as they build
new collaborations and seek research mentorship. The TTC gathers every month for
one and half hours including junior faculty presentations and mentoring
sessions. The Junior Faculty Session consists of research presentations,
questions and answers, and breakout rooms for brainstorming and discussions. The
Mentoring Sessions are held between every two consecutive junior faculty
sessions with topics selected from a junior faculty survey on academic and life
challenges. Special panels to invite industrial partners, government agency
representatives, and national lab personnel are planned. Graduate and
postdoctoral research expos will highlight the next generation of faculty in the
community. Twelve junior faculty sessions and four mentoring sessions have been
organized during the pilot phase of the TTC, where over 60 junior faculty and 40
senior faculty have been actively participating. This project will support the
TTC in the post-pandemic era to build collaborations, nurture junior faculty,
foster innovations, and grow the thermal transport
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TTC brings together thermal transport
scientists around the world to foster scientific discoveries and explore future
directions of thermal transport research, with a focus on promoting junior
faculty and nurturing the next generation of researchers. The technical
presentations feature junior faculty provides a platform for in-depth questions
and constructive feedback. The mentoring sessions focus on important and timely
topics identified by junior faculty surveys. The TTC helps to build a culture of
resource sharing and open collaborations. The TTC sessions will be recorded and
shared in a YouTube channel. A dedicated TTC website will be developed and
maintained where the latest news of the research community will be disseminated.
The TTC is committed to enhancing the diversity, equity, and inclusion in
thermal transport community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.