* 2149559
* Hydrous Components in Nominally Anhydrous Phases
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 256,367.00

Hydrogen exists as a minor component in numerous crystalline substances as
molecular water and hydroxide ions, the so-called hydrous components. Minerals
with these components include those that make up the Earth and synthetic
industrial analogues that are of technological importance. The hydrogen in
Earth’s minerals account for the vast majority of our planet’s hydrogen and has
a profound effect on the behavior of Earth’s interior. Similarly, hydrous
components can significantly modify the material properties of synthetic
materials, such as semiconductors. Despite the clear importance of hydrogen in
these contexts, there remain two fundamental uncertainties: 1) where does the
hydrogen incorporate into crystal structures and 2) at what concentrations
hydrogen is present. This work will address both issues through a comprehensive
approach of both laboratory experiments and computer simulations. This will
include development of analytical techniques for hydrogen detection, detailed
spectroscopic studies, and interpretation of experimental data from quantum
mechanics calculations. In addition to continuing work on previously studied
silicate minerals (the most abundant minerals in the earth), the research will
also focus on binary oxide minerals. Binary oxides are not only geologically
relevant, but also have extreme relevance in many established and emerging
technologies, ranging from solar cells, to lasers, touch screens, pigments,
semiconductors, and flat screen displays. Hydrogen impurities have been shown to
play a key role in these settings. Thus, this research will not only be
important for understanding the inner workings of our planet, but will also be
significant for the development of new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has
long been understood that hydrous components (OH- and H2O) in nominally
anhydrous minerals (NAMs) are of great importance in earth science. These
phases, which include abundant mantle phases such as olivine, garnet, pyroxene
and ringwoodite, are likely the largest reservoir for hydrogen in the Earth. The
trace hydrogen in NAMs often has outsized effects on a wide range of their
material properties, from melting points, to mechanical deformation, thermal and
electrical conductivity, color, radiation stability. Despite the clear
significance of hydrogen in NAMs, there persist two fundamental issues. First is
the quantification of hydrogen concentrations in these phases. Numerous
techniques have been attempted or utilized over the last few decades including
nuclear profile analysis and SIMS measurements, but the technical challenges
related to measuring trace hydrogen concentrations in NAMs have proven difficult
to overcome. Second is the identification of specific hydrogen sites in NAMs.
Although some defect sites have been identified in specific NAMs such as
garnets, there is little recourse for establishing the detailed defect
structures in most phases. Our proposed solution to these issues is a holistic
approach that considers both established and emergent techniques for measuring
trace hydrogen in minerals, and quantum mechanics (density functional theory)
calculations. These research components will be linked through infrared
spectroscopy of oriented crystals, a technique that has proven fundamental in
the study of NAMs. Our work will initially focus on simple oxide minerals such
as rutile and stishovite, a group of phases that has typically been
underrepresented in research into NAMs, but whose study could greatly benefit
the field as a whole, with additional benefits to the development of
technological materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.