* 2149913
* REU: Modern Topics in Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Wojciech Czaja, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 480,525.00

This project supports a summer undergraduate research experience in mathematical
sciences at the University of Maryland – College Park. The project will
contribute to the development of a mathematically sophisticated workforce and
broaden the participation of undergraduate students in research in the
mathematical sciences. Twelve undergraduates will participate each summer in an
eight week residential summer program, preceded by a two week remote training
session. Each research team will involve a faculty mentor together with a
graduate student assistant. This REU project has three primary goals. The first
goal is to nurture research abilities, promote independent thinking, and enhance
the technical and presentation skills of the undergraduate participants. The
second goal is to provide training to undergraduates from schools with limited
research opportunities in STEM fields. The final goal is to provide graduate
students with hands-on experience in the supervision of REU projects and
administration of REU programs. Student participants will engage in cutting-edge
research in a variety of fields within contemporary pure and applied
mathematics. The program will also contribute to students’ professional
development by offering a diverse array of seminars and workshops, and will
provide students with opportunities to present the results of their work at
high-profile national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
participants in this research program will conduct research in pure and applied
mathematical fields under the supervision of experienced faculty and graduate
student mentors. Projects will range from mathematical modelling in materials
science to machine learning methods for the study of rare events in random
systems to applications of harmonic analysis in the representations of data via
neural networks. Other projects will originate from mathematical fields such as
optimal transport theory, geometric flows, convex and differential geometry, and
cluster algebras. Student participants will also gain valuable professional
experience through involvement in a series of workshops and seminars: the Update
Seminar (where undergraduate participants will give talks on the progress of
their research), the Exposure Seminar (where faculty from the host institution
and nearby universities will give expository talks on their research), and the
Lunchtime Workshop (where a variety of professional development topics will be
addressed). Following the conclusion of the summer program, students will remain
in contact with their faculty mentors for additional guidance on the preparation
of final reports, research articles, and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.