* 2149257
* Sustaining MorphoSource 3D data Repository: Supporting a transformation in research and education practices relying on biodiversity and natural history collections
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,658,661.00

An award to Duke University is made in support of the MorphoSource on-line data
resource for 3D specimen data. MorphoSource is a web accessible data repository
that is uniquely specialized for 3D/2D image data representing physical
specimens from museum or lab collections. Sources of 3D data include CT scanners
(a common source of 3D imagery), laser scanners, photogrammetry modeling and
more. Over the last decade, MorphoSource has initiated a revolution in the study
of anatomy through unprecedented data access. In addition to providing digital
data and tools for scientists to conduct research, MorphoSource also supports
public engagement and is being widely used for public education and outreach. By
making 3D data discoverable and accessible, MorphoSource helps neutralize access
limitations due to geography, capability of travel, fragility of material, or
high demand. By making web accessible 3D imagery available to any student with a
basic computer or mobile device, MorphoSource broadens inclusivity in use of
biodiversity and natural history museum collections in a way that was never
previously possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2013, MorphoSource.org was created
to enable broad access to digitized “virtual specimens” and 3D data for advanced
analyses of anatomic phenotypes. MorphoSource has since become a vital research
resource for 3D data on anatomical form of specimens in biodiversity and natural
history collections. MorphoSource has been cited by ~1,100 papers for data
access or archiving and served a growing, active community of 15,000 users (with
~1,600 data contributors). Achieving this status has hinged largely on its
standards-based data model, file format expertise, rich management tools, and
collaboratively developed policies. Furthermore, MorphoSource supports deep
integrations with a variety of federally-funded bioinformatic platforms and is a
natural and robust partner in national efforts at digitization of biodiversity
collections for handling 3D needs. With unprecedented depth of taxonomic
sampling and a powerful 3D web viewer, Morphosource has already enabled start-
to-finish studies of large-scale patterns in anatomical variation from “virtual
specimens” for the first time. The ability to access and measure nuanced
anatomical variation in massive numbers of specimens is essential to realizing
NSF’s visionary goals of leveraging computer science frontiers like machine
learning, computer vision and artificial intelligence in biological research.
This NSF award will allow MorphoSource to continue serving its diverse
communities as they grow for the next five years and to further develop policies
and procedures that will eventually empower certain segments of user communities
to help support the platform. Results from studies that leverage MorphoSource
are frequently published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and presented at
scientific meetings and in numerous outreach and training
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.