* 2149921
* REU Site: Algebra, Graphs, and Number Theory at the University of Texas at Tyler
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Christina Graves, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 04/30/2025
* USD 311,154.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in mathematics at the
University of Texas at Tyler. The 8-week program will take place in the summers
of 2022, 2023, and 2024. Each summer, ten students will work in groups of three
with one faculty mentor leading each group. The program focuses on building
confidence of student participants and preparing them to go on to pursue careers
in mathematics. The REU will have a greater effect by recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. In particular, Hispanic students, women, and first-
generation college students will be recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mentors
for the REU site at the University of Texas at Tyler will provide research
questions that are accessible to undergraduates, yet interesting to working
mathematicians. The goal is to provide participants the opportunity to conduct
original research leading to publication in professional journals. The research
projects are in the areas of abstract algebra, graph theory, and number theory.
All topics will be accessible to students who have taken early proof-based
courses in their major. By the end of the eight weeks, REU students will write
their results in a professional format and prepare a final talk and a poster
suitable for presentation at conferences for
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.