* 2149416
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging the power of ecological modeling and functional ecology to understand spatio-temporal variation in community assembly through the late Quaternary
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jessica Blois, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 321,683.00

Biodiversity—the variety of all forms of life—serves many functions to humans
and its loss is one of the most pressing environmental issues of our time.
Understanding the processes that shape species within ecological communities is
crucial to chart the future of biodiversity and ecosystems in the face of human
impacts. To date, studies of processes that are responsible for composition of
ecological communities have been largely restricted to small (local) spatial
scales and contemporary (months to decades) time scales. But these processes are
complex and take place across many different scales, from local to continental
spatial scales and monthly to 1000-year time scales. To understand which
processes are important to structuring ecological communities at longer time
scales, the project will use the fossil record of small mammals from the past
21,000 years. Results from and data generated by the project will be freely
available for use by the broader scientific and educational communities. The
project will provide workforce development opportunities and broaden
participation in science by training middle- and high-schoolers and postdoctoral
researchers from groups typically underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate spatial and temporal non-stationarity of
processes structuring communities, the project will leverage the fossil record
of small mammals across the late Quaternary, simulations and species
distribution modeling (SDM) techniques, and trait datasets. The team will first
conduct a comprehensive chronological re-assessment of the existing fossil
record and carry out a suite of simulation exercises to understand the
sensitivity of SDMs to spatial and temporal uncertainty inherent in the fossil
record. The knowledge gained through these steps will then guide the
construction of near continental, dynamic (i.e., changing through time) species
distributions using the empirical fossil record. These modeled range-wide
distributions for small mammals will then be stacked to obtain evaluations of
community functional and trait composition, which will inform the spatio-
temporal variation in community assembly processes. Ultimately, the findings
will have implications for understanding the impacts of environmental and biotic
change on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.