* 2149500
* Collaborative Research: Diagnosing the Role of Ocean Eddies in Carbon Cycling from a High-resolution Data Assimilating Ocean Biogeochemical Model
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Don Chambers, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 288,380.00

The Southern Ocean accounts for ~40% of the total ocean uptake of anthropogenic
carbon dioxide despite covering only 20% of the global ocean surface, and is
particularly rich in long-lived eddies. These eddies, or large ocean whirlpools
which can be observed from space, can alter air-sea fluxes of carbon dioxide in
ways that are not yet fully understood. New observations from autonomous
platforms measuring ocean carbon content suggest that there is significant
heterogeneity in ocean carbon fluxes which can be linked to these dynamic eddy
features. Due to computational and time limitations, ocean eddies are not
explicitly represented in most global climate simulations, limiting our ability
to understand the role eddies play in the ocean carbon cycle. This study will
explore the impact of eddies on ocean carbon content and air-sea carbon dioxide
fluxes in the Southern Ocean using both simulated- and observation-based
strategies and the findings will improve our understanding of the ocean’s role
in the carbon cycle and in global climate. While this work will primarily be
focused on the Southern Ocean, the results will be globally applicable. The
researchers will also broaden interest in physical and chemical oceanography
among middle school-age girls in the University of South Florida’s Oceanography
Camp for Girls by augmenting existing lessons with computational methods in
oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to quantify the impacts of
mesoscale eddy processes on ocean carbon content and air-sea carbon dioxide
(CO2) fluxes in the Southern Ocean. For the modeling component, the
investigators will explore relationships between eddies, ocean carbon content,
and air-sea CO2 fluxes within the 1/6-degree resolution Biogeochemical Southern
Ocean State Estimate (B-SOSE). They investigators will produce high-resolution
composites of the carbon content and physical structure within both cyclonic and
anticyclonic eddies by region, quantify the influence of these eddies on the
overall simulated air-sea CO2 flux, and diagnose the physical mechanisms driving
this influence. For the observational component, the investigators will match
eddies observed via satellite altimetry to ocean carbon observations and
characterize observed relationships between eddies and ocean carbon content with
a focus on Southern Ocean winter observations where light limits biological
processes, allowing isolation of the contribution of physical processes. This
work will also provide motivation for higher resolution and better eddy
parameterizations in climate models, more mesoscale biogeochemical observations,
and integration of satellite sea surface height data into efforts to map air-sea
fluxes of CO2. Each summer, the PI delivers a lab lesson at the University of
South Florida Oceanography Camp for Girls, recognized by NSF as a “Model STEM
Program for Women and Girls” focused on broadening participation by placing
emphasis on recruiting a diverse group of young women. As part of this project,
the existing interactive Jupyter Notebook-based Python coding Lab lesson will be
augmented with a B-SOSE-themed modeling component, which will broaden interest
in physical and chemical oceanography and data science, and expose campers to
computational methods in oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.