* 2149053
* Environmental Stress, Political Institutions and Social Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Anoop Sarbahi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 01/31/2025
* USD 407,554.00

The fast-expanding literature on the climate-conflict nexus has improved our
understanding of the causes of political violence, but it falls short of
identifying local contextual factors that may moderate the effects of
environmental stress on social conflict. This project advances our scientific
understanding of how environmental stress impacts social conflict. Focusing on
conflicts organized around lineage- (caste-clan) and religion-based identities,
this project highlights the importance of attenuated manifestation of social
conflict, such as denial of access to community resources, asset appropriations
and public humiliation, particularly against marginalized socioeconomic groups.
These attenuated manifestations received little attention in the existing
literature, which almost exclusively focuses on accentuated manifestations of
social conflict, such as insurgencies and civil wars, even though localized
attenuated incidents can engender major accentuated violence, fueling
instability in a geopolitically volatile region that is of vital importance to
US national security and global peace. In addition to generating theoretical and
empirical insights, the project will train undergraduate and graduate students,
especially from under-represented groups, in a critical area of social science
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs collect high resolution
environmental stress and conflict data, leveraging discontinuities in historical
and contemporary political institutions across carefully selected subdistrict,
district and national boundaries, and deploying a range of methodological tools,
including ethnographic work and a survey experiment to facilitate a strong
causal inference. They will develop a theoretical framework that builds on the
existing literature to offer a nuanced understanding of the role of historical
and contemporary political institutions in moderating the effects of
environmental stress and water access on social conflict. In theorizing a
moderated and highly contextual relationship, this project challenges dominant
narratives in both research and environmental stress and its impact on conflict
and research on the role of colonial institutions while highlighting the
importance of distinguishing between inter- and intra-ethnic divisions. The
project develops an empirical framework that integrates three different levels
of analysis – the district, sub-district and individual – within carefully
controlled geographical settings. The sub-district level analysis focuses on
selected clusters of geographically contiguous provinces in the two countries.
For these analyses, the project will generate: a) large-scale, high-resolution
data organized around religion- and lineage-based identities on the entire
accentuated-attenuated social conflict spectrum; and, b) highly-localized
longitudinal maps on water security and political institutions across the two
countries. To validate the findings and clearly identify causal mechanisms, the
PIs benchmark the results obtained from analyses of district and sub-district
data against a forced-choice conjoint experiment deployed in 240 carefully
selected primary census units in India combined with ethnographic work conducted
in a subset of these communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.