* 2149587
* Nature of a Low Velocity Anomaly in the Mantle Transition Zone Beneath the Western Great Plains
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kelly Liu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 189,117.00

Decades of intensive research in the geological sciences have convincingly shown
that large-scale surface features such as mountain belts, ocean basins, and
rifted valleys; and natural hazards such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions;
are manifestations of dynamic processes occurring in the deep interior of the
Earth. One of these processes is the upwelling of hotter-than-normal, partially
melted rocks in the Earthâ€™s mantle. In recent years, a number of geophysical
studies have identified such upwelling beneath the western Great Plains, but the
geometry, depth extent, and more importantly, formation mechanism for this
feature remain enigmatic. This study will employ a suite of computationally-
intensive geophysical techniques to investigate this intriguing feature.
Findings from this study will shed light on similar features elsewhere on Earth,
ultimately improving our capability to understand, predict, and mitigate natural
hazards and effectively explore and develop natural resources. The proposed
scientific investigations will have significant impacts for geoscientists from a
wide range of fields and career stages. A graduate student, two undergraduate
students, and a summer intern will be involved in the study. Materials developed
from this project will be integrated into various educational programs at the
university aimed at recruiting minority undergraduate and graduate students into
scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use an array of
seismologic approaches to investigate the existence and nature of a prominent
low velocity anomaly beneath the western Great Plains by testing three
hypotheses, including whether it represents 1) an anomalously hot, low-density,
upwelling feature associated with the subduction of the Farallon slab; 2) an
emerging plume originating from the lower mantle; and 3) a zone of high water
content in the mantle transition zone. Research tasks to test the hypotheses
include velocity corrections to the apparent transition zone discontinuity
depths, obtained using P-to-S receiver functions; imaging the mantle transition
zone using multiply reflected P-to-S conversions; investigation of seismic
anisotropy layering; and constraining the anomaly feature using synthetic tests.
Testing these hypotheses may provide first-order constraints for geodynamic
models, leading to significant progress in understanding the tectonic evolution
of North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.