* 2149860
* REU Site: Weather, Climate, and Society: An Interdisciplinary approach integrating physical and social sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robin Ersing, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2025
* USD 495,364.00

This 9-week summer REU program focuses on engaging under-represented students
(with a particular emphasis on rising sophomores) in interdisciplinary research
related to weather, climate, and society (WCS) and their physical and social
interactions. The pedagogical approach, which incorporates a myriad of learning
opportunities, will enhance the experience of participants and facilitate their
development of scientific skills. The development of knowledge/skills will
encourage students to enter STEM fields, particularly related to atmospheric
sciences or a related discipline, and prepare them for basic and applied
research at upper levels and later in graduate school. Research projects will
have the potential to directly benefit disaster-vulnerable communities in
Florida and other extreme weather affected areas. USF's WCS REU will continue to
be a model for interdisciplinary-based research performed by students through
dissemination of project results and presentations by REU students and faculty
at local (USF and their home institutions), regional, and national conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will draw from an interdisciplinary panel of
mentors, and is designed to achieve these objectives: 1) Deliver an intensive
research experience for 10 students/year with an emphasis on under-represented
groups; 2) Provide participants with research experiences to aid their
recruitment into a STEM undergraduate major, particularly the atmospheric
sciences or a related discipline, and graduate programs; 3) Promote
participantsâ€™ skill development through a program of mentored research (which
follows a project from conception to dissemination of results), experiential
learning, professional development workshops, seminars that offer interaction
with national and international scientists, trainings in social and physical
research techniques and interdisciplinary perspectives on the social and
physical aspects and impacts of severe weather and climate and related
disasters; 4) Increase awareness of ethical issues related to working with
scientific data and communicating the results; and 5) Provide students access to
a mentoring network that will support them throughout their
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.