* 2149470
* Data-guided Control: Fundamental Limits in Presence of Nonlinearities, Streaming Data, and Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Mehran Mesbahi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Data-guided control is an emerging area in system sciences that aims to embrace
time series data as its core construct for control of dynamic systems–replacing
or complementing their models. This project addresses foundational gaps in the
current state of the art in data-guided control. The approach is multi-pronged;
on one hand, the current paradigm is extended by facilitating its applications
in the context of nonlinear systems and trajectory funnels, as well as large-
scale networked systems. On the other hand, foundational system-theoretic
constructs for control with online streaming data are developed. The project
also has a significant educational component. The PI will develop and re-design
a number of control courses at the University of Washington, providing a
complementary “data-model” perspective on dynamic systems. These courses will
encourage students with interest in machine learning to appreciate the
theoretical underpinnings of model-based design. In parallel, the educational
goals of this project involve inspiring students with interest in systems and
control theory to re-examine data-guided analysis from a perspective that is
rooted in system theory, yet embraces how data, statistics, and optimization
significantly complement the more traditional training in systems and control.
This project contributes to making system-theoretic concepts in areas such
complex networks, infrastructure systems, and health care, as relevant and
useful as data analytic tools and methods. Also envisioned is reviving a deeper
appreciation for systems and control in students who have gravitated towards
machine learning in the past decade. This new perspective also facilitates
attracting a new cohort of students to systems by broadening its scope to realms
where first-principle models are neither available nor justifiable. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop novel data-parameterized analysis and
synthesis techniques for dynamic systems. Building on the notions of
informativity and Willem’s Fundamental Lemma, the use of data-parameterized
matrix inequalities is examined in the presence of disturbances and for funnel
synthesis in nonlinear trajectory-following. Next, scaling laws will be examined
that clarify the relation between suboptimality measures and analytic properties
of design objectives on one hand, and data-snapshots required for analysis and
synthesis on the other. The project will then examine new system-theoretic
notions for control synthesis motivated by streaming data, as well as rigorously
identify the role of data-reduction techniques for the control of networked and
multi-agent systems. The overarching goal of the project is developing data-
guided system-theoretic techniques that transparently capture the “duality”
between models and data in online control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.