* 2149548
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: An Online Learning Framework for Socially Emerging Mixed Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Cathy Wu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Emerging mobility systems, e.g., connected and automated vehicles and shared
mobility, provide the most intriguing opportunity for enabling users to better
monitor transportation network conditions and make better decisions for
improving safety and transportation efficiency. However, different levels of
vehicle automation in the transportation network can significantly alter
transportation efficiency metrics (travel times, energy, environmental impact).
Moreover, we anticipate that efficient transportation might alter human travel
behavior causing rebound effects, e.g., by improving efficiency, travel cost is
decreased, hence willingness-to-travel is increased. The latter would increase
overall vehicle miles traveled, which in turn might negate the benefits in terms
of energy and travel time. The project will consolidate emerging mobility
systems and modes with real-world data and processed information leading to an
equitable transportation system with broad economic, environmental, and societal
benefits. We expect the outcome of this project to enhance our understanding of
the rebound effects, changes in travel demand and capacity, human reception,
adoption, and use of emerging mobility systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcome of this research will deliver an online learning framework that will aim
at distributing travel demand in a given transportation network resulting in a
socially-optimal mobility system that travelers would be willing to accept. A
“socially-optimal mobility system” is defined as a mobility system that (1) is
efficient (in terms of energy consumption and travel time), (2) does not cause
rebound effects, and (3) ensures equity in transportation. The framework will
establish new approaches in optimally controlling cyber-physical systems by
merging learning and control approaches. It includes the development of new
methods to enhance accessibility, safety, and equity in transportation and
travelers’ acceptance. In the context of the proposed framework, a “social
planner” faces the problem of aggregating the preferences of the travelers into
a collective, system-wide decision when the private information of the travelers
is not publicly known. Mechanism design theory will be used to derive the
optimal routes and the selection of a transportation mode for all travelers so
as to maximize accessibility, safety, and equity in transportation and
travelers’ acceptance. Online learning algorithms for contextual bandit problems
will be developed to identify traveler preferences and to determine how they
would respond to the social planner’s recommendations on routing and selection
of a transportation mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.