* 2149480
* Collaborative Research: US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Processing-Driven Nucleation Mediated Control for Manufacturing of Phase-Pure Ferroelectric Hafnia
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Christina Rost, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2025
* USD 143,196.00

This award supports research that will develop new knowledge related to the
manufacturing of electronic materials that will not form naturally, but that
exhibit useful properties. The material studied in this effort is hafnium oxide,
which can have a specific arrangement of atoms that results in a spontaneous
electric charge separation that can be changed with application of a sufficient
voltage. This functionality is useful for future generations of low power
computing and computer memory. This particular hafnium oxide structure is
challenging to prepare and often contains regions with other atomic arrangements
that do not exhibit the useful spontaneous charge separation property. This
award will support fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to
directly and completely form the hafnium oxide structure of interest. This new
process will overcome the challenges of structural purity that have hindered
mass production of hafnium oxide-based computer memory devices and enable
development of new computing elements that consume less power. Low power devices
are needed to reduce the overall energy consumption related to computing. This
will directly impact the US economy, national security, and society by enabling
the development and manufacture of new microelectronic technologies that lead to
new functionality and less energy consumption. This project involves researchers
in the United States, the Republic of Ireland, and Northern Ireland,
representing several disciplines, including materials science, electron and
scanning probe microscopies, and physics. The multi-disciplinary and multi-
national team will develop educational outreach materials and present them to
students in economically disadvantaged areas to stimulate interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics and to show how science and engineering
are global endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this fundamental research
project is to develop a scalable manufacturing method to prepare phase-pure
ferroelectric hafnium oxide and hafnium zirconium oxide by atomic layer
deposition. The project will utilize plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition to
prepare amorphous deposits of hafnium oxide and hafnium zirconium oxide. The
impact of processing parameters on the amorphous structure and resulting phases
will be characterized using X-ray Diffraction, Extended X-ray Absorption Fine
Structure, Transmission Electron Microscopy, Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy,
Scanning Probe Microscopy, and electrical property measurements. The project
will determine how amorphous structure bond length and atomic coordination
impact the nucleating phase. By isolating the impact of atomic layer deposition
process parameters on the amorphous structure and then determining how that
leads to crystalline phase formation, a deterministic means to prepare phase-
pure materials will result. The nano- and device-scale ferroelectric behavior
will be quantified using advanced microscopies and the impact of phase
impurities on material performance will be measured. The end result will be new
knowledge of the impact of amorphous structure on crystallization of hafnium
oxide-based materials and the impact of phase impurity on ferroelectric
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.