* 2149741
* I-Corps:  Reducing medical adhesive-related skin injuries while using high-adhesion tape
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Eric Seibel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high-adhesion medical tape that may be removed in seconds
without skin injury. The proposed technology may be especially beneficial for
children and elderly because they have thinner and more fragile skin. Medical
tape is used to hold essential devices to the skin for long periods of time.
Unfortunately, without means for safe removal, these strong adhesive tapes are
painful to remove from the skin, often resulting in medical adhesive-related
skin injuries (MARSI). Medical tape that offers high adhesion while providing
means for safe removal may gain immediate traction in children’s hospitals. The
proposed high-adhesion medical tape is designed to release from skin upon
warming with a heat pack. The proposed technology may lead to commercialization
of a novel medical tape that would affect patients and caregivers worldwide,
leading to reductions of pain felt by patients and anxiety experienced by both
patients and caregivers. In addition, there are other potential commercial
applications outside of healthcare that benefit from heat-responsive adhesives,
making for an expansive global market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a temperature responsive adhesive that may be
manufactured into high adhesion tapes and labels. The plan is to formulate a
variety of temperature sensitive polymers (TSPs) and incorporate them into the
pressure sensitive adhesive (PSA) so when the mixture reaches 43°C, the tape
loses most of its adhesion. Based on the makeup of the proposed PSA, certain TSP
characteristics make these polymers compatible with the PSA. One TSP has been
tested and the goal is to test others to understand how these various TSPs
interact with a PSA system, and the mechanism for peel force reduction. Initial
data on one TSP formulation has shown a 75% decrease in peel force after heating
with a heat pack approved for human use. Since these additives are expected to
create new classes of skin-safe heat-releasing adhesive bandages, performance
will be optimized by understanding their temperature-responsive performance
mechanisms during use and preserving functionality during storage/shipping to
choose the best candidates for future products. By comparing three distinctly
different additives, mechanisms of action will be determined by means of
analytical surface analysis, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and peel force
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.