* 2149235
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Sensing of Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances in Water Utilizing a Microelectrode Sensor Array Platform and Machine Learning Enabled Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gang Cheng, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,181.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of “forever chemicals”
that are used in numerous consumer and industrial products including non-stick
cookware, paints, clothes, cleaning products, food packaging, and firefighting
foams. These products are either released to the environment or disposed of in
landfills and, therefore, have the potential to contaminate natural waters and
drinking water sources. Medical studies suggest that exposure to very low levels
of PFAS could result in long-term developmental disabilities in infants,
increased infertility, and risk of cancer. As such, PFAS contamination is an
important environmental problem, and low-cost methods for rapid and reliable
monitoring are necessary. Current PFAS detection methods require expensive
equipment and specialized training to maintain the complicated instrumentation.
The overall objective of this project is to create a low-cost PFAS sensing
method to monitor PFAS contamination in water. This objective will be
accomplished by developing a microelectrode sensor array coupled with machine
learning algorithms to detect a mixture of PFAS in diverse water sources. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development of a low-cost method to monitor PFAS. Additional benefits to society
will be achieved through student education and outreach including the mentoring
of two graduate students at the University of Illinois at Chicago and an
undergraduate student at Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-cost
methods for rapid and reliable monitoring of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) are greatly needed. Current PFAS analysis relies on chromatographic
methods coupled to expensive and bulky mass spectrometric detectors. While these
methods are useful for accurate low-level quantification of PFAS, they are not
mobile, and they require specialized training to maintain the complicated
instrumentation. The overarching objective of this project is to create a
bottom-up framework for the development of mobile, low-cost PFAS sensing
platforms that can be used in-situ and at the point-of-use to monitor PFAS
contamination in water. The proposed framework will be demonstrated through the
development of a functionalized microelectrode sensor array (MESA) platform,
coupled with machine learning algorithms, for the detection and quantification
of a mixture of PFAS with a range of physical properties in diverse water
matrices. The specific research objectives of this project are to: (1)
characterize the fundamental adsorption/desorption mechanisms of PFAS on sorbent
materials using an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance experimental
setup; (2) utilize computational density functional theory calculations to
reveal the specific surface interactions that control PFAS adsorption/desorption
on different sorbent materials; (3) integrate the experimental-computational
results to guide the selection of selective, reversible adsorbents for various
PFAS; and (4) fabricate and test a machine-learning enabled MESA platform for
PFAS detection. The successful completion of this project has potential for
transformative impact through the development of a sensor for the selective
detection of individual compounds within a PFAS mixture with detection limits in
the low ng/L concentration range and reliable performance in varying source
water matrices. Further benefits to society will be accomplished through an
annual summer research experience for undergraduates and by creating a four-week
workshop to introduce machine-learning concepts to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.