* 2149071
* ANT LIA: Collaborative Research: Adaptations of Southern Ocean Diatoms to Manganese Scarcity: Can Physiological Ingenuity Overcome Unfavorable Chemistry?
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Natalie Cohen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 01/31/2026
* USD 224,928.00

The current understanding of what controls productivity in the Southern Ocean is
based mostly on the scarcity of a metal compound needed for algal growth,
Dissolved Iron in seawater. There is growing evidence that Manganese also plays
a critical role in maintaining algal growth and if found in low concentrations
can play a role in limiting primary productivity. As algal growth is a major
player in absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, understanding what
controls productivity increases our understanding of what role the Southern
Ocean plays in the global carbon cycle. This study proposes to study the algal
processes that take up Manganese in Antarctic diatoms, one of the main primary
producers in the region. Another aspect will be to understand how Zinc, a
micronutrient with similar dynamics than Manganese, can inhibit its uptake. The
PIs propose lab experiments with cultured diatoms isolated from the Southern
Ocean to obtain answers to their questions on micronutrient dynamics and will
compare results from those obtained with a diatom species isolated from
temperate waters. The proposed research will benefit NSFâ€™s goals of
understanding life in cold environments and how they differ from other parts of
the ocean. This project will support two first-time early career scientists and
a female researcher in Earth Sciences. Two graduate students will also be
supported, and scientific techniques used in this research will be shared at
open houses sponsored by the academic institutions and with local summer
schools. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal represents collaborative research
to explore manganese (Mn) limitation in Antarctic diatoms by two early career
investigators. Diatoms are central players in the Southern Ocean carbon cycle,
where the micronutrient chemistry is fundamentally different from other oceans.
The Southern Ocean is characterized by widespread low Mn, coupled with high zinc
(Zn). High Zn levels are potentially toxic to diatoms as Zn can competitively
inhibit Mn uptake and metabolism, compromising the ability of building critical
cellular components, thus impacting the biological pump. Using culture
experiments with a matrix of micronutrient treatments (Mn, Zn, Fe) and
irradiances, and using physiological and transcriptomic approaches, along with
biochemical principles, the Principal Investigators will address the central
hypothesis (diatoms from the Southern Ocean possess physiological mechanisms to
low Mn/high Zn) to quantify rates of uptake and transporter binding constants.
The transcriptomics approach will help to identify candidate genes that may
provide Antarctic diatoms physiological mechanisms in low Mn/high Zn
environment. The project does not require fieldwork but instead would make use
of culture experiments with 4 diatom species (3 Antarctic, and 1 temperate). The
proposed approach will also enable the goal of developing biomarker(s) for
assessing Mn stress or Zn toxicity and results from the physiological
experiments will help parameterize models of micronutrient limitation in the
Southern Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.