* 2149327
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Non-isolation and Social Preference
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Yusuf Masatlioglu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 4,138.00

Daily life regularly consists of scenarios where one needs to determine “how
fair” to be to others based on current and previous interactions. Deciding
whether to hold the door open for the next person, let someone merge ahead in
traffic, or take the last crab at a crab feast are all everyday scenarios that
could depend on how fair one has been previously. Multiple rounds of fairness
also occur both experimentally in the lab and naturally in the field in higher
stakes and economically relevant environments. Managers must decide on bonuses
among subordinates (and potentially themselves), and these decisions may or may
not depend on their past bonus decisions. In professional baseball, unwritten
rules dictate when players should “take a pitch” to help the other team, despite
potentially losing hundreds of thousands of dollars in incentives. This project
will examine the features of such dynamic fairness concerns using a laboratory
experiment. In addition to testing dynamic fairness concerns, we also examine
the methodological issue of payment in relevant experimental settings. When
subjects are repeatedly asked questions to provide more data, a common cost-
saving measure in laboratory experiments is to randomly choose one decision
problem for payment. The reliability of this method, while commonly used, is
dependent on a subject’s dynamic fairness concerns. The standard analysis
assumes that there are no dynamics: each choice problem is viewed in isolation.
When the experimenter does not know a subject’s concerns, assuming isolation
could give rise to incorrect conclusions about that subject’s preferences.
Therefore, this project will also investigate payment methodology’s robustness
in terms of experimental design on fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
contributes threefold to the bodies of literature in social preferences under
risk and experimental methodology by using the simplest way to better
understand: (i) how individuals make choices in a specific dynamic fairness
settings, (ii) which theoretical model(s) of social preference under risk best
represent actual data, and (iii) how much of a role isolation plays in social
preference experiments. This project will experimentally test the presence of
non-isolation in a two-round experiment using the aforementioned “random problem
selection” (RPS) payment mechanism. Each round will be a binary outcome dictator
game, where a subject will choose one of two options to split a share of money
between themselves and another anonymous subject. In particular, this experiment
asks whether having previously chosen a fair (resp. unfair) alternative outcome
creates a tendency to choose an unfair (resp. fair) outcome for the next round.
This type of dynamic response is labeled a “choice reversal”, and it identifies
non-isolation. However, the dynamic nature of the experiment inevitably induces
selection bias. To overcome this challenge, the experiment uses a procedure with
possible early resolution of the RPS scheme, which can shut down the effect of
RPS in later choice while inducing subject’s choice under RPS for earlier
choice. Therefore, the subject's choice in later rounds will not be affected
probabilistically from their earlier round choice, which can then be compared to
the control group. Note that non-isolation and reversals are two separate
concepts: subjects who do not isolate the problem do not necessarily give rise
to reversals. Therefore, the focus will be to jointly test the existence of non-
isolation and reversal behavior. Simultaneously, the parameters of the
experiment are chosen to distinguish between three classes of models of social
preferences under risk. Dynamic fairness concerns are important factors in
economically-relevant individual decision-making problems and their respective
welfare analyses. This research's fundamental contributions to understanding
these concerns will advise both applied and theoretical economists on
appropriate model selection. For the experimental economist, this research will
provide insight into the applicability of the common RPS payment mechanism in
such dynamic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.