* 2149173
* Collaborative Research: Revealing essential regulatory proteins in tardigrade cryptobiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Derrick Kolling, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 03/31/2025
* USD 366,624.00

Tardigrades (water bears) are eight-legged, microscopic invertebrates renowned
for their ability to survive extreme stress. The hallmark of this survival is
their unique ability to form a ‘tun,’ a survival state achieved through
withdrawing of limbs, expelling internal water stores, and significantly
decreasing metabolism. Tardigrades can remain in this state for years while
remaining relatively undamaged, emerging only when the external threat has been
removed. However, how this survival is regulated is largely unknown. The
investigators' work has revealed a dependence of tardigrade survival on the
presence of highly reactive oxygen-containing chemicals, small cellular
messengers present in all living systems. These chemicals are essential
signaling molecules that alter metabolic activity through the modification of
proteins within the cell. The multidisciplinary team of scientists from the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Marshall University can track
these signals and affected biological compounds within tardigrades through
powerful analytical and biochemical methods. The investigator team will combine
these approaches to comprehensively map the entrance and emergence of tardigrade
into and from tun across unique stresses allowing them to determine the precise
adaptations that enable extreme stress tolerance. This work is integral to
understanding molecular strategies for extreme stress tolerance within cells
that can be applied to understand stress across life on earth. The collaborative
teams will create sister courses on their campus, working across institutions to
characterize different tardigrade proteins. In addition, students will be
engaged in undergraduate research and gain experience in protein chemistry,
computational modeling, and scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tardigrades (water bears) are cosmopolitan
microscopic invertebrates that respond quickly to environmental stressors using
ingenious modes of extremotolerance collectively known as cryptobiosis.
Understanding the regulatory processes governing tardigrade cryptobiosis is
essential to revealing the molecular strategies that preserve biochemical
pathways when exposed to extreme stress. While cryptobiosis is prevalent across
taxa, there exists only a nascent understanding of the molecular mechanisms and
to what extent different types are interconnected. We are far from a
comprehensive understanding of the biochemical participants, the coordination
among diverse networks, or of the interplay between stress and survival. A
multi-disciplinary team will combine their expertise in proteomics and reactive
oxygen species monitoring with the aim of elucidating the redox-dependence of
tardigrade extremotolerance. They will characterize tardigrade survival on both
a physiological and proteomic level, enabling enhanced understanding of the
molecular mechanisms through which tardigrades survive various hostile
environments. Project outcomes include: a) the identification and
characterization of essential redox-modified proteins required for cryptobiosis
induction; b) the mapping of redox signaling across distinct cryptobioses; and
c) the identification of key regulatory points in the tardigrade ‘cryptobiome’.
This work will generate the most comprehensive biomolecular framework for
cryptobiosis, to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.