* 2149122
* Quantitative Molecular Dynamics of Extremophile Metalloproteins -- Combining Experiment and Computation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Stephen Cramer, SETI Institute
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 801,972.00

This is a collaborative research project between the SETI Institute, San Jose
State University, PCOM Georgia, and Georgetown University to study proteins from
‘extremophiles’. These are organisms that can thrive in extreme environments,
such as low temperature (&lt;0°C, ‘psychrophiles’), high temperature (&gt;100°C,
‘hyperthermophiles’), or high pressure (&gt;1100 atm, ‘piezophiles’), as well as
other extremes of pH, salt concentration, and radiation. Understanding how
living things can flourish under extreme conditions is important for guiding the
search for life elsewhere in the universe. It also has many practical
applications, since the enzymes from these microorganisms, ‘extremozymes’, are
extraordinarily useful. Their stability under extreme conditions has enabled
numerous applications, such as enzymes included in cold-water ‘biodetergents’,
high temperature ‘bio-pulping’ enzymes for more eco-friendly paper-processing,
and high-pressure enzymes for food processing. Despite their numerous
applications, the factors that lead to extremozyme stability are still not
completely understood. Some theories propose that the molecular motion within
these proteins determines the ranges of stability and activity. However, there
is not enough good quantitative information about extremozyme motion under
different conditions. For this project, proteins from various extremophiles will
be produced by undergraduates at San Jose State and PCOM Georgia. The motion in
these proteins will be measured by SETI scientists using novel x-ray techniques.
The results will be tested against theoretical calculations by graduate students
at Georgetown University. Underrepresented high school and undergraduate
students from local schools will be involved in field trips and summer research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is undertaken to gain experimental
data on atomic motion in proteins from psychrophiles to hyperthermophiles and
from mesophiles to obligate piezophiles, under a range of temperatures and
pressures. Experiments performed by using nuclear resonance vibrational
spectroscopy (NRVS) will provide information on motion of Fe atoms at the active
sites of rubredoxin and cytochrome P450 and Te atoms in the middle or on the
periphery of the target proteins. X-ray diffraction and nuclear resonant time
domain interferometry (NR-TDI) will quantify motion in polypeptide helices and
loops of these proteins. The data will test two hypotheses concerning protein
dynamics. The project will specifically look for ‘protein glass transitions’,
which are proposed Temperature-dependent changes in protein flexibility over the
range of 180-220 K. The project will also test the ‘corresponding states’
paradigm, which says that proteins in an extremophile have been adapted to
maintain equivalent flexibility under the different environmental conditions
favored for each organism. Finally, the project is aimed to determine the best
combination of force fields and water models for molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations to reproduce and interpret the experimental data collected for a set
of proteins. This research is expected to expand the knowledge of molecular
motion in extremophile proteins and the fundamental factors that contribute to
life under extreme conditions. This project was funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.