* 2149433
* Crustal Evolution and Recycling in a Long-Lived Transcrustal Magma System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrew Barth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 274,138.00

Volcanoes formed at boundaries between colliding tectonic plates are important
recorders of large-scale heat and magma transfer from Earth’s interior to it’s
surface. Long-term changes in these tectonic plate processes are recorded by the
evolution in composition and behavior of magmas through time. A better
understanding of these processes can be achieved in areas where magma systems
beneath the volcanoes have been uplifted and exposed to study on the Earth’s
surface. This study will focus on long-term magma evolutionary relationships and
links to tectonic processes by comparing rock products of magmatic episodes
exposed in the Transverse Ranges of California. This area is remarkable because
subsequent tectonic tilting and erosion have exposed on Earth’s surface magmatic
rocks that formed over a range of depths within a very long-lived magma system.
Comparison of rock and mineral chemistry in a variety of samples will allow
researchers to create a detailed timeline of magma evolution over a range of
depths within this plate boundary magma system. As an important part of the
project, undergraduate geoscience students will engage in qualitative and
quantitative analysis of field and laboratory data that will supplement their
course work and provide authentic research experiences. The impact of this
project will be broadened by engaging cohorts of geoscience students in a tiered
sequence of quantitative research experiences. The goal of this work with
student cohorts is to use a set of high impact practices to improve the year
over year retention rate of geoscience students. The tiered set of authentic
research experiences will help to build a supportive environment that will
encourage persistence and will contribute to broadening of underrepresented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolution of long-lived
transcrustal magma systems and the role of crust recycling is a fundamental
component of understanding the dynamic evolution of continental arcs. In this
project researchers and students will document diverse styles of magma
emplacement and pluton assembly as a function of age and paleodepth in the
tilted and exhumed Transverse Ranges segment of the California continental arc.
The goal of the study is to expand upon the existing model for the architecture
of the prototypical continental arc, to reflect observed processes of crustal
evolution and recycling in a long-lived and pulsed arc built within much older,
stratified continental crust. Whole rocks and zircon grains will yield evidence
of long-term arc evolution that will complement the existing continental arc
model based on single pulse, high flux arc growth. Whole rock and zircon trace
element data collected as a function of paleodepth, age and pluton assembly rate
will be used to describe the diversity of crustal magma sources and the dynamics
of crust recycling in this continental arc magma system. Premagmatic zircons in
particular will supplement whole rock data because Pb/U and trace element
analyses of diverse populations provide coupled age and mineralogic records of
crustal magma provenance and evolution over the life cycle of this continental
arc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.