* 2149868
* REU Site: Undergraduate Bioinformatics Research in Data Science for Genomics
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Mihai Pop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 439,615.00

Following the genome revolution, bioinformatics has arisen as an essential field
of research. There is a critical need for scientists with interdisciplinary
training to process and analyze large scale genomic datasets. This new REU Site
establishes a program called BRIDGE (Bioinformatics Research In Data science for
Genomics) that exposes students to research within bioinformatics and
computational biology. Ten students will receive training and mentorship for ten
weeks each summer and will be jointly advised by members of the UMD Center for
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (CBCB).&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this
experience, students will work in pairs to learn about a research problem,
propose a plan to tackle a specific research question, and implement their plan.
With the guidance of experienced mentors, undergraduate students will research
real world problems in cutting-edge areas of bioinformatics, including
metagenomics, machine learning, single-cell RNA sequencing, parallel computing,
and phylogenomics. Students will address novel problems with unknown answers. By
the end of the summer, each team will produce a paper and give an oral
presentation on their project. Students' findings will advance knowledge and
understanding of the field.&lt;br/&gt;BRIDGE aims to build a diverse cohort of
exceptional undergraduates from across the country and provide research
opportunities for women, underrepresented minorities, and non-traditional
students. In order to build a solid foundation in bioinformatics and
computational biology, students will take a week-long intensive course and
attend seminars and panel discussions on various professional development
topics. BRIDGE will provide students with a valuable, enjoyable research
experience that will encourage them to pursue interdisciplinary graduate studies
and eventually expand and diversify the biomedical research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.