* 2149766
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: RUI: Applied Cryptographic Protocols with Provably-Secure Foundations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ewa Syta, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 317,909.00

Cryptographic protocols have become an essential facilitator for the Internet
and its many applications, supporting the needs of modern society. It is hard to
imagine the Internet without the extensive use of applied cryptographic
protocols, e.g., protocols used to secure web and email. Such protocols use and
depend on the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), which is also key to the security
of other open systems such as mobile networks, Internet of Things, and
blockchains. PKI provides a critical security infrastructure to achieve
confidentiality, authentication, integrity and non-repudiation. However, there
have been many attacks exploiting vulnerabilities of the PKI itself; PKI, in
contrast to other well-known cryptographic protocols, has no security proofs or
even precise definitions of security goals. As a result, systems utilizing PKI
may be vulnerable. The proposed research will define security goals for PKI
schemes, present PKI schemes which provably meet these goals, and present
practical and efficient implementations of PKI schemes. This research will also
develop the necessary theoretical tools to define security goals of
cryptographic protocols and to analyze their security. The outcomes of this
research will have broad benefits. Developers will benefit from the availability
of open-source, provably secure PKI systems, enabling security for real-world
applications. End-users will benefit from improved security guarantees and
privacy. Given the global role of the Internet, society at large will benefit
from a strengthened, advanced security infrastructure and PKI ecosystem and from
educational efforts which will raise awareness of the importance of these
topics. Furthermore, this research will support the development of a diverse
cohort of graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Connecticut
and Trinity College through increased research opportunities, education, and
mentoring and outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research efforts of this
project, the results of which will significantly impact the theoretical and
practical aspects of developing and deploying cryptographic protocols, are
organized in three main areas: 1) Advancement of PKI theory: to define a
comprehensive set of formal PKI requirements, and to design and analyze schemes
to produce provably secure PKI schemes; 2) Development of PKI systems with
improved security guarantees: to design, develop, and standardize provably
secure PKI designs that are practical and appropriate for real-world
applications; 3) Development of a framework and tools to facilitate provable
security for applied cryptographic protocols under realistic models: to build a
comprehensive framework that supports composability and formal verification
tools for rigorous specification and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.