* 2149450
* NSF-BSF: Willingness to Vaccinate Against COVID-19: Psychological Mechanisms and Ways to Increase Responsiveness
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 172,815.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has claimed the lives of over 4 million people worldwide,
and over 190 million people have been affected in varying degrees of severity.
The vaccine against the coronavirus has dramatically reduced the number of
infected people, saving the lives of millions. However, although the vaccine has
been proved to be highly effective, and its safety profile is satisfactory, in
most countries there is still a relatively large percentage of people who are
opposed, who endanger the entire population in their country as well as
worldwide. Since COVID-19 continues to pose a threat to humans, it is essential
to understand what causes this resistance and to find ways to increase
vaccination rates. This research relies on previous works on terror management
theory, as well as on insights from recent work on people's willingness to
donate organs after death, to suggest psychological mechanisms that may explain
people’s resistance to the vaccine, and to offer effective interventions to
increase vaccination rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the necessity of getting
more people vaccinated, understanding the reasons behind peoples’ negative
attitudes towards Covid vaccines and their reluctance to be vaccinated is of
great importance. This research analyzes the multiple factors that may influence
people’s attitudes toward the coronavirus and their decisions to be vaccinated
against COVID-19 or not. The study entails 11 experiments reflecting two
research directions: The first (Part I) examines the influence of different
descriptions of COVID-19 on people’s attitudes and willingness to be vaccinated.
Manipulations to increase thoughts of life saving (rather than death) may
override defense mechanisms that might create negative attitudes toward the
vaccine, thus increasing willingness to vaccinate. Additional studies manipulate
the status quo (making the decision not to vaccinate a deviation from the
default) and examine the effect on risk perceptions and on increasing
willingness to vaccinate. Part II of the studies focus on individual differences
in fears and beliefs that are hypothesized to play a major role in people’s
decisions about vaccination, including the fear of death, religious beliefs,
belief in a just world and belief in tempting fate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and the U.S.-Israel Bi-national Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.