* 2149483
* CEDAR: Characteristics of Front Like Structures in Polar Mesospheric Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Brentha Thurairajah, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 04/30/2025
* USD 363,521.00

The award to Virginia PolyTechnic Institute and University will support a study
of satellite imaging data with emphasis upon polar mesosphere cloud forms. This
study would evaluate statistically the dynamical properties of this region. The
mesosphere is a region that couples the atmosphere from the ground to geospace
and is populated with dynamical wave structures. Imaging the polar summer
mesosphere with a satellite platform provides rich visual clues to the dynamic
processes that control this region and contribute to the formation of Polar
Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) which typically occur in the high-latitude (&gt;60°N)
summer mesosphere at the edge of space (~82-86 km). Previous study of these
images found complex spatial structures (veils, bands, vortex, voids etc.) that
have been taken to be signatures of atmospheric gravity waves (GWs), turbulence,
or the manifestation of the Kelvin Helmholtz instability. The study supported by
this award would use the extensive NASA/AIM database (15 seasons) of cloud
images combined with coincident background meteorology (temperature, water
vapor) and model simulations to develop a statistical quantification of the
various forms detected. This study would focus on the ‘front’ like structure
often seen in PMCs, which is a solitary wave or a sharp step-like boundary that
separates a mesospheric cloud and no cloud regions. While previous work on
mesospheric fronts have been case studies, this study aims to provide a
comprehensive statistical study on the characteristics of these unique cloud
forms. This work would support a female scientist thus improving gender
diversity in the aeronomy community. This work would also support a graduate
student who is expected to learn valuable skills and training that would help
the entrance of that person into a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the dynamics of the mesosphere is
inherently complicated, a comprehensive statistical study of the global
characteristics of PMC fronts will advance the understanding of the atmospheric
processes that control the summer high-latitude mesosphere. A ray-tracing of
gravity wave propagation combined with the study of the mesosphere coupling with
the troposphere would provide information about potential summer mesospheric GW
sources that would help improve global climate models that incorporate a
representation of gravity wave behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.