* 2149585
* Dexterous Magnetic Manipulation of Non-Magnetic Objects with Stationary Electromagnetic Dipole-Field Sources
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2025
* USD 562,285.00

Methods that have been developed for non-contact magnetic manipulation of
objects have typically assumed that those objects comprise a large fraction of
ferromagnetic material. Many engineered devices contain no magnetic material but
do contain electrically conductive material. This award will support research on
dexterous six degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) manipulation of non-magnetic, but
electrically conductive materials using stationary electromagnetic field
sources. Preliminary results indicate that eddy current-induced forces and
torques produced in the objects by the magnetic fields can be used to achieve
this objective, paving way for an entirely new class of robotic manipulation
opportunity. The knowledge gained in this research has the potential to
contribute a solution to a major problem facing humanity: orbital space debris.
Most space debris is made of aluminum: a conductive but non-magnetic material.
There is a dire need for remediation strategies to remove debris already in
orbit and to repair or remove human-made objects before they become new debris,
to protect the fast-growing number of satellites that the worldâ€™s population has
grown to rely on. This award will also support training and mentorship of
graduate students, inclusion of undergraduate students in research, and outreach
to K-12 students through university programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to test the conjecture that physical modeling and robot-
learning techniques can be combined to improve manipulation of conductive non-
magnetic objects for which a model exists, and enable manipulation of objects
with no prior model, using multiple stationary electromagnetic rotating-dipole-
field sources that partially surround the object. The investigation will explore
the optimal manipulation of conductive objects for which a model of eddy
current-induced force-torque already exists. It will also elucidate a
generalized model for eddy current-induced force-torque on conductive spheres of
varying size, wall thickness, and material to serve as a first-order
approximation for other conductive object geometries. The scope also includes
examination of cases where the system lacks a model of the target object and
must acquire one online from sensor observations. Finally, experimental
validation of the concepts will be performed with the development of a 6-DOF
neutral-buoyancy water-based microgravity simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.