* 2149607
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Disinformation Detection and Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jian Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 324,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site project will engage motivated
students in the rapidly growing research area of disinformation detection and
analytics. With its focus on identifying disinformation, this program will
broaden the views of the students, providing them with a holistic and in-depth
understanding of disinformation and its viral spread across the Web. They will
leverage knowledge and skills learned to discern and debunk disinformation,
which could aid their families, friends, and social media contacts and
eventually help prevent disinformation from spreading. Their knowledge and
skills will not only prepare students for disinformation-related jobs in
research or industry, it will encourage them to pursue graduate study and
research in general. This program will also contribute to the development of a
diverse, globally competitive workforce by providing research and education
opportunities to an economically diverse group of students, including female,
underrepresented minorities, first-generation college students, and those from
undergraduate institutions who may not have previous exposure to research or
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Students participating in the REU Site
project will learn: (1) The concept of disinformation, its types, examples, and
active research topics, (2) Mainstream computational methods to detect
disinformation on social media, including how to access, clean, preprocess, and
visualize data and how to build analytical and predictive models using open
source programming tools, (3) Important metrics to evaluate research results,
compare baseline models, and produce preliminary results for publication quality
research products, and (4) Essential research skills including brainstorming
discussion, programming experiments, forensics, trial-and-error, technical
writing, and research presentation. Students will conduct hands-on research on
topics of their own choosing that fit within faculty members' existing broad
disinformation research programs. The goal of this REU Site is to engage
participating students in real-world projects studying disinformation from the
perspectives of data analytics, information retrieval, applied machine learning,
web archiving, and social computing. The participants will learn essential
knowledge and skills to support future careers, whether research or application
oriented. Co-funding for this project is being provided by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program and the Cybercorps/Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program in recognition of the alignment of this project with the goals of
these two programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.