* 2149995
* Collaborative Research: AGEP FC-PAM: Project ELEVATE (Equity-focused Launch to Empower and Value AGEP Faculty to Thrive in Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* William Sanders, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2027
* USD 542,541.00

Carnegie Mellon University, Johns Hopkins University, and New York University
will work as an Alliance team to develop a model to promote the equitable
advancement of early career tenure-stream engineering faculty from
underrepresented groups in STEM (African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American
Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders).
Faculty who belong to these populations will be referred to as AGEP faculty in
the context of the AGEP program. The goal of this AGEP Faculty Career Pathways
Alliance Model (FCPAM) is to develop, implement, self-study, and
institutionalize a career pathway model, that can be adapted for use at other
similar institutions, for advancing early career STEM faculty from these
populations of interest to the AGEP program. This AGEP FCPAM will provide a
framework for institutional change at private, highly selective research
institutions that will enable all faculty to be members of a collaborative
community. Improving the experience of these faculty can lead to increased
diversity in the engineering faculty and ultimately result in graduating more
STEM students from diverse populations and increasing diversity in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving equity and inclusion is critical to
advancing STEM faculty, educating Americaâ€™s future STEM workforce, fostering
individual opportunity, and contributing to a thriving U.S. economy. The NSF
AGEP program, therefore, funds grants that advance and enhance the systemic
factors that support equity and inclusion and, consequently, mitigate the
systemic inequities in the academic profession and workplace. FCPAM awards are
intended to support the development, implementation, evaluation, and
institutionalization of Alliance models that will advance AGEP faculty, within
similar institutions of higher education. FCPAM collaborators also study how
socio-cultural, economic, structural, leadership and institutional variables
affect the formation of the FCPAM, and the strategies or interventions the
collaborators implement to advance AGEP faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Alliance interventions will focus on three major areas, 1) equity-focused
institutional change designed to make structural changes that support the
advancement of AGEP faculty, 2) developing and sustaining an infrastructure that
facilitates impactful mentorship of AGEP junior faculty in support of career
advancement, 3) inclusive professional development that equips all engineering
faculty and institutional leaders with skills to implement inclusive practices
and to support career advancement. Evidence-based practices from the Women in
Engineering ProActive Network and the NSF INCLUDES ASPIRE Alliance's Inclusive
Professional Framework, will be foundational for this AGEP FCPAM's activities.
An internal evaluator will lead the self-study and formative assessment which
will advance knowledge concerning the institutional barriers that negatively
impact the advancement of AGEP faculty in academic STEM careers. Attention will
be given to the role cultural and intersectional identities play in the success
of AGEP faculty. An external evaluator will provide a summative assessment using
a culturally responsive framework to assess the implementation of project
activities and the development of the Alliance model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.