* 2149964
* PlantSynBio/TR-Tech-PGR: Targeted Integration of User-Defined DNA in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Xuemin Wang, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 2,379,217.00

The placement of new DNA into plant genomes is both inefficient and imprecise.
This inefficiency hampers all approaches to develop new and enhance existing
agricultural traits in crops. New technology such as CRISPR/Cas9 nucleases act
like molecular “scissors” to cut DNA at specific locations in the genome,
improving the precision of plant genome engineering. However, after cutting the
DNA, the precise addition of new DNA has remained a grand challenge. This
project identifies the missing counterpart to the molecular “scissors”--the
molecular “glue” needed to precisely add DNA at sites cleaved by Cas9. Project
aims include developing the precise addition of DNA into crop genomes, as well
as test how this new genome engineering technology can be used to quickly make a
single gene or entire plant stress-responsive. This project will also test key
rules governing this system of targeted DNA addition, such as the size and type
of the DNA that can be introduced. This enabling technology has the potential to
transform the engineering of plant genomes for both research and industry.
Lastly, this project will excite middle school students in STEM careers and
educate undergraduate students that have not yet had other research experience
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this award is the
production of a usable and accessible toolkit of technology that enables future
plant synthetic biology approaches to introduce new abilities into key
agricultural plants. First, this project aims to target the integration of new
DNA into the genome of the discovery plant Arabidopsis thaliana and crop plants
maize and soybean. Second, this project aims to explore the types and
limitations of the synthetic cargo DNA that can be delivered to specific regions
of the genome. These include the delivery of engineered expression cassettes,
inserting epitope tags in-frame with protein-coding genes, and adding new
enhancer elements upstream of gene coding regions. Third, this project aims to
demonstrate how this system of targeted DNA integration can be used to rewire
the transcriptional response and engineer the plant phenotype to overcome
environmental stress on either a single gene level or for the entire genome.
Lastly, this project aims to adapt the “Anyone Can Be A Scientist” outreach
program to the COVID and post-COVID eras and develop a course-based
undergraduate research experience based on one of the scientific aims to provide
students with their first hands-on authentic biological research experience. All
project outcomes including genetic and molecular resources will be made
available upon request and through long-term
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.