* 2149680
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Methods and Tools for Effective, Auditable, and Interpretable Online Ad Transparency
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Blase Ur, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 314,522.00

Targeted online advertising is ubiquitous. Search engines and online social
networks provide powerful targeting technologies for advertisers to deliver
their messages to specific end users. These technologies help users see more
relevant ads, yet raise privacy concerns. Targeted ads impact people's lives in
a variety of ways, such as what employment, housing, and credit opportunities
they may encounter. Platforms have recently started making transparent to
researchers and end-users more data about advertisements. Despite these efforts,
initial studies have found significant shortcomings in current transparency
mechanisms, necessitating improved methodologies. This project seeks to better
understand current transparency mechanisms, develop new methods for collecting
transparency data, and design new mechanisms that make transparency more useful
to researchers, journalists, civil-society groups, and end-users, ultimately
increasing end users' trust in targeted advertising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has three key tasks. First, the researchers are mapping the current
space of advertising transparency, developing a taxonomy of transparency
mechanisms, and conducting user studies to evaluate these mechanisms' utility
both for end-users and third-party auditors. Second, transparency is currently
implemented very differently by various social media platforms, and the data
made available are often not directly suitable for large-scale empirical
research. The researchers are developing methodologies to layer additional data
on top of platforms' sources of transparency data to extend transparency and
standardize data across platforms. Third, the researchers are applying user-
centered design practices to develop and evaluate a suite of new ad transparency
mechanisms and user interfaces designed for multiple stakeholders: end-users,
civil-society groups, and journalists. This project will train students with
expertise in security, data science, and human-computer interaction, areas of
broad national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.