* 2149406
* DDRIG in DRMS: Lay Understanding of Vaccine Efficacy
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Gretchen Chapman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 22,545.00

Efficacy rates for COVID-19 vaccines have received major attention in scientific
journal articles and news media outlets. Further, many sources emphasize the
high efficacy rates for the three vaccines with FDA or FDA EUA status in the
United States. For example, the mRNA-based Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine boasts an
efficacy rate of 95% against the original strain of the COVID-19 virus, meaning
that over the duration of a 3-month period in which 1% of the population without
the vaccine contracted COVID-19, we could expect about 0.05% of vaccinated
people to contract COVID-19 (95% lower). However, many lay people may not
understand how vaccine efficacy rates are computed, and the 95% efficacy rate
could be misunderstood to mean that 95% of vaccinated people will be protected
from disease, implying that 5% of vaccinated people will become diseased with
COVID-19. This project examines how lay people (such as patients) use health-
related numerical information, sheds light on the basic cognitive processes
underlying misuse of vaccine efficacy numbers and speaks to the broader question
of how to present numerical health information in a way that lay people can
understand and effectively use. The research identifies the degree to which
different facets of cognitive processing (e.g., knowing how to use the
mathematical formula, understanding the concept of relative risk reduction, and
engaging in deliberation or comparison processes) act as facilitators to
providing the normative response. Findings from the proposed research have the
potential to foster informed medical decision making and patient agency.
Understanding how lay people understand vaccine efficacy is highly relevant
during the COVID-19 pandemic when conversations about vaccine efficacy receive
increased attention and interest from patients. Given the strong association
between perceived vaccine efficacy and vaccination intention, it is critical to
identify and correct misconceptions in patients’ understanding of vaccine
efficacy statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic prompted
widespread discussion of efficacy rates for COVID-19 vaccines in scientific
journal articles and news media outlets, but little is known about how well lay
people understand vaccine efficacy, which entails a fairly sophisticated
mathematical calculation. This research tests the prediction that lay people are
lured by a plausible and computationally simple but incorrect calculation: post-
vaccination risk of infection = 1 - efficacy. For example, the lure response
would be that after receiving a 95% effective vaccine a person has a 5% risk of
getting infected. Previous medical decision-making research demonstrates that
patients, especially those low in numeracy, often have difficulty understanding
numerical information, which has a consequential impact on their health
decisions and health outcomes. Moreover, prior cognition research provides
evidence of quick, intuitive responses that may be analogous to the lure
response in the vaccine efficacy context. This series of studies investigates
the extent to which laypeople improperly interpret efficacy and whether this
misunderstanding is associated with individual characteristics such as numeracy,
cognitive reflection, and scientific literacy. First, hypothetical scenario
experiments are employed to better understand how lay people utilize information
about vaccine efficacy. Scenarios that vary information about fictitious
vaccines illuminate the extent to which lay people improperly understand
efficacy (for example, by answering that a vaccine that is 95% effective means
that 5% of vaccinated people will get infected). Additional studies test a
tutorial designed to improve viewers’ conceptual understanding of vaccine
efficacy. Two versions of the tutorial differ in their emphasis on the
mathematical formula vs. the concept of relative risk reduction, enabling a test
of which of these facets is the major barrier to normative responses. Final
studies examine a debiasing method that prompts participants to make an implicit
comparison of disease risk between untreated and treated groups, testing the
hypothesis that misunderstandings about vaccine efficacy stem from a failure to
consider a comparison between a placebo group and a vaccinated
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.