* 2149446
* Experimental Evidence on Intergenerational Transmission of Economic Status
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Edward Miguel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2025
* USD 631,767.00

The persistence of health disparities and poverty is a major global economic
policy issue. Despite this, relatively little is known about the
intergenerational transmission of economic status and human capital, in part due
to limited data. This study will provide causal evidence of the long-term and
intergenerational impacts of child health interventions, assessing whether a
health and human capital intervention has the potential to improve recipients’
adult socioeconomic status as well as life outcomes of their children. In
addition, the research will use the rich longitudinal survey data collected for
the project to study potential mechanisms through which adult life changes may
translate into intergenerational impacts, and whether these effects differ by
gender or socioeconomic status. The results of this research have important
implications for public policy design regarding approaches to promote
intergenerational mobility and reduce persistent economic inequalities. The
results could also inform policies to reduce wealth inequalities across
socioeconomic groups over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes both
experimental and non-experimental variation to examine the long-term and
intergenerational returns to child health investments, by combining randomized
interventions with a 26-year longitudinal dataset containing detailed
information on both program participants and their children. This project
extends data collection of a school-based deworming intervention and a
randomized cash grants intervention for 6,500 program participants (who were
aged 8-15 in 1998), to create a novel intergenerational panel dataset. Using
this dataset, the research will study the potential mechanisms driving the
intergenerational transmission of economic status, including human capital,
economic preferences, and attitudes, living standards and economic status, and
parental investment decisions. Understanding these intergenerational drivers of
child well-being has important implications for public policies to assist
marginalized individuals in escaping poverty and improving health in both the US
and internationally. The results have important implications for public policy
design regarding approaches to promote intergenerational mobility and reduce
persistent economic inequalities. The results could also inform policies to
reduce wealth inequalities across socioeconomic groups over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.