* 2149092
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biometric Identification Technologies and the Citizenship Document Validation Process
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Leo Chavez, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 26,284.00

In the context of heightened security measures aimed at updating state
identification technologies, thousands of U.S. citizens have been asked to prove
the validity of their birth. This doctoral dissertation project aims to
understand how efforts to update biometric security systems impact the lives of
citizens, particularly those living in regions where they frequently must rely
on document technology to prove their identity. In addition to furthering the
social scientific training of a graduate student in anthropology, this project
will generate policy briefs, interactive discussion sessions, a short
documentary, and other multimodal work to help inform the public and policy
makers about the impact of new forms of biometric technology and governance.
This project also broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through online research, FOIA requests, and semi-
structured interviews with state officials, this project investigates what
socio-political processes have accelerated new forms of biometric security.
Fieldwork includes observational methods at U.S. District Court hearings and
participant observation with citizens as they navigate state bureaucracies to
establish the veracity of their documents. Other methods include semi-structured
interviews with attorneys, judges, advocates and other officials, as well as
document, court, and transcript analysis. This research will contribute to an
understanding of how new modes of biometric technology and document surveillance
help to produce new forms of identity precarity. The research will further
theoretical debates concerning the role of documents, technology, and governance
in shaping membership boundaries, with an emphasis on understanding what role
biopolitical processes such as bureaucratization and surveillance have in social
scientific understandings of citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.