* 2149080
* Towards a theory of the abyssal circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Joern Callies, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 01/31/2025
* USD 326,726.00

A revised picture is emerging of the deepest portion of the ocean's circulation.
The mixing required to lighten dense bottom waters and that allows them to rise
to mid-depth is strongly enhanced over rough topography. This project will work
toward a dynamical theory that captures the interplay between the boundary
transformations and interior flows and stratification. This work is important
because the abyssal ocean has the capacity to store vast amounts of heat and
carbon. A more complete understanding of what dynamical processes shape its
circulation will help climate models capture its behavior and role in a changing
climate. A pivotal role has been ascribed to the abyss in explaining the
drawdown of atmospheric carbon dioxide during ice ages. Deeper insight into the
dynamics of the abyssal circulation will also help understand better how it may
have been different during these and other periods of Earth's
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will build a hierarchy of
dynamical models of the response of the abyssal circulation to bottom-
intensified mixing on slopes with a focus on the two-way interaction between
boundary layers on topographic slopes and the interior of the abyss. This
interaction will be expressed explicitly using boundary layer theory. The
approach will start with the local one-dimensional dynamics on slopes, then
consider their coupling to the large-scale context in simple two-dimensional
examples, and subsequently extend to idealized and increasingly realistic three-
dimensional setups. This will connect recent work on bottom-intensified mixing
on slopes to scaling theories for the abyssal overturning that are based on
ocean basins with a flat bottom and vertical sidewalls. These dynamics will be
explored using a planetary geostrophic model, whose reduced dynamics allow for
direct dynamical insight and controlled numerical solutions that resolve all
features, including the all-important boundary layers on topographic
slopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.