* 2149747
* Collaborative Research: ANSWERS: Prediction of Geoeffective Solar Eruptions,  Geomagnetic Indices, and Thermospheric Density Using Machine Learning Methods
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Xiaoli Bai, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2025
* USD 539,988.00

Understanding and predicting eruptions on the Sun and their terrestrial impacts
are a research as well as strategic national priority, as such space weather
affects our electronic communication, electric power supply, satellite
infrastructure, national defense, and more. This project is a collaboration
among Rutgers University, New Jersey Institute of Technology, West Virginia
University, and Montclair State University that will improve our ability to
predict several linked space weather components: geoeffective solar eruptions,
the global magnetic response of Earth to these eruptions, as well as variation
of neutral density in the Earth’s thermosphere and its effect on satellite drag.
The work covers many aspects of geospace science, solar physics, and data
science including machine learning. The innovative machine learning tools
developed from the project will be applicable for analyzing disparate data sets
in astronomy and other areas of science. Faculty members, early career
researchers including a postdoctoral fellow and graduate students will
collaborate on the project, creating a multidisciplinary training program for
future generations of scientists. The project will emphasize diversity and the
participation of underrepresented minorities through both the research efforts
and education activities such as K-12 teacher
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two key science questions are: What are the
physical mechanisms for the onset of geoeffective solar eruptions? And what are
the effects of solar eruptions on neutral density in the thermosphere?
Specifically, the project will create synthetic vector magnetograms using
ground- and space-based data for solar cycles 23 and 24; develop machine
learning (ML) tools to predict solar flares and associated geoeffective coronal
mass ejections (CMEs) based on magnetogram parameters; predict geomagnetic
indices from derived magnetic properties of solar active regions and CMEs, solar
wind parameters and solar images; and predict neutral density in the
thermosphere using ML approaches that integrate satellite data, observed and
predicted geomagnetic indices, and empirical neutral density models. Most of the
funding will be used to support three graduate students (one at WVU and two at
NJIT) and a postdoc at Rutgers. K-12 teacher workshops will be organized by
Montclair State University. ANSWERS projects advance the nation’s STEM expertise
and societal resilience to space weather hazards by filling key knowledge gaps
regarding the coupled Sun-Earth system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.