* 2149667
* REU Site: Lowering the Carbon Footprint through Research in Propulsion  and Power Generation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Karen Thole, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 447,853.00

The Penn State Center for Gas Turbine for Research, Education, and Outreach
(GTREO) will provide 10 REU students with a unique and enriching experience that
encompasses research, professional development, and networking. Gas turbines are
used to generate power for electricity and create propulsion for flight.
Improving the efficiency of gas turbines is a critical path towards lowering
global carbon emissions and can be achieved through novel research tools.
Educating students through first-hand research experiences using these tools is
essential to advance the field and reduce the CO2 in our environment. A diverse
student cohort from a range of schools, including an established network of
undergraduate-only and minority-serving institutions, will spend 10 weeks in a
range of research-related activities (i.e., lab and facility tours, industry
workshops, and a research symposium). Students will also participate in
workshops on technical communication, applying for jobs in the industry or
graduate school, and fellowship applications to provide them the skills to
transfer their research experiences to career outcomes. Mentoring from faculty,
near-peer graduate students, and industry professionals will provide REU
students with a strong support network both during and after the summer
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State Center for Gas Turbine for
Research, Education, and Outreach (GTREO) REU Site will provide 10 REU students
with a unique and enriching experience that encompasses research, professional
development, and networking. Students will engage in selected research in areas
such as fluid mechanics, material science, heat transfer, manufacturing,
combustion, sensor development, acoustics, and high-performance computations.
Proposed projects include high-impact topics like additive manufacturing using
Inconel 718, control of combustion instability using reinforcement learning,
data-driven methods for better computational fluid mechanics simulation, and
design of advanced instrumentation using additive manufacturing methods.
Students will access a range of expertise and laboratories, and use the latest
research tools such as metal additive manufacturing, sensors made using
nanofabrication techniques, machine learning, high-speed laser diagnostics, and
more. Overall, this REU site will provide a cohort of students with a unique and
impactful summer experience while informing them about the gas turbine
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense ASSURE Program in partnership with the NSF REU
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.