* 2149052
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ontogenetic and environmental origins of pathogen disgust sensitivity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Carolyn Hodges-Simeon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,054.00

It has long been proposed that the emotion of disgust helps humans avoid
illness. However, levels of disgust, also called disgust sensitivity, can vary
greatly among different individuals, which has implications for their behavior.
In particular, research suggests that people higher in disgust sensitivity are
more motivated to avoid certain objects, situations, and people. This doctoral
research project investigates the broad question: why do people vary in their
disgust sensitivity? One framework suggests that differences in the childhood
environment may lead to differences in adult disgust sensitivity. This project
is among the first to measure disgust sensitivity across a wide range of
childhood ages to understand how disgust changes throughout growth and
development. The researchers also examine cultural, individual, and
environmental variables that may explain differences between individuals in
their disgust sensitivity. These findings may be useful to health and education
initiatives that focus on reducing infection risk and mitigating the progression
of pandemics. Such initiatives will be aided by understanding when, why, and how
children are motivated to avoid infection, and how this may vary across
individuals and groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infectious disease has been a
longstanding feature of human societies. As a result, humans have seemingly
developed cultural and biological strategies to avoid infectious exposure.
Pathogen disgust sensitivity is proposed as one of the core motivational
triggers to initiate avoidant behavior, yet little research has investigated how
it develops during childhood or what explains variation among individuals. This
project examines variables such as inflammation, energy budget, control over
pathogen exposure, social learning, and gender, that may account for variation
in pathogen disgust sensitivity across childhood. The researchers collect these
variables using self-report and physiological measures among children 6 to 18 in
two communities with distinctly different infection risk and access to
resources. The empirical findings from this project will be integrated to build
a biocultural understanding of individual and group variation in pathogen
disgust sensitivity. Educational components of the project contribute to the
goal of broadening participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.