* 2149353
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Downdrafts in Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Peters, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 408,606.00

Improving the prediction of thunderstorms, their impacts on global climate
patterns, and their ability to produce severe weather relies on fundamental
knowledge of the processes that contribute to vertical motions in these storms.
Recently, attention has been focused on upward motions in storms, known as
updrafts. Downward motions in storms, which are called downdrafts, have received
comparatively little attention. This research will address the aforementioned
knowledge gap related to downdrafts. The project targets understanding the
influence of atmospheric properties (e.g., temperature, moisture, and changes in
the wind direction and speed with height) on the forces that drive downdrafts,
the height at which downdrafts originate, and how large they become. This will
be accomplished through theoretical analysis and idealized simulations. The
knowledge gained from this work will allow for improvement in how downdrafts are
represented in weather and climate models. Thus, this study will benefit
scientific communities and the general public by improving the fundamental
understanding of thunderstorms, improving forecasting of severe thunderstorm and
precipitation hazards, and improving climate prediction. The inclusion of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral scholar in this
research will also have a direct impact on the development and training of
future scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide foundational
research for improvements in downdraft forecasting and parameterization. The
project will deliver on this front in three ways: first, it will uncover the
typical origin heights of downdrafts, which are not well understood at present;
second, it will solidify the physical basis of downdraft conceptual models, and
consequently improve predictions of downdraft accelerations; third, it will
demonstrate the direct impact of our improved conceptual models for downdrafts
on cumulus parameterization and global climate model performance. These goals
will be accomplished through a large suite of idealized large-eddy simulations
with varying, realistic base-state thermodynamic and kinematic profiles,
analyzed with novel techniques for assessing downdraft properties including
layered and targeted passive tracers as well established trajectory analysis
techniques. The new Multiple Analytic Plume (MAP) cumulus parameterization will
be improved through the addition of a downdraft parameterization that is
informed by the idealized simulation findings. The project will also develop an
improved sounding-derived parameter for downdraft intensity forecasting that
accounts for deviations from parcel theory, including nonhydrostatic vertical
perturbation pressure gradient accelerations and entrainment. The foundational
research will inform sensitivity experiments in a widely used global climate
model to understand the connection between downdrafts and large-scale climate
state simulations. Combined, all lines of research will facilitate improved
understanding of convective phenomena and forecasts on multiple atmospheric
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.