* 2149772
* REU Site:  American Student Placements and Internships in Rehabilitation Engineering (ASPIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 411,084.00

The 3-year renewal project at the University of Pittsburgh features
rehabilitation engineering. This technical field investigates, designs,
develops, and deploys technologies to help people with disabilities and older
adults to live fuller lives and can better participate in and contribute to
society. The project introduces ten undergraduate students each year to the
field of rehabilitation engineering and provides them with the foundational
knowledge and skills to pursue further study in the field. Students participate
in research projects alongside experts from essential fields learning teamwork
and skills that make them better engineers regardless of the direction that they
choose. The program emphasizes participation by students with disabilities to
provide opportunities to learn as well as teach other students through their
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-year renewal project at the University
of Pittsburgh features rehabilitation engineering and showcases engineering
principles applied to rehabilitation, disability, and independent living. Ten
students each year will work on ASPIRE (American Student Placements and
Internships in Rehabilitation Engineering) research, which originates from the
voice of the consumer and helps teach person-centered design and research.
ASPIRE students learn to understand and practice “How to” do something (an
engineer’s perspective). Equally important, ASPIRE students can describe
precisely and understandably “What is” (a scientist’s viewpoint). The ability to
help people with disabilities and older adults in a visible and tangible manner
makes Rehabilitation Engineering (RE) a compelling and growing field of study.
The methods and lessons learned during the ASPIRE research experience have wide
applicability for making undergraduate participants better engineers and more
engaged people. Positive individual and social impact is an outcome of RE
solutions, and as a result, training in RE provides an excellent foundation for
students pursuing any field of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.