* 2149591
* REU Site: EXERCISE - Explore Emerging Computing in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Enyue Lu, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2025
* USD 404,979.00

The project is a renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
EXERCISE (Explore Emerging Computing in Science and Engineering) site at
Salisbury University (SU) for the next three years. The goal of the project is
to offer student participants, particularly those from primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUIs), a valuable research experience in parallel computing¬. The
project consists of two components: an online pre-program workshop each spring
and an on-site research program every summer. The spring workshop will prepare
students with background knowledge in parallel computing and help them develop
interest in research projects to be conducted in the summer. In the summer
research program, students will work with their faculty mentors to carry out
well-designed undergraduate research projects via a comprehensive approach that
combines theory, algorithm, implementation, analysis, simulation, and
experiment. A dedicated computing research lab is reserved for the summer
program. Field trips, social activities, and graduate school application
information sessions are planned. The host institution SU will collaborate with
University of Maryland Eastern Shore, a historically black college and
university (HBCU), and the University of Maryland College Park for multi-
disciplinary faculty expertise and summer activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EXERCISE project will continue to promote “parallel thinking,” an important
computational thinking skill, and further contribute parallel computing
resources to education and research communities, including PUIs with limited
high performance computing facilities and curricula. The PI, together with a
group of faculty mentors from diverse backgrounds, will encourage student
researchers to explore parallel computing through parallel algorithms,
concurrent software, and multi-core architectures. They will tackle data and
compute intensive problems in the selected science and engineering application
areas such as public health and global epidemics, sustainable aquaculture
farming, human activity recognition, topological data analysis, and
computational fluid dynamics. Students will have opportunities to solve real-
world problems with emerging parallel computing paradigms such as MapReduce and
GPU computing. The renewal REU site plans to prioritize recruiting under-
represented and female students, and attract students from local HBCUs, PUIs,
and community colleges on Maryland’s Eastern Shore into computational science
and engineering majors and the general Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.