* 2149886
* CAREER: Understanding and Exploiting Non-linear Behavior of Phase-Change Materials for Millimeter-Wave Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Nima Ghalichechian, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 213,879.00

Future wireless communication systems are expected to support significantly
higher data rates. Higher data rates, though, are generally achieved by using
higher frequencies. One area of the electromagnetic spectrum that uniquely fits
this purpose is called the millimeter-wave band. This band refers to wavelengths
in the order of a few millimeters. Specifically, the millimeter-wave band is
defined as frequencies between 30 GHz to 300 GHz. Reconfigurability and
adaptability is a vital feature of future agile millimeter-wave systems for
sensing, imaging, and wireless communications. However, when radio-frequency
systems are made reconfigurable, they become lossy neutralizing any gain
achieved by reconfiguration. In other words, despite the added functionality,
losses (low efficiencies) are the Achilles heel of any radio-frequency
reconfigurable system often less discussed. This project intends to address
aforementioned fundamental limitation. The proposed research fosters fundamental
studies on phase-change materials and their applications in the millimeter-wave
domain, specifically, passive imaging sensors. The proposed research can open
doors in millimeter-wave and beyond. Applications of the proposed millimeter-
wave sensors include medical imaging, navigation, remote sensing, and robotics
among a few. In addition to research, the education plan of this project
includes: 1) develop new courses at the Ohio State University, 2) undergraduate
and K-12 summer program, and 3) participation in outreach program for
underserved students from Central Ohio. Broader impacts of this project include
broadening participation of underrepresented groups and undergraduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase-change materials are attractive choices for
millimeter-wave reconfiguration as they provide a path to achieve low-loss
microsystems. Unique feature of phase-change material is non-linear or abrupt
change in physical (i.e. electrical or optical) properties such as permittivity
or refractive index with temperature, strain, and current. Metal oxides such as
vanadium dioxide belong to a sub-group of phase-change materials that exhibit
reversible metal-insulator transition. These materials provide a path for
realization of low-loss radio-frequency microsystems. As a result, the main
objectives of the proposed research are 1) to understand and analyze the
correlation between film deposition conditions and the electrical properties
(complex permittivity) of phase-change materials in the millimeter-wave band
including losses. Successful demonstration of such unique properties, hinges
upon understanding film growth conditions and their impact on crystal structure;
2) study and exploit new strain-induced excitation (activation) techniques on
suspended millimeter-wave structures and analyze their impact on device
performance; 3) explore novel device architecture, especially, using selected
phase-change materials such as vanadium dioxide or other candidates, to reduce
or eliminate losses while achieving unique functionalities. A new class of
passive imaging arrays (millimeter-wave camera) is expected to exhibit
significantly higher responsivity in this band than the state-of-the-art
sensors. In addition to the fundamental studies, the proposed work is ambitious
but potentially transformative as it challenges the conventional wisdom in
designing sensors and dominance of semiconductor-based millimeter-wave
detectors. Currently, no acceptable solution is available for millimeter-wave
imaging systems operating at the room temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.