* 2149564
* Drought or Deluge?  Columbia River flows to the North Pacific under a variable Holocene climate.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 884,945.00

Drought or Deluge? Columbia River flows to the North Pacific under a variable
Holocene Climate &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discharge of the Columbia River
broadly reflects the water supply of the Pacific Northwest region. Little is
known about the long-term influence on climate variability on this water supply
prior to the 20th century, leading to uncertainty surrounding the impacts of the
currently warming climate on regional water rights, agricultural production, and
fisheries. This research aims to reconstruct the natural variability in river
discharge via chemical and biotic measures of past surface salinity preserved in
marine sedimentary layers accumulating off the Columbia River mouth, and to
place that river discharge variability into the climatologic context of the past
~12,000 years, a time that spans intervals of both warmer and cooler climate
than today. By investigating the relationship between climate variability and
discharge of this major river system in the past, this research will contribute
to a better understanding of what is likely in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages a new suite of sediment cores
recently collected via two seagoing research expeditions to the continental
slope off the Columbia River, well suited for reconstructions of Holocene
climate and river discharge. The sites bracket the offshore Columbia River low
salinity plume in its winter and summer extents. The study will analyze fossil
plankton shells for oxygen isotopes, barium:calcium and magnesium:calcium
ratios, the species abundances of marine foraminiferal plankton and both marine
and freshwater diatoms to reconstruct sea-surface temperatures and sea-surface
salinity (related to discharge). Analysis of multiple species of known seasonal
succession will allow for investigation of seasonality and intermittency of
discharge. These data will address a hypothesis that higher temperatures in the
NE Pacific are associated with inland drought, relative to an alternate
hypothesis that warmer ocean temperature drive higher net precipitation (snow
and rain) through an increase in atmospheric moisture. The highly resolved
independent chronology of this reconstruction will place PNW hydroclimate and NE
Pacific temperature variability into a global temporal framework, improving our
understanding of large-scale regional climate dynamics in a part of the world
poorly constrained by data and models. Results of this study will advance
fundamental understanding of regional-scale dynamic sensitivity of climate and
will yield practical knowledge about potential future water supplies of value
for long-term planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.