* 2149492
* Empirical and Causal Models for Heterogeneous Data Fusion
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Debashis Ghosh, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 281,469.00

This research project will advance the use of causal inference methods in
situations where individual-level data are not available due to practical,
ethical, or legal constraints. There has been a lot of work on the development
of innovative methods to evaluate policy effects in observational databases, the
area being termed causal inference. However, many of these methods require
individual-level data. For a variety of reasons, it might not be possible to
obtain individual-level data due to reasons such as maintaining patient privacy
or other logistical issues. This project will extend statistical methodologies
to accommodate practical real-world scenarios in a wide variety of disciplines,
including medicine, the social sciences, and public health. There are a variety
of important problems the new methods could be applied to, such as evaluating
the effects of climate change on COVID19 incidence and deaths. Graduate students
will be trained, and software and curricula in causal inference will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop new methods
for combining heterogenous databases. Such data have become commonplace with the
vast expansion of databases in various types of scientific and epidemiological
applications. First, the project will develop new approaches to estimate
empirical associations for heterogenous data fusion problems. The investigator
will leverage model misspecification theory in conjunction with
resampling/perturbation-based methodology. Second, the project will develop new
causal inference approaches for heterogeneous data fusion problems, primarily
focusing on constrained estimation, simulation-based approaches, and sensitivity
analysis techniques. The results of this research should lead to new theoretical
underpinnings in various areas of the mathematical sciences, including
statistical theory and causal inference. Primary subfields of statistics that
will be addressed in this research include likelihood theory and inference,
estimating equations, model misspecification, and causal
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.