* 2149404
* CAREER: From One Language to Another
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Alexis Palmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2025
* USD 415,747.00

Language technology has become an integral part of how we interact with the
world of information, but sophisticated natural language processing (NLP) tools
are available only for a handful of the approximately 7000 languages spoken
across the world. Modern data-driven methods for developing NLP tools generally
rely on the availability of enormous amounts of data for the language in
question, an obstacle that may be insurmountable for many languages, especially
languages lacking significant digital resources and languages with small or
diminishing numbers of speakers. This project aims to remove barriers to
developing NLP tools for languages with less data, developing new methods that
incorporate knowledge about linguistic properties of languages into models
learned from data. Learning how to build faster paths to NLP tools for new
languages has the potential to rapidly advance the state of language technology
for any language. In addition, the tools and knowledge developed here have the
potential to speed up the description of endangered languages, helping to secure
an informed record of the world's languages while there are still speakers to
learn from.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imbalance in access to language
technologies arises in part because current NLP models and algorithms need to
learn from large amounts of training data. This project addresses that imbalance
by adapting methods from cross-lingual transfer learning, in which models
learned on one language are adapted and exploited to make predictions for
another language. One innovation of this project is to investigate the
incorporation of expert linguistic knowledge for improving model transfer. Two
types of linguistic knowledge will be injected into artificial neural network
models for morphological analysis and part-of-speech tagging: a) knowledge about
relationships between individual languages and language families; and b)
knowledge about specific linguistic properties of individual languages and
language families. The models will be evaluated both intrinsically and
extrinsically, the latter by studying the usefulness of the models for human
linguistic analysis and as part of the language documentation and description
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.