* 2149361
* REU Site: Engaging Undergraduates in Interdisciplinary Evolutionary Science
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Maurine Neiman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2025
* USD 134,982.00

This REU Site award to the University of Iowa, located in Iowa City, IA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted and how to
communicate science to public audiences. Many participants will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will
be done through online surveys. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
REU is evolutionary science, with students conducting research projects across
several disciplines. Scientist-mentors in six academic departments will offer
research projects that span a wide range of topics, including evolutionary
ecology, paleontology, genomics, evolution of infectious disease, and
developmental biology. Students will work on evolution-themed projects in one of
these specific areas and will also work as a cohort to make broad connections
among disciplines. As part of the program, students will receive training in
ethical and responsible conduct in research, participate in career workshops,
make formal research presentations based on their work, and create an
interactive digital research poster. Students will be selected by program
directors based on previous academic performance, enthusiasm for conducting
research, interest in specific faculty research projects, and potential for
future success in a research-related career. Students from groups under-
represented in science and who have limited research opportunities at their home
institution will be especially encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;More information
about the program is available by visiting https://biology.uiowa.edu/reu, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Andrew Forbes at Andrew-forbes@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Maurine Neiman at maurine-neiman@uiowa.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.