* 2149449
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Research on Immigration Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Neil Harvey, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,445.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The REU program has both scientific and societal benefits integrating
research and education. This renewal project will allow for further training of
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in the social sciences. Each
summer, ten students will receive training in research methods related to issues
facing the border region, particularly in the El Paso/ Las Cruces areas of New
Mexico. With immigration and border issues remaining central to national policy
debates, more on the ground research is needed to truly understand the nature of
enforcement measures and their impacts on border communities in a highly dynamic
and complex region. Students will learn techniques for collecting and analyzing
qualitative and quantitative data as they collaborate with local organizations
engaged with immigration and border enforcement debates. The goal is to produce
research that is highly relevant to local needs, rather than academic research
based purely on theoretical concerns. Students will explore topics related to
the root causes of migration from Mexico and Central America, the impacts of
border enforcement at ports of entry and interior checkpoints, as well as the
relationships between federal immigration enforcement and border communities.
This project will help to produce the next generation of applied social
scientists for the academy, government, and the nonprofit sector, while also
contributing to the scholarship on immigration policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to address gaps in existing literature concerning the root causes
of migration as well as the local impacts of federal immigration and border
security policies, while preparing undergraduate students, especially those who
are from groups that are underrepresented in the social sciences, to pursue
academic STEM studies and careers using Community Based Participatory Research
(CBPR). The program has three main goals: 1) Provide students with opportunities
to conduct quality CBPR by involving them in interdisciplinary research projects
on immigration policy; 2) integrate scholarship in migration and border studies;
and, 3) prepare students to conduct collaborative research and present findings
in a variety of academic and community venues. Student activities will be
grounded within a nine-week summer program comprised of nine workshops, faculty
mentorship, and collaborative research resulting in written products and
conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.