* 2149321
* DDRIG in DRMS: An Investigation of Harm Perceptions from Communications on Social Media about COVID Vaccines
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Raghav Rao, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 29,850.00

During health crises such as COVID-19, dissemination of health information on
social media that is not backed by science has been shown to result in serious
harms to communities. These harms include both physical harms (such as losses of
life, long- and short-term health harms, or financial harms) and psychological
harms (such as loss of trusts on others, emotional sufferings, or confusion).
These negative effects can lead to wrong decisions such as drinking bleach to
cure the viral infection. In investigating this type of harm, this proposal
focuses on two specific research questions: (1) How can the perceptions of harm
from information not backed by science be characterized in health crises? (2)
How are harm perceptions associated with social media conversations in a health
crisis? Results have the potential to advance national health and welfare.
Official health organizations such as the CDC and WHO, may gain a better
understanding of vulnerable population’s threat and need perceptions. An
understanding of people’s perceptions of harmful inaccurate information
ultimately helps improve the reliability of social media channels. Broader
impacts include the support of a doctoral dissertation, dissemination of
findings at professional outlets, and teaching modules related to this research
project are part of a course at University of Texas at San Antonio, a Hispanic
Serving Institution (HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite prior efforts handling
harms from inaccurate information in both COVID-19 pandemic and COVID-19 vaccine
contexts, to our knowledge, there is no research that has characterized harm
perceptions from such information in health crises. This project takes a sharp
focus on perceived harms, rather than on actual harms, and examines the
interplay between perceived harms and actual harms. Focusing on the COVID-19
vaccine context, studies examine several COVID-19 vaccine scenarios containing
inaccurate information, and characterize harm from that information using three
characteristics, i.e., unknown and dread and manageability. Using text mining
the project examines the association between harm perceptions and nature of
communication in Twitterverse. This is an early attempt at quantitatively
measure the harm that results from inaccurate information in the pandemic
context. The project advances knowledge in an under-studied area and use
conversations in Twitterverse to investigate the nature of communication with
respect to harm characteristics. This research bridges social media data with
communication theory to unpack the role of social media around crisis
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.