* 2149533
* CNS Core: Small: Leveraging Hardware Counters to Improve the Performance and Energy Efficiency of Mobile Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Xiaorui Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Many mobile apps are reported to either have poor user-perceived performance,
such as long response times, or significant battery lifetime impacts.
Programming bugs from novice developers have become common reasons for such non-
functional issues. For example, a type of non-deterministic bug is the hang bug,
which may cause the app to have soft hangs, i.e., the app becomes unresponsive
for a limited but perceivable period of time. Abnormal battery drain (ABD) is
another type of software bug that has been reported to trouble a large number of
developers. An ABD usually consumes an unnecessarily high amount of energy and
causes undesired battery drain. This project proposes a software bug detection
and diagnosis framework based on performance counters --hardware registers
configured to monitor selected events like cache misses or context switches--
for mobile apps. The proposed framework performs correlation analysis to select
the most relevant hardware events for given hang bugs and ABDs, as well as other
non-functional bugs, such as memory bloat, which refers to a mobile app
consuming significantly more memory than necessary. Novel algorithms will then
be designed that leverage the fine-grained and low-overhead hardware information
provided by performance counters to help app developers pinpoint the root causes
of these bugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this timely project would
greatly impact mobile app development by providing app developers a sorely
needed tool that can help them identify the root causes of their non-functional
bugs, such as hang bugs, ABD, and memory bloat. With the number of available
mobile apps reaching a massive 8.93 million in early 2020, a recent study shows
that 40% of app developers are reported to be working completely on their own,
and 26% of app developers have less than 2 years of experience in writing apps.
New mobile apps released from these novice developers can be creative and help
users significantly in daily lives, but often yield poor user experiences or
short battery lifetimes. With the proposed counter-based bug detection
framework, app developers can spend less time concerned with performance/energy
issues and focus more on their own business logic for higher productivity. In
addition, the algorithms and framework developed in this project can be valuable
to all computer systems in general, by exploring the intricate correlation
between non-functional software bugs and hardware-level information provided by
performance counters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.