* 2149787
* ANSWERS: Dynamics and Impacts of Electrons and Ions in the Earth’s Magnetosphere-Ionosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Kai Germaschewski, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2025
* USD 899,669.00

Understanding the Earth’s magnetosphere and its connection to the ionosphere is
crucial for correctly predicting space weather events, which are a potential
hazard to human-built technology such as power grids, telecommunications, and
satellites. The magnetosphere-ionosphere system is characterized by plasma
(electron and ion) interactions that are coupled together and inherently
complex. State-of-the-art models of this system often rely on simplifications
that lead to deficiencies in predicting space weather events. This project aims
to improve our ability to model the complex plasma interactions in Earth’s upper
atmosphere. A team of mainly early-career researchers from Princeton University,
University of New Hampshire and University of Alaska will collaborate with space
weather forecasters and power grid operators on this project. While space
weather is fascinating, it has received less attention in K-12 STEM curricula
due to its complexity and transdisciplinary nature. To make space weather
information more widely available to students, the project team will focus on
educator training, create engaging curricular materials, and collaborate with
the NSF-funded Space Weather Underground project, which serves historically
underserved groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a modeling effort to
investigate the dynamics of the Earth’s magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere
system, addressing the role of electrons as well as heavy ions in magnetotail
reconnection and the subsequent electric driving of auroral streamers. The
modeling will include self-consistent coupling between micro-instabilities and
macro-transport. The team will apply new capabilities of the OpenGGCM model to
evolve multi-electron-multi-ion fluid dynamics, incorporating significant
kinetic physics beyond magnetohydrodynamics. They will investigate the transport
of electron and ion species (H+ and O+) in the outer magnetosphere, as well as
the impact on magnetotail reconnection, a controlling process in magnetospheric
space weather events. The impact of magnetospheric electron dynamics and
electric driving on aurora streamers, a critical M-I coupling product, will be
studied in the upper atmosphere using open-source GITM model. In collaboration
with a power grid operator, estimates of geomagnetically-induced current will be
delivered. The team will promote K-12 STEM education through secondary educator
training focused on space weather science, creation of engaging materials
(including data literacy, visualization, and hands-on practices), and
collaboration with the NSF-funded Space Weather Underground project. ANSWERS
projects advance the nation’s STEM expertise and societal resilience to space
weather hazards by filling key knowledge gaps regarding the coupled Sun-Earth
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.