* 2149975
* REU Site: Engaging Undergraduates Students in Converting Waste to Sustainable Construction Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zhihui Sun, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,283.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Louisville will provide multidisciplinary research experiences in solid waste
recycling and reuse of construction materials to a total of 24 undergraduate
students from institutions with limited research opportunities in Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) states (e.g., Kentucky and
West Virginia). Accumulation of solid waste in landfills negatively affects the
food chain, health, and environment. The ability to convert solid waste from
construction, agricultural, industrial, and municipal waste into a new
generation of sustainable construction materials will reduce pollution from
waste and reduce CO2 emissions from the production of new construction
materials. REU students will participate in interdisciplinary research to make
such solid waste recycling practical and economical. These experiences will help
prepare students from a wide range of engineering disciplines to conduct future
research to address our societies’ waste problems. The REU experience will also
help students develop a wide range of scientific and research skills, as well as
communication and teamwork skills that will benefit their future careers and
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this three-year REU site at
the University of Louisville is to provide 8 undergraduate participants a
10-week summer research experience each year to increase their skills, self-
efficacy, motivation, and retention in STEM. The program focuses on the
development of skills in research, critical thinking, problem-solving, and
teamwork/communication by participating in research to convert solid waste into
construction materials, as well as other training and development activities.
The specific objectives of the REU site are to: (1) Instruct students about
scientific concepts relevant to eco-friendly construction material technologies;
(2) Equip students with laboratory skills associated with traditional
construction materials and educate students about the burgeoning solid waste
problem; (3) Develop students’ critical thinking, problem-solving, teamwork, and
communication skills by having students work with both faculty members and
industry experts; and (4) Prepare students for opportunities in academia,
business, government, and other career paths through a variety of research and
enrichment activities. Research topics include the conversion of lignocellulosic
biomass, plastic, used tires, coal ash, and construction and demolition
materials into sustainable construction materials. The program will include
weekly seminars, professional development workshops, and field trips. These
activities are designed to complement the technical activities. REU participants
will be encouraged to present technical papers and posters at regional and
national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.