* 2149243
* High-resolution prediction and uncertainty estimation of land value and conservation costs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Christoph Nolte, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 07/31/2026
* USD 287,931.00

Accurate estimates of the fair market value of private land rights are key
inputs for many public policy choices, including property taxation and
conservation planning. However, this estimation task is challenging, because
land value is affected by many environmental and social factors, their
importance varies geographically, and available training data of property sales
tends to be scarce, clustered, and rarely representative of the landscape. This
project investigates the performance of different statistical techniques to
estimate land value, conservation cost, and associated uncertainties across
large and heterogeneous geographical areas. The data produced in this effort are
designed to support government agencies, conservation organizations, and
academic research groups in the identification of conservation priorities for
current and future species habitat, carbon storage, flood risk reduction,
farmland protection, and equitable access to open space. The project also
contributes to the education and training of a postdoctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With societal demand for land-based benefits
shifting as a result of economic crises and climate change, an accurate
predictive understanding of the trade-offs between private and public benefits
from land is needed for the identification of effective and equitable policy
solutions. Using a novel geospatial database of approximately 150 million
properties and 4 million sales for the conterminous United States, this project
compares the performance of traditional statistical estimators and modern
spatial machine learning methods in predicting land values and public
acquisition costs across space and time, alongside associated uncertainties. It
also examines the performance of new machine learning techniques for the
estimation of the value of partial land rights and conservation easements, a
rapidly expanding protection instrument in the United States. In doing so, the
project contributes to generalizable best practice in predictive modeling and
validation of land value and conservation costs over large, nonstationary study
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.