* 2149165
* REU Site: Neutrino Physics at Virginia Tech
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Camillo Mariani, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 365,283.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award supports a new Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in physics at Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp;
State University (Virginia Tech). The site will support nine undergraduate
students per year for ten weeks of summer research in various projects in
neutrino physics. The Center for Neutrino Physics faculty will mentor the
students directly, with special emphasis on the students professional
development. The program will contribute to enhancing the students' knowledge,
skills, and communication capabilities in the various aspects of neutrino
physics, thereby contributing to the training of skilled graduates in science
essential for a fast-paced and rapidly growing technological
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be various projects available in a broad
spectrum of research areas with a direct focus on neutrino physics, including
electron/neutrino scattering experiments, the search for sterile neutrinos,
phenomenology studies, long baseline optimization for DUNE and the study of the
neutrino spectrum from nuclear reactors and supernovae neutrino experiments and
theory. REU students will have the opportunity to pursue independent and
productive activities, guided by an established team of faculty members. In
addition to experiencing the excitement of front-line research, the students
will develop the essential skills of a successful scientist, such as critical
self evaluation and self-assessment. The program will provide them with the
realistic aspects of research at graduate schools and beyond, such as the design
and running of experiments, the acquisition and analysis of data, the
development and testing of computer codes, the learning of appropriate
mathematical/analytic techniques, the formulation of theoretical ideas, as well
as the preparation of results for publications and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.