* 2149906
* REU Site: Integrated Studies in a Rapidly Warming Fishery Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Kanae Tokunaga, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2025
* USD 183,928.00

The Gulf of Maine Research Institute (GMRI),located in Portland, ME, will host a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program that will bring six
undergraduates to the GMRI campus each summer for three years to complete a
10-week research experience. GRMI will provide undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds with an interdisciplinary research experience in the Gulf of
Maine, a coupled natural and human (CNH) system warming faster than 99% of the
world’s oceans. The primary objective of the GMRI program is to train the next
generation of scientists capable of describing, quantifying and communicating
the interconnections between environmental and human influences on marine
ecosystems. Applications are encouraged from students attending colleges with
limited research opportunities, such as two-year and four-year primarily
undergraduate institutions, veterans, and students from disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students at GMRI explore the structure and
function of the Gulf of Maine fishery ecosystem (plankton to seafood), how it is
changing over time (trends and prediction), how it responds to perturbations
(e.g., climate and fishing), and how changes may affect local communities and
economies. They develop independent, hypothesis-driven research projects and are
exposed to multiple scientific approaches, including classic experimental
ecology, observational science, and statistical and dynamical modeling. Students
also receive safety training, ethics training, and data management, analysis and
scientific communications workshops. These, along with social activities, a
journal club, regular seminars and a student symposium to share results are
designed to foster a sense of shared experiences, critical to the success of the
program. Student research will contribute to an ecosystem approach to marine
resource management in a rapidly changing environment, lessons from which can be
applied to other coupled systems around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.