* 2149698
* Collaborative Research: ANSWERS: Impacts of Atmospheric Waves and Geomagnetic Disturbances on Quiet-time and Storm-time Space Weather
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shun-Rong Zhang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2025
* USD 212,120.00

Space weather refers to the dynamic changes in near-Earth space caused by
complex Sun--Earth interactions. Space weather can pose hazards to electric
power grids, telecommunications, spacecraft operations, and astronaut health.
This project will advance our understanding of how the Earth’s
ionosphere—thermosphere (IT) system changes due to the combined effects of solar
variability and changes in the Earth’s lower atmosphere, including extreme
weather events such as tornadoes. Understanding IT system variability is an
essential element to predict space weather. Extensive historical and ongoing
observational data and state-of-the-art weather and geospace models will be used
in the investigation. Graduate and undergraduate students will be integral to
the research efforts. The project will develop an online lecture series on space
weather, organize virtual workshops for the public, and leverage existing REU,
outreach and broadening participation efforts. The collaboration includes
Clemson University, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, New Jersey Institute of Technology, and Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies variations in Earth’s ionosphere-thermosphere (IT) system due to
atmospheric waves from both terrestrial sources (including extreme weather) and
geomagnetic disturbances triggered by solar activity. The key science questions
are: 1) What is the day-to-day IT variability induced by lower-atmosphere waves
and persistent geomagnetic disturbances? How do their relative contributions and
underlying mechanisms change with locations? 2) What are the multi-scale IT
responses to intense space weather and terrestrial convective events? How do
their response characteristics compare? and 3) What are the preconditioning
effects of atmospheric waves on the IT response to geomagnetic disturbances? A
team of researchers active in the geospace CEDAR and GEM communities will
investigate these questions. They will use data from a variety of ground-based
and space-borne instruments, develop a high-resolution model coupling a general
circulation model with a regional wave model, and utilize data assimilation to
improve upon the model drivers. Broader impacts of the project include the
potential to advance space weather forecasting by characterizing IT system
variability. The project will develop a new space weather curriculum and
leverage existing education and outreach programs at the collaborating
institutions. ANSWERS projects will advance the nation’s STEM expertise and
societal resilience to space weather hazards by filling key knowledge gaps
regarding the coupled Sun-Earth system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.