* 2149108
* The Seasonal Behavioral Ecology of Respiratory Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Kathrine Starkweather, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2025
* USD 390,308.00

Respiratory illnesses, like those caused by viruses like COVID-19, Influenza,
and RSV, are among the leading causes of death for American citizens, especially
for those in older and younger age groups, and for immunocompromised
individuals. Global spread of these viruses continues to pose a threat in the
United States; therefore, it is important to understand how they are transmitted
in different cultural settings. In addition to the potential public health
benefits of this study, it facilitates scientific training of a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students. Public dissemination of findings will also
inform community members on the roles of the household and extended family
members in transmitting disease, and measures to prevent transmission of
respiratory viruses among family and friends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is
designed to assess how social behavior and environmental conditions interact to
affect the transmission of common respiratory viruses and longer-term health
impacts of illness in a tropical setting. To do so, the research team is
collecting year-round, community-wide data on social networks and symptoms of
respiratory illnesses, seasonal biological markers of respiratory infection, and
seasonal anthropometric measurements, including height, weight, and upper arm
circumference. In-depth interviews are being conducted to gain an understanding
of how people think about illness risk. This study tests the theory that humans
use behavior to adapt to environmental circumstances, and that they do so in a
way that maximizes benefits and minimizes risks associated with the behavior.
This may help to inform future public health policy on how best to minimize
transmission of respiratory viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.