* 2149059
* Migrant communities: Effects of demographic characteristics on place making under uncertain timelines
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Tara Deubel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 05/31/2025
* USD 268,939.00

How are durable communities made when populations are mobile and experience
uncertain settlement timelines? How do these processes differ according to
gender, ethnicity, age, and documentation status? How well are mobile
communities integrated into surrounding populations under varying individual and
contextual circumstances? Rates of migration are increasing, with increasing
numbers of women and other historically under-represented groups increasingly
joining migrant journeys. This project tackles these important questions to
understand, using theory and methods from cultural anthropology, how migrants
with very different personal circumstances and in different societal contexts
make communities and integrate with surrounding populations. It supports under-
represented scholars in STEM and trains graduate students. Its results will be
disseminated widely to academic and non-academic audiences, including policy
makers grappling with questions of how best to support migrant communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses theories of intersecting characteristics
to investigate hypotheses surrounding the experiences of waiting and settlement
among diverse migrants in different settings. Using ethnographic methods
involving participant observation, interviews, and photovoice, hypotheses
address 1) how the demographic characteristics of migrants affect community
incorporation experiences; 2) differences in how men and women establish social
support systems and access services; and 3) how experiences related to racial
identity affect migrant integration in different contexts. The focus on
differences in men’s and women’s social networks offers a complementary,
migrant-centered approach allowing for a more nuanced understanding of variation
in forms of home, kinship, and social life under precarious
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.