* 2149204
* Collaborative Research: AGEP ACA to Engage Leaders to Improve Diversity among STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Mala Htun, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 02/29/2024
* USD 194,866.00

This NSF AGEP Catalyst Alliance project is piloting an institutional change
strategy of broad national significance, which focuses on mobilizing STEM leader
engagement and commitment to expand opportunities for doctoral students, post-
doctoral research fellows, and faculty who are members of racial and ethnic
groups historically underrepresented in STEM. Consisting of leaders with
considerable expertise in diversity promotion at the University of New Mexico,
Arizona State University and University of Oregon, this NSF AGEP Catalyst
Alliance team is expanding knowledge about the shared and specific challenges
facing these doctoral students, post-doctoral research fellows and faculty in
STEM fields and contributing to best practices to promote equitable and
inclusive institutional transformation. This NSF AGEP Catalyst Alliance is
identifying challenges, engaging leaders, developing a strategic plan, and
consolidating an effective working team between the three partner institutions.
The partners are public institutions of higher education, have a Carnegie
classification of Doctoral Universities: Very High Research Activity, are
located in Western states, and share a commitment to advancing the success of
people with backgrounds that are historically underrepresented in the science
and technology enterprise. The project team focuses on four primary activities
during the project period. First, the team is implementing institutional
assessment studies at each partner institution through surveys and individual
interviews. Second, the team is creating leader engagement committees of STEM
administrators and faculty to analyze study results and review menus of national
best practices. The committees are generating a sense of buy-in and ownership
from participants. Third, the partners are developing a five-year equity
strategic plan, which outlines change strategies suggested by the leader
engagement committees. Finally, the team is refining a collaborative
relationship between project leaders at the three partner universities through
weekly meetings, while consulting with an external advisory board of
distinguished STEM leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving equity and inclusion
is critical to advancing STEM faculty, educating America’s future STEM
workforce, fostering individual opportunity and contributing to a thriving U.S.
economy. The NSF AGEP program, therefore, funds grants that advance and enhance
the systemic factors that support equity and inclusion and, consequently,
mitigate the systemic inequities in the academic profession and workplace. NSF
AGEP Catalyst Alliances design and implement one or more organizational self-
assessment(s) to collect and analyze data that will identify inequities
affecting doctoral students, post-doctoral research fellows, and faculty who are
members of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM. NSF
AGEP Catalyst Alliances also pilot equity strategies and develop a five-year
equity strategic plan. These grants fund similar institutions of higher
education to generate the foundational work necessary for long-term
institutional transformation. Ultimately, advancing institutional equity and
inclusion in faculty hiring, retention and promotion policies and practices will
increase the number of faculty who are members of racial and ethnic groups
historically underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF AGEP
Catalyst Alliance is using an intersectional analysis to study the variation in
the experiences of and challenges faced by members of racial and ethnic groups
historically underrepresented in STEM. This analysis includes examining within
and between group similarities and differences. The team is also adapting the
Frank Dobbin’s and Alexandra Kalev’s managerial engagement approach, and Shelley
Correll’s “Small Wins” change model, to address the goal of improving diverse
faculty representation in STEM. Together these methods will contribute to
successful project implementation and outcomes. Internal evaluation of the
project work will be conducted by Kristine Denman, the Director of the New
Mexico Statistical Analysis Center. External assessment of this NSF AGEP
Catalyst Alliance work will be led by Lynn Nordstrom from the Cornelius
Management Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.