* 2149517
* FDA Scholar Program: Characterizing Leaching of Hazardous Material from Polymeric Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Martin Tanaka, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,805.00

Potentially hazardous chemicals contained within implanted medical devices can
pose a risk to human health if they migrate from the device into surrounding
tissues. However, if the amount of chemicals released in one day is low, the
exposure may have little to no risk of negative effects. Historically, the
primary method to predict the amount of exposure has been through laboratory
testing in chemical liquids. However, recent advances in science and computer
technology support the development of new computer-based tools to predict
exposure risk. In this research, mathematical equations and computer simulations
are developed to predict how quickly potentially hazardous materials are
released into the body. An advancement over previous simulations is the
inclusion of both the medical device and the surrounding tissue in a two-
component model designed to better predict exposure risk. Predictive models can
reduce development cost, decrease animal testing, and enable products to reach
the market faster without sacrificing public protection. Use of the model for
preliminary risk assessment would be a great asset to industry, especially small
companies that may lack the resources to predict outcomes prior to engagement
with regulatory bodies. As an additional component, the principal investigator
will visit medical device companies to share knowledge about the product
evaluation process, develop a new course, and provide undergraduates with funded
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
more accurately quantify the rate that leachable materials are released from a
medical device by modeling their migration through a polymeric matrix and the
contacting biological tissue. Research includes characterizing the transport
properties of leachables in biological tissue by aggregating data from multiple
sources and using cluster analysis to approximate transport properties of
leachables in biological tissue. Mathematical models and computer simulations
that utilize these transport properties will be created to predict migration of
leachables using a diffusion-limited two-component system. In addition, a novel
approach to model biomaterial systems will be developed that represent model
parameters as probability density functions rather than single scalar values.
This new approach will advance modeling tools available in this field. Overall,
this research will improve the fundamental understanding of the fate of
leachables contained within polymeric biomaterials in contact with the body.
Physics-based models that better capture the complexities of this system will
yield more clinically relevant results than extraction studies, expanding our
understanding of these complex biodynamic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.