* 2149985
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Astronomy for Undergraduate Students at the Maria Mitchell Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Regina Jorgenson, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 152,371.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award is for renewed funding of the Maria Mitchell
Observatory (MMO) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in
Nantucket, Massachusetts. The REU program will be offered annually to six
qualified applicants, who will perform state-of-the-art data analysis using a
wide variety of space- and ground-based astronomical observations. The student
projects include the general areas of: formation and evolution of stars, groups
and clusters of galaxies, large-scale structure of the universe, cosmology, and
star clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MMO REU program will have a significant
impact on the skills and career development of student participants by enhancing
their capability to do research, to present their results at scientific meetings
and in public settings, to write scientific papers, and to write observing
proposals to use national and international telescope facilities. Hundreds of
undergraduate students have participated in the REU program to date, the great
majority of them women, and many have gone on to successful careers as
astronomers at leading universities, observatories, and other organizations
around the world. Indeed, roughly one of every 20 American women with a PhD in
astronomy today acquired formative research experience at the MMO. This award
will therefore contribute to developing a talented STEM workforce in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.