* 2149129
* Inflation Expectations of Decision Makers and their Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Francesco DAcunto, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 646,000.00

This research will investigate the value that the data of a consumer has for the
firm&lt;br/&gt;that uses it. In many digital platforms, consumer data is often
used to intermediate the&lt;br/&gt;needs of various agents with conflicting
interests—such as buyers and sellers, drivers and&lt;br/&gt;riders, or social-
media users and advertisers. This makes determining the value of
data&lt;br/&gt;especially complex. This research will tackle such complexity to
provide a more complete&lt;br/&gt;account of the value of data—especially its
dependence on privacy-protection policies.&lt;br/&gt;By doing so, it will
advance our understanding of the demand for data in the
digital&lt;br/&gt;economy and provide insights into how data markets work and
may be affected by policy&lt;br/&gt;interventions. This research will also shed
light on the debate about how to individually&lt;br/&gt;compensate consumers for
their data, which many scholars and policymakers believe to&lt;br/&gt;be an
essential aspect of a functioning data market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this research project will study what determines the value of a
single&lt;br/&gt;data record for the intermediary that uses it as an input in
its business. For instance,&lt;br/&gt;such a record can be the characteristics
of a buyer that an e-commerce platform stores&lt;br/&gt;on its servers. When
data is used by a third party (like a platform) to
strategically&lt;br/&gt;direct interactions between multiple agents (like buyers
and sellers), assessing its value is&lt;br/&gt;complicated and calls for a new
approach. The project shows that this value is not just the&lt;br/&gt;payoff the
intermediary derives directly from a record (like a platform’s transaction
fees).&lt;br/&gt;It involves other components, which can significantly bias our
assessments if ignored.&lt;br/&gt;They capture externalities between the records
of, say, different buyers not because of a&lt;br/&gt;statistical correlation,
but because of how the platform partitions its knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt;buyers
so as to direct sellers’ responses (e.g., by pooling buyers into market
segments).&lt;br/&gt;Such externalities can render the record of a low-spending
buyer more valuable than&lt;br/&gt;that of a high-spending buyer. The first part
of the project will study contexts where&lt;br/&gt;the intermediary already owns
the data and can use it without people’s consent. Its&lt;br/&gt;core
contribution is to show how to properly assess the value of individual records
and&lt;br/&gt;characterize all its components. The second part of the project
will study how the value&lt;br/&gt;of data changes when each consumer can
withhold their data from the platform. One key&lt;br/&gt;insight is that privacy
rights may not only shift wealth from data-users to data-
sources&lt;br/&gt;(i.e., from intermediaries to consumers), but also change the
value of data records itself.&lt;br/&gt;For instance, it can increase the value
of some people’s records at the expense of others.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, privacy can
have redistributive effects across data-sources, which may
contribute&lt;br/&gt;to social inequality and should be taken into account by
privacy-protection policies.&lt;br/&gt;1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.