* 2149971
* REU Site: Advanced Materials at Rutgers Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Deirdre O'Carroll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 382,260.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site in Advanced Materials at Rutgers Engineering. The
objective of the NSF-REU activity is to provide unique opportunities to
undergraduate students from diverse demographics to conduct state-of-art,
interdisciplinary research in the field of Advanced Materials in a nurturing
environment. The program features stimulating interactions between students and
faculty/mentors, and access to professional development and entrepreneurship
opportunities through research. The program takes a holistic approach to
enhanced learning by marrying training in research with professional
development. This program will recruit students from diverse populations,
including from underrepresented groups, who have limited opportunities to
perform undergraduate research. The overall goal of this REU program is two-
fold: encourage undergraduate students to continue their studies while
simultaneously developing their professional and entrepreneurial skills. This
goal will have positive long-term impacts on the professional outlook and
development of the REU participants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will focus on the development of
novel advanced materials with hierarchy in structure ranging from nano-scale to
macro-scale, using computational, experimental and theoretical approaches. The
advanced materials developed are nanomaterials, hybrid soft materials, patterned
surfaces, glasses, inorganic polymers, and advanced ceramic composites. These
materials can be applied to wound treatment, biosynthesis, optical waveguides,
catalysis, tissue engineering, polymer solar cells, biological nanoparticles,
wind turbine blades and phase transformation investigations. Student
participants are recruited primarily from academic institutions with limited
research opportunities, including two-year colleges. The students will acquire
advanced research skills with enhanced professional abilities, having excellent
communication skills, both oral and written. Their work will be disseminated
through presentations at professional meetings and publications in professional
journals. The research experiences provided by this REU Site will have a long
lasting and rewarding influence on the participating
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.