* 2149518
* Collaborative Research: Testing Next Generation Measurement Techniques for Reconstruction of Paleoclimate Archives from Thin or Disturbed Ice Cores Sections
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Tyler Fudge, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 254,639.00

Ice cores provide valuable records of past climate such as atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gasses and unmatched evidence of past abrupt
climate change. Key to understanding past climate changes are the measurements
of annual layers that are used to determine the age of the ice, and the timing
and pace of major climate events. The current measurement limit for annual
layers in ice cores is at the centimeter scale. This project aims to improve the
depth resolution of measurements of the chemical impurities in ice using
measurements such as electrical conductivity, hyperspectral imaging, major
elements measured with laser ablation, and ice grain properties. This will
advance understanding of the preservation and layering in ice cores and improve
the accuracy and length of annual timescales for existing ice
cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the past time preserved in an ice core is
near the bed where the layers have been thinned to only a fraction of their
original thickness. Interpreting highly compressed portions of ice cores is
increasingly important as projects target climate records in basal ice, and old
ice recovered from blue-ice areas. This project will integrate precisely co-
registered electrical conductivity measurements, hyperspectral imaging, laser
ablation mass spectrometer measurements of impurities, and ice physical
properties to investigate sub-centimeter chemical and physical variations in
polar ice. Critical to resolving thin ice layers is understanding the across-
core variations that may obscure or distort the vertical layering. Analyses will
be focused on samples from the WDC-06A (WAIS Divide), SPC-14 (South Pole), and
GISP2 (Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2) ice cores that have well-established
seasonal cycles that yielded benchmark timescales, as well a large-diameter ice
core from the Allan Hills blue ice area. This work will develop state-of-the-art
instrumentation and FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable)
data handling workflow at the National Science Foundation Ice Core Facility
available to the community both to enhance understanding of existing ice cores,
and for use in future projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.