* 2149529
* Physical and Mechanical Response of the Cementation of Aluminosilicate Seals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tiziana Vanorio, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

For decades, geophysicists studying faults and earthquakes have focused on how
rocks weaken or break in response to forces within the Earth. Another question
we need to ask is, how do rocks restrengthen, for instance, between earthquakes?
One process that makes rocks stronger is cementation. That is, groundwater
passing through small pores and cracks in rocks may deposit minerals which act
like glue or cement, strengthening the rock. Dr. Vanorio and her group will
conduct laboratory studies to investigate in detail just how cements form, and
how much they strengthen rocks under a variety of thermal and chemical
conditions. In addition to helping scientists understand how faulted rocks
rebuild their strength between earthquakes, Dr. Vanorio's research can also help
engineers design materials that can maintain their strength under harsh chemical
conditions over long periods of time. Because cementation fills small voids in
rock and makes them more impervious to fluid flow, her research will also help
engineers to design geothermal systems or select suitable sealed reservoirs for
storing greenhouse gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active faults of the Earth's
crust function as large-scale kiln factories — they mechanically pulverize
aluminosilicate rocks to the micron or finer scale, and internally channel heat
that treats and primes the fault gouge for fluid-mediated chemical reactions,
eventually leading to cementation. Geophysical data shows that repeated failures
and strength recovery of the Earth’s crust — a process known as fault healing,
is a relatively fast process. In this project, the PI intends to advance
knowledge on the natural cementation (i.e., frictional healing) of geological
seals by studying Earth’s chemical synthesis of aluminosilicates exposed to two
natural processes: CO2-induced carbonation and alkaline hydrothermal treatment.
To understand how the physical and mechanical properties of rock materials
measured at the macro scale connect to the underlying structure, the PI plans to
study the micro- and nano-scale structures of the formed cementitious phases and
how they influence strength and mode of failure as well as the acoustic
signature of the loss of seal integrity (crack propagation and
fracturing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.