* 2149925
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Photophysiology and bio-optics of Red Sea mesophotic corals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Wangpraseurt, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2025
* USD 630,129.00

Tropical coral reefs are hotspots of biodiversity and provide critical services
to numerous coastal communities worldwide. A combination of global and local
stressors have led to the unprecedented degradation of shallow water coral reef
communities. Most importantly, elevated water temperatures combined with excess
solar radiation can cause coral bleaching, which describes the loss of the
coral’s symbiotic algae and is regarded as the major threat to the future
existence of shallow-water reefs. Thus, corals from deep waters are gaining
interest as they are expected to be buffered from extreme environmental impacts
more commonly experienced in shallow waters. Surprisingly, corals are
flourishing in habitats where sunlight barely reaches, and 30-150 m depth
mesophotic coral reef ecosystems (MCEs) are characterized by unique coral
communities that could serve as a refuge for shallow water corals. In this
project, we aim to study the light-harvesting mechanisms that allow corals to
thrive under such light-limited conditions using a multidisciplinary approach
that combines state-of-the-art bioengineering, bio-optics, and coral physiology
tools. Since corals are among the most efficient aquatic photosynthetic systems,
studying coral bio-optics can also lead to the discovery of novel light-
harvesting mechanisms and the development of novel coral-inspired photonic
materials to build more efficient and sustainable photobioreactors. This is a
US-Israel binational project that aims to promote international collaboration
and diversity through a range of public outreach activities, including museum
exhibitions and the design of creative experiences to support the participation
of under-represented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light is a
key driver of coral community change along the coral reef depth gradient.
However, the importance of irradiance for the existence and growth of corals has
been predominantly studied in shallow species, and knowledge of how mesophotic
corals thrive despite extremely limited light conditions is largely lacking.
This study will provide a quantitative assessment of light-harvesting at
mesophotic depths and offer novel insights into the role of bio-optics and
irradiance in structuring coral communities. To achieve our goal, we will employ
an interdisciplinary approach to establish the bio-optical properties of
mesophotic corals. Our workflow combines (1) in-situ coral reef fieldwork in
Eilat (Red Sea, Israel) to collect and analyze corals along a depth-irradiance
gradient, (2) lab-based light microsensor measurements combined with analyses of
endogenous green fluorescent protein and photosynthetic assays; (3) optical
coherence tomography and microcomputed tomography to characterize tissue and
skeletal morphology for the development of 3D light-capture models using Monte
Carlo simulations; and (3) a novel 3D bioprinting approach to experimentally
determine the roles of coral skeleton morphology on photosynthesis. Altogether,
this research will provide the essential basis for theoretical models that seek
to understand the spatial distribution of mesophotic coral reef ecosystems and
predict their responses to environmental change, therefore offering a practical
tool for reef management and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.