* 2149909
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: The Socio-Ecological Role of Greenways in Urban Systems - An Interdisciplinary Approach
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* DeAnna Beasley, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2025
* USD 264,531.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The REU program has both scientific and societal benefits integrating
research and education. This REU Site award to University of Tennessee
Chattanooga, located in Chattanooga, TN, and Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville in Edwardsville, IL, will support the training of 10 students for
10 weeks for three years. Research is conducted at Chattanooga, TN,
Edwardsville, IL, and Cleveland, TN. It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an
under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
policy decisions are made and how interdisciplinary research is conducted, with
many presenting the results of their work at scientific conferences and to local
policymakers and community stakeholders. The research will integrate greenway
networks into the broader field of urban science and improve our understanding
of the environmental and human associated impacts of greenway networks in urban
areas. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme for this 3-year research experience
focuses on enhancing environmental resilience and sustainability by examining
the interaction between human and natural systems within urban greenway
networks. The research is grounded in three fundamental questions: 1) What are
the human and ecological drivers of microclimate? 2) What are the human usage
patterns in urban greenway networks? 3) How can empirical evidence on urban
greenway dynamics inform the broader scientific community and local community
stakeholders on ways to mitigate environmental impacts and social disparities in
cities? Students will work in interdisciplinary teams and assess how greenways
vary based on social and ecological characteristics of the greenway in each
respective city. Results from each team will be combined into a larger dataset
which will be used to assess greenway characteristics in varying city sizes. The
findings will be shared with community leaders and stakeholders to inform them
of the current impacts of their greenway system and potential opportunities for
expanding the greenway network. Students will learn and apply skills related to:
biodiversity; data collection, analysis, and visualization; geographic
information systems (GIS); and, evidence-based policymaking. These skills will
then be used to better understand the human and biological drivers of
microclimate variation within greenway networks and inform policymakers as to
the best ways to mitigate environmental impacts and social disparities in order
to create more resilient cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.