* 2149822
* Is the Solar Wind Electron Strahl a Seed Population for the Earth's Electron Radiation Belt?
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Joachim Birn, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 682,313.00

The near-Earth space is filled with charged particles from the solar wind and
the Earth's upper atmosphere. However, how these particles are accelerated and
transported into the radiation belt remains a mystery. This Magnetospheric
project will explore a possible pathway to discern the ultimate source
population of the Earth's electron radiation belt and discern the controlling
factors for that source population. The reasoning is as follows. (1) Because the
electron radiation belt is lost on occasion, a seed population of energetic
electrons is required to replace the belt. (2) It is commonly accepted that the
radiation-belt seed population is the population of energetic electrons injected
into the dipole by substorms. (3) These substorm-injected electrons are
suprathermal electrons in the Earth's magnetotail plasma sheet that are
adiabatically delivered from the magnetotail into the dipole by substorms. (4) A
resulting question is: where do the magnetotail suprathermal electrons come
from, and what factors control them? This project argues that the magnetotail
suprathermal electrons come from the energetic electron strahl in the solar
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this NSF project are: (1) To
determine whether (and by how much) the solar-wind electron strahl acts as a
seed population for the Earth's electron radiation belt, (2) To determine the
controlling factors for this process, (3) To trace the electron strahl from the
solar wind, into the Earth's magnetotail plasma sheet, into substorm injections,
and evolving into the electron radiation belt, and (4) To discern whether there
are other sources of the suprathermal electrons in the magnetotail plasma sheet
that become energetic substorm- injected electrons. In the diverse data analysis
of this project, the strahl electron population in the solar wind at Earth will
be statistically followed into the magnetotail plasma sheet, into substorm
electron injections, and into the electron radiation belt. The data analysis
will be guided by computer simulations to answer questions about the evolution
of the strahl electron population as it enters into and traverses through the
magnetosphere-ionosphere system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.