* 2149771
* ANSWERS: Understanding and Forecasting Solar Energetic Particles in the Inner Solar System and Earth's Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Gang Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,132,855.00

Eruptive events on the Sun such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections
(CMEs) can greatly energize electrons, protons and heavy ions. When these "solar
energetic particles" (SEPs) interact with the Earth, they are a potential space
weather hazard. They can have adverse impacts on avionics, satellites, and
astronauts. Forecasting SEP events is a challenge because they are unpredictable
and the particles can arrive at Earth within minutes to hours of the solar
event. To mitigate the harmful effects due to SEPs on our technology-dependent
society, we need a thorough understanding of how such energetic particles are
transported and accelerated in the solar system, particularly in near-Earth
space. Due to the nature and scale of the problem, such an understanding
requires collaborative efforts from researchers in multiple disciplines,
including solar physics, space physics and geospace sciences, plasma physics and
particle physics. In this project, a multidisciplinary team from the University
of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH), University of Michigan (UM), University of
Wisconsin at River Falls, and the National Solar Observatory will develop a
comprehensive scientific model to understand and forecast SEPs. They will create
a web-based SEP forecasting tool hosted by UAH and UM for use by the space
weather community. University students and a postdoctoral researcher will have
leadership roles in all aspects of the project. The broader impacts of this
cutting-edge research effort are thus in its potential to improve societal
resilience to a space weather hazard while advancing our nation's expertise in
space science and space weather. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
a comprehensive scientific model to understand and predict how CMEs influence
the energetic particle radiation environment in the inner solar system and
Earth's magnetosphere, and compare the results with measurements at the Earth's
surface. Two widely used models, the Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) and
the improved Particle Acceleration and Transport in the Heliosphere model
(iPATH) will be coupled. Existing gaps in SWMF and iPATH will be bridged by
developing two new models: a machine learning-assisted CME model for the lower
solar corona, and a particle tracing model for transport from the Lagrange L1
point into the magnetosphere. The integrated model will provide the ability to
simulate the propagation of SEPs from CME launch to signals detected by ground-
based neutron monitors, and account for effects on galactic cosmic rays, e.g.,
the Forbush decrease. Model validation will include comparison with neutron
monitor data for a number of ground level enhancements and large SEP events
during solar cycles 23 and 24. An integrated SEP/GCR Forecasting Tool will be
made openly accessible to the space weather community through a web interface.
Daily forecast of the SEP/GCR flux at the L1 point and inside the magnetosphere,
as well as neutron monitor flux (when applicable) will be provided at 8-hour
intervals. Given the increased interest in Sun-Earth system science, a graduate
level course on magnetospheric physics will be developed at UAH. Undergraduate
and graduate students and early-career researchers including a postdoctoral
scholar will be fully involved in the research and outreach efforts. ANSWERS
projects will advance the nationâ€™s STEM expertise and societal resilience to
space weather hazards by filling key knowledge gaps regarding the coupled Sun-
Earth system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.