* 2149555
* REU Site: Injury Science Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 392,542.00

Injuries and violence remain the leading causes of death and acquired disability
for children, youth, and young adults in the U.S. and worldwide. The Injury
Science Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia’s Center for Injury Research and Prevention (CHRP)
provides a personalized internship experience for a diverse pool of talented
interns with the aim of inspiring the pursuit of careers in science, technology,
and engineering. This Site immerses interns in a 10-week rigorous,
interdisciplinary program of mentored scholarly research, professional
development, and graduate school preparation that results in a broadened
awareness of STEM career opportunities. The overarching goal is to provide
research training designed to encourage and enable students from STEM-limited
schools and those who are underrepresented in STEM to pursue advanced degrees,
and ultimately, careers in science and engineering. Students benefit from an
increase in knowledge, develop interest in science and engineering, gain
professional development, develop the ability to solve real-world problems, and
prepare to optimize technology for safety solutions through user-centered,
participatory design and human factors research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traffic
injuries and violence have substantially increased, fueled by societal changes
and the pandemic. This requires innovative ideas and an expanded workforce
focused on injury science to effectively develop and implement novel prevention
strategies. The Injury Science Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia’s Center for Injury Research and
Prevention (CHRP) provides a personalized internship experience for a diverse
pool of talented interns with the aim of inspiring the pursuit of careers in
science, technology, and engineering. This REU site renewal project focuses on
the leading injury risks to children – traffic crashes, sports-related injury,
and violence. Students will have access to and engage in research projects with
faculty using large, unique datasets through data science; leverage large
clinical exposure of human factors engineering (to optimize safe driving and
care delivery during crises); employ neuroscience preeminence for bench-to-
bedside translational science (animal models, virtual reality and
magnetoencephalographic assessments, and head impact sensors); and interact with
a large and diverse clinical population to advance pediatric rehabilitation. A
cohort of 8 interns each year will engage in Injury Science to advance research
and training innovations that elucidate injury mechanisms and develop novel
prevention strategies and technologies as the future injury science workforce.
New for this renewal are increased recruitment levels of racial/ethnic
minorities from STEM-limited schools and increased participation from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) through nationwide on-site
HBCU recruitment visits and dedicated positions for HBCU
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.