* 2149592
* Collaborative Research: Assessing denitrification and other strategies for planktic foraminiferal survival under dysoxic conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Catherine Davis, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2025
* USD 63,495.00

As the oxygen levels in the world’s oceans are decreasing, the coastal areas
that cannot support life (‘dead zones’) and open ocean oxygen minimum zones
(OMZs) are increasing. The expansion of deoxygenation has significant ecological
consequences and impacts global climate through biologically-mediated carbon and
nitrogen cycling changes. Understanding the survival strategies and
biogeochemical contributions of organisms that tolerate very low-oxygen
environments is thus critical. This project investigates the strategies that
free-floating foraminifera, an important group of eukaryotic single-celled
organisms, use to survive within the OMZ. A particular focus is whether
foraminifera in the water column can respire nitrogen like foraminifera species
within the ocean floor and contribute significantly to global nitrogen cycling.
This project supports two early-career female scientists, including one from an
underrepresented group in geosciences, and at sea and laboratory training for
one graduate student and several undergraduates at North Carolina State
University. In addition, science outreach includes a Science-through-Art
exhibition in collaboration with a professor at the University of Iowa and a
multimedia multi-sensory teaching module for freshman high school students in
Falmouth, MA, to share aspects of the project about marine species living in
deoxygenated settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to elucidate the biological strategies planktic foraminifera use to thrive in
dysoxic and anoxic environments in the pelagic ocean. The project tests three
interrelated hypotheses: 1. OMZ-dwelling planktic foraminifera are capable of
performing denitrification; 2. Denitrification is widespread among planktic
foraminifera, within and beyond OMZ-affiliated taxa; 3. Planktic foraminifera
capable of nitrate respiration do so regardless of macroenvironmental oxygen
concentrations. Samples from depth-stratified net tows (MOCNESS) along a north-
south transect above and within the Northeastern Pacific OMZ are used to
quantify the abundance and distribution of planktic foraminifera across oxygen
gradients and to understand how planktic foraminifera tolerate low-oxygen
environments. Metatranscriptomic analyses of foraminifera species thought to
live in variable oxygen environments are used to test for the presence of
denitrification pathways. Additional shipboard incubations of individuals allow
direct testing for denitrification. These analyses are assessing how widespread
denitrification potential is among planktic foraminifera and under what oxygen
concentrations foraminifera may actively denitrify. Additionally, analysis of
preserved foraminifera are determining cytoplasm nitrate and nitrogen isotope
content and cytological studies to elucidate ultrastructure to reveal other
potential survival strategies (i.e., symbiosis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.