* 2149893
* REU site: Advanced Interdisciplinary Materials Research for Maritime Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Vijaya Chalivendra, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 430,631.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award establishes a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth (UMassD) to provide an exciting residential setting for summer cohorts
of 10 community college students and involve in interdisciplinary research in
advanced materials relevant to marine economy. This summer program supported by
Division of Materials Research and Division of Ocean Sciences, begins with
training sessions on safe laboratory practices, research ethics, research
communication skills; and includes hands-on experience with research
instrumentation, field trips to local industries and national research
laboratories, and career advising. The summer research program culminates with
an oral symposium, and open forum on industry and research careers with invited
eminent marine materials scholars. This interdisciplinary site integrates the
efforts of dedicated educators from four departments (Bioengineering, Chemistry,
Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering) who have
strong track records in mentoring students for research. The entire summer
activities are designed to facilitate community college students to seek jobs in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields or pursue
education in four-year research university and develop meaningful relationships
with faculty and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative materials and their broader use are
vital to improve the structural reliability and life cycle performance of ships
and maritime structures, to lower their environmental footprint, to make
maritime industries more viable at a global scale and thus to generate and
sustain employment. Many young scientists in STEM disciplines are naturally
fascinated by these outstanding challenges as they search for a greater drive
for their education and meaningful ways to serve society. The overarching goal
of this REU site is to prepare scholars to address the challenges in advanced
materials and fill critical gaps in knowledge on materials needed to transform
marine technologies. The REU participants at this site conduct independent
research on projects that will leverage and advance a wide range of studies on
novel materials currently underway at UMassD, including: nonaqueous redox flow
batteries, multi-functional sandwich composites, functional composite materials
for structural energy storage, underwater super-hydrophobic surfaces, tactile
sensors, bioinspired photonic materials, meta-materials, granular materials, and
nanostructured surfaces for antifouling. With the inter-disciplinary nature of
these research projects, faculty and students interact and advance the materials
science across different fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.