* 2149305
* SaTC: CORE: Small: On Cryptography and Kolmogorov Complexity
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rafael Pass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Whether one-way functions (OWFs) exist is arguably the most important problem in
Cryptography: OWFs are known to be both necessary and sufficient for most of the
basic cryptographic building blocks, such as CPA-secure private-key encryption,
pseudorandom generators and functions, digital signatures, and authentication
protocols, to name but a few. But the question of whether OWFs properly exist is
wide open. Until very recently, known candidate constructions of OWFs relied on
various types of conjectures, be they number-theoretic or lattice-based, but
none of them are known to be equivalent to the existence of OWFs. The goal of
this project is to develop a closer connection between standard complexity-
theoretic problems---and most notably those arising from the study of Kolmogorov
complexity---and cryptographic assumptions, such as OWFs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In recent work, the investigator has presented the first natural
complexity-theoretic problem whose average-case hardness characterizes the
existence OWFs: It was shown that the existence of OWFs is equivalent to (mild)
average-case hardness of the so-called "time-bounded Kolmogorov complexity
problem", a central problem in algorithmic information theory that has been
studied since the 1960s. This project aims to leverage and further develop this
connection between Cryptography and Kolmogorov Complexity. Concrete directions
include: (a) identify additional natural problems whose average-case hardness is
equivalent to the existence of OWFs; (b) characterize OWFs with additional
structure, or more advanced cryptographic primitives; (c) demonstrate
limitations of basing OWFs on general average-case hardness of NP; (d) study the
possibility of basing cryptographic primitives, or relaxations thereof, on the
worst-case hardness of primitives related to Kolmogorov complexity. Taken
together, the goal is to provide a stronger theoretical underpinning of OWFs
(with or without extra structure), and to further elucidate to what extent the
existence of such functions can be based on more standard complexity-theoretic
assumptions (such as NP != P).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.