* 2149140
* DDRIE: Emigration: A Blessing or a Curse: Empirical Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Nathan Nunn, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2023
* USD 30,423.00

While economists know a lot about the socio-economic effects of international
migration on the destination countries, the long-term impact of migration on
source countries remains unclear and difficult to measure due to data limitation
and selection issues. Because only the most able and entrepreneurial migrate,
there are economic losses to countries of origin. On the other hand, migrants
may send remittances and may return to their home countries with new skills that
boosts economic development. This research project will use a unique archival
data on international migration merged with data on contemporary economic
conditions in source countries and innovative methodology to study the effects
of international migration on source countries. The unique historical data,
combined with the innovative research methods will allow the researchers to
overcome the selection problems in the studies of migration. The results of this
research project provide a better understanding of the benefits of international
migration to both source and destination countries. The results will also inform
migration policies in both source and destination
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DDRIE uses a combination of
local level historical and contemporary data to study the effects of
international emigration on source regions. To construct the independent
variable, the researchers will collect and digitize individual conscripted
soldier files containing detailed information such as their place of birth, year
of birth, station of deployment and regiment of assignment, for each soldier who
ever served in the army from archival sources. The research measures economic
development at the local level using census data, satellite data and the
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Preliminary results suggest that
conditional on the total number of soldiers enlisted in the army, the number of
soldiers who were conscripted is strongly positively correlated with the several
measures of current economic development and high emigration rates from source
regions. The results of this research project will provide a better
understanding of the mechanisms through which international migration occur as
well as the benefits of such migration to both source and destination countries.
The results will also inform migration policies in both source and destination
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.