* 2149418
* Social Networks and Migration
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Ahmed Mobarak, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 10/31/2023
* USD 257,148.00

This research project will use experimental methods to study whether programs
connecting new migrants to experienced migrants outside their social networks
can improve migration outcomes. While migration is among the most effective
strategies to improve the functioning of labor markets and reduce poverty, many
individuals, particularly vulnerable ones, face large barriers to profitable
migration opportunities. As a result, labor shortages exist in one part of a
country/region while high unemployment rates exist in other parts, thus slowing
economic growth and increasing poverty. The project will leverage an on-going
field experiment in a high-migration region to evaluate a migration mentorship
program. The innovatively designed experiment will help to answer whether
policies that leverage social networks and support systems can help people
migrate to better opportunities, with many potential applications to many
regions, including wealthier regions of the world. The results of this research
project will help to improve the functioning of domestic and international labor
markets, hence increase economic growth, and reduce poverty in the U.S. and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate experimental evidence
on the effects of changes in social network structure on migration. The project
will make use of an existing phone sample in a high-circular-migration region of
Nepal. It will randomly assign 2,000 potential migrants to receive one of three
interventions or a control condition. The interventions are: (1) standard
information on migration opportunities delivered by program staff; (2) standard
information on migration opportunities plus idiosyncratic information delivered
by an experienced migrant from their locality; and (3) intervention (2) plus
multiple 1-1 meetings and the opportunity to migrate with an experienced migrant
from their locality. The researchers will collect additional data on 2,000
potential migrants in the social networks of these potential program recipients.
They will conduct six rounds of phone surveys before the intervention, during
the intervention period, during the migration season, and after the migration
season. These surveys will track changes in beliefs and attitudes towards
migration to various destinations, migration and migration experiences, earnings
and remittances, and the welfare of family members at home. The results of this
research will provide inputs into policies to improve the functioning of
domestic and international labor markets, hence increase economic growth, and
reduce poverty in the U.S. and globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.