* 2149982
* REU/RET Site: Summer Research Experiences in Renewable and Sustainable Energy Technology (ReSET)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 394,708.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU/RET SITE: Summer Research
Experiences in Renewable and Sustainable Energy Technology (ReSET) jointly
hosted by the Materials Science and Engineering Department and the Maryland
Energy Innovation Institute (MEI2) in the Clark School of Engineering at the
University of Maryland will provide a 10-week REU program for eight
undergraduate students and a 6-week RET for two high school STEM (science,
technology, engineering, or math) teachers. Each summer participant will conduct
research related to the development of new technologies for renewable energy
production and sustainable energy generation, storage, and use. To increase the
broadening participation impact, the program focuses on chemistry, physics and
engineering undergraduate students from community colleges, minority serving
institutions, and non-PhD research institutions and science teachers from high
schools that serve high poverty and traditionally underserved communities. The
program goals are to: (1) provide REU students with the background, skills, and
self-confidence to enter careers in energy research and related STEM fields, and
(2) provide teachers with research project-based teaching materials to introduce
K9-K12 students to clean energy problems and engineering solutions using
mathematics and science to increase understanding and interest in the STEM
fields. In addition to the research experiences, participants will have career
exploration and professional development opportunities through faculty mentors,
lectures and lab tours, as well as team-building activities for an inclusive
cohort experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual center of the ReSET program focuses on
projects exploring a wide range of excellent lab-based and computational
research activities to develop new energy technologies and then translate them
into real world advancements. The projects span a broad range of materials and
materials limited issues and propose solutions using ceramics, metals, organic
materials and more. Topics include low temperature, low energy consumption ways
to fix nitrogen in fertilizer or fuels, rapid nanomanufacturing of materials for
energy applications, the fabrication and testing of solid-state batteries, and
low environmental impact approaches to make transparent electrodes for devices.
Participants will acquire experience in state-of-the-art hands-on scientific
methods, data analysis, modeling and simulation, and best practices in
laboratory safety protocols. In addition to conducting individual research
projects, participants will develop their writing and presentation skills,
attend lectures and participate in discussions on ethics and sustainability in a
welcoming, supportive environment. The STEM teachers will develop new teaching
materials based on their research to help their students relate science and
mathematics to energy problems they want to solve. The RET was included with the
REU to increase the impact of the program through teacher facilitated outreach
to economically disadvantaged or underrepresented high school students.
Recruiting students from community colleges and schools with limited research
opportunities will enhance the impact of the REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.