* 2149897
* REU SITE: University of Kansas Physics and Astronomy Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Hartwin Peelaers, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 398,029.00

This award seeks to establish a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
site at the University of Kansas with the objective of exposing ten
undergraduate participants for 10 weeks per summer to research in the areas of
astronomy, astroparticle physics, high energy theory, and condensed matter
theory and experiment. The mentoring faculty of the Department of Physics and
Astronomy at the University of Kansas have experience designing short-term
research projects and including student results in publications. At the same
time participants will increase their computing skills through a computational
bootcamp during the first week, and develop professional skills such as
scientific writing, presenting, and discussing
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will offer participating students,
after completion of their research projects, the opportunity to attend a
scientific conference and present their results. In addition, this REU will
provide ethics training, including workshops on implicit bias, bystander
intervention, and research ethics. The scientific activities will be
supplemented with graduate student mentoring and departmental social activities,
including student-run Diversity in Physics gatherings. Participant recruitment
efforts will be National, but will provide a particular focus on students from
smaller colleges in the Midwest and underrepresented students (URM).
Applications will be evaluated holistically including both cognitive and non-
cognitive assessments, and a certain number of participant slots will be
provided for underrepresented students and women/non-binary students. A keystone
outcome of this REU program is to have participating students present at
national scientific conferences. This will broaden their exposure to the fields
of physics and astronomy while increasing their visibility, which is especially
important in ensuring the success of URM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.