* 2149128
* Illuminating the physiology, cellular characteristics, and ecogenomics of the first cultivated strain of the SAR86 lineage
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Michael Rappe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2025
* USD 748,827.00

Since their initial discovery nearly 30 years ago, a group of marine bacteria
known as SAR86 has come to be recognized as one of the main groups of
microorganisms inhabiting the global surface ocean, where they can make up 20%
or more of the planktonic cells that live in seawater. SAR86 cells appear to
employ a heterotrophic lifestyle wherein the energy for cellular growth and
metabolism is derived from organic compounds, and oxygen is converted to carbon
dioxide via aerobic respiration. This basal metabolism appears to be
supplemented by harvesting energy from sunlight using a unique light-harvesting
system based on a protein known as proteorhodopsin. Despite its global
prevalence and thus importance to understanding Earth’s major elemental cycles,
a major factor that limits understanding of SAR86 marine bacteria is the lack of
cultured isolates, such that even the most basic cellular features and metabolic
traits are unknown. This study leverages the first isolated strain from the
SAR86 lineage in a set of experiments designed to characterize basic aspects of
SAR86 cells and to link metabolic traits with specific genetic features of
SAR86. Collectively, these experiments are increasing understanding of one of
the global-ocean’s most abundant microbial inhabitants. This project also
supports the maintenance and public dissemination of a culture collection of
marine microorganisms at the University of Hawaiʻi, the development of an
educational module that focuses on the ecology of marine microbes inhabiting
coastal Hawaiʻi, and the collaboration of the research team with community
education partners on a new 3-D virtual reality rendering of the research
laboratory and institute. One postdoctoral researcher, one graduate student, and
multiple undergraduates are being trained in engaging, cutting-edge research,
including the exposure of undergraduate students of native Hawaiian and Pacific
Island ancestry to hands-on research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project uses living cultures and the closed, annotated genome of the first
isolated strain of the enigmatic SAR86 clade, HIMB1674, in a set of experiments
to provide fundamental information on the cellular and physiological
characteristics of SAR86 cells and connect specific metabolic features to genes
and pathways encoded by the genome. The project links the genome of HIMB1674 to
publicly available genomes and metagenomes from around the globe and integrates
SAR86 eco-genomics into a time-series study that spans a steep coastal to open-
ocean environmental gradient in the tropical Pacific Ocean. The experiments
offer a combination of dry-lab informatic analyses, wet-lab experimentation with
cultures, and a field program that uniquely illuminates the systems biology of
SAR86 marine bacteria. The three main goals of this project are to 1) use SAR86
strain HIMB1674 to quantify basic cellular characteristics and investigate
specific metabolic features predicted from its genome, 3) use the complete
genome sequence of strain HIMB1674 as an anchor to investigate the eco-
evolutionary characteristics of the SAR86 lineage, and 3) perform experiments
designed to isolate additional SAR86 strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.