* 2149830
* REU SITE: Program in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Paul Laybourn, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2025
* USD 380,836.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Colorado
State University, located in Fort Collins, CO, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022- 2024. It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. A primary goal of this REU site is to broaden
the participation of members of underrepresented groups (minority students,
particularly from four year colleges with limited research opportunities).
Society will benefit from a greater number of better-trained molecular
bioscience researchers and educator role models, particularly from
underrepresented groups. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program exposes
undergraduates to the broad range of research areas and approaches that
constitute the modern discipline of molecular life sciences. Participants work
with faculty from a range of life science, physical science, agriculture science
and engineering departments. Potential research projects include HIV-1 protease
autoprocessing, aging, renewable energy, protein misfolding, crab molting
control, plant-bacteria interactions, thermophilic microbe DNA-dependent
processes, complex macroscopic material engineering. The program provides
workshops on science communication (oral, written, poster) and responsible
conduct of research (ethical theory, misconduct, notebook keeping, mentor/mentee
relationships, the importance of diversity in science, etc.) and on the nature
of graduate education, selecting and applying to graduate programs, fellowship
opportunities, etc. The Program Director, the Co-Director and a committee of
participating faculty members critically review both the substance and the
operation of the program based on assessments of student gains, as well as
participant quantitative and qualitative feedback. An online application
requests demographic information, an unofficial transcript, two letters of
nomination, and preferred research projects. Applications are evaluated
according to student project choice. The program directors make a final ranking
of the finalists. Offers are extended via email to the top ranked candidates
until the 10 positions are filled. More information about the program is
available by visiting https://www.bmb.colostate.edu/reu-program-description/ ,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Paul Laybourn at paul.laybourn@colostate.edu ) or
the co-PI (Dr. Lubna Tahtamouni at lubna.tahtamouni@colostate.edu
).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.