* 2149291
* An Equilibrium Model of Experimentation on Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Simon Board, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 191,630.00

This project will investigate how the balance between discovery and diffusion
depends on the nature of connections between people. Do more connections lead to
faster technological progress? Is society better off in a loosely connected
network or with many tight clusters? This project has two important features
that differentiate it from the wider literature. First, by studying both
diffusion and discovery within a single model, the project analyzes the
interconnection between the two forces and how this depends on the social
network. Second, the project considers forward-looking agents, whose incentives
for original discovery are crowded out by the possibility of learning from
others. The resulting model can be used to understand how policy changes (e.g.,
subsidizing innovation) affect society’s technological progress. The project
also speaks to a growing empirical literature that studies how people learn
about innovations from their neighbors (e.g. new production techniques or new
consumer products). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In their classic paper, Bala and Goyal
(1998) study agents who learn from their neighbors in a network. To make
analytical progress, they restrict attention to myopic, non-Bayesian agents,
shortcutting strategic considerations and allowing them to solve the model as a
sequence of static decision problems. In contrast, this project studies agents
who are forward-looking and Bayesian, so social learning (both past and future)
crowds out private experimentation. The key simplifying assumption is that
agents learn via a perfect good news process. While each agent faces a rich
strategy space, her “social learning curve” is described by a simple function of
time, and her best response reduces to choosing a single number: the total
amount of individual experimentation, as captured by a cutoff time. The model
thus recovers the tractability of the reduced-form models of experimentation in
a model of Bayesian learning and uses this to provide a clean characterization
of initial experimentation and subsequent contagion. The project investigates
learning and welfare as a function of the density and structure of the network.
It studies two measures of network density: (i) the size of the core in a core-
periphery network and (ii) the degree of random regular networks generated by
the configuration model. For either measure, preliminary results suggest that
aggregate (asymptotic) information decreases in network density, whereas welfare
is hump-shaped in network density, with intermediate networks striking a balance
between motivating individual discoveries and their social diffusion. The
project will also investigate network structure, including models where links
are one-directional (e.g., Twitter), bi-directional (e.g., LinkedIn) and
clustered (e.g., Facebook). It will study the effect of such network
architecture on learning and welfare in the context of tree networks. Trees both
approximate large random networks and are highly tractable, allowing the
researchers to characterize the social diffusion of information by simple
ordinary differential equations. Collectively, this project will paint a clear
picture about learning dynamics, information aggregation, and welfare in
networks of forward-looking agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.