* 2149946
* CAREER: Regulation of Hyaluronan Production and Function by Biomechanical Signals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Deva Chan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2025
* USD 511,901.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate the role
that biomechanics plays in controlling the production and function of
hyaluronan. Hyaluronan is a component of many tissues and organs in the body. It
provides structural support and lubrication for synovial joints like the knee.
The functions of hyaluronan and its interactions with other molecules are
complex and diverse, despite its relatively simple structure. The mechanical and
biological roles of hyaluronan depend on a number of factors. These can include
its size, the types of molecules and cells with which it interacts, the
characteristics of the hyaluronan-rich structures that form around a cell, and
other factors that remain undiscovered. This research program will study how
mechanical loading affects the production of hyaluronan by different cell types
in the joint, and the resulting differences in both function and interactions of
these hyaluronan products. The results of this work will reveal how mechanical
and biological signals can alter its production and function. Given that
hyaluronan is produced in almost all tissues of the body, this knowledge has the
potential to advance science and human health. Specifically, by increasing our
knowledge of synovial joints (like the knee and elbow) and also other
hyaluronan-rich organs such as the gut and brain. Complementary to the
scientific research will be education and outreach efforts. These will target
populations that are typically under-served by programs in science technology
engineering and math (STEM). Specifically, this will include first-generation
college students, high-school student-athletes, and middle to high school
students in the Capital Region of New York State. Involvement of undergraduate
and graduate student researchers in these activities will enhance the impact and
reach of these educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
scientific goal of the research is to discover how mechanical cues alter
hyaluronan turnover and the assembly of the hyaluronan-rich pericellular coat.
Utilizing cells of the synovial joint as a study system, the research objectives
are (1) to probe whether mechanical stimuli affect hyaluronan synthesis and
degradation in a magnitude- and frequency-dependent manner and (2) to
characterize the extent to which mechanical loading can alter hyaluronan
turnover and formation of a pericellular coat under pro-inflammatory conditions.
Experimental results will inform computational models that establish the
relationships among mechanical cues hyaluronan synthesis and turnover and the
resulting properties of the hyaluronan-rich matrix. The research outcomes of
this project will have transformative impact on the understanding of hyaluronan
as both a mechanically and biologically active molecule in the synovial joint
and more broadly advance knowledge at the intersection of mechanobiology and
hyaluronan sciences. The long-term impacts of this work, beyond the future
application to improving human health, will also broaden participation and
retention of underrepresented groups in biomechanical research and STEM careers
through outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.