* 2149969
* REU Site: TaMaLe - Testing and Machine Learning for Context-Driven Systems: Research Experience for Undergraduates
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Renee Bryce, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2025
* USD 404,957.00

TaMaLe (Testing and Machine Learning for Context-Driven Systems), a renewal
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at University of North Texas,
engages 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks with problems in the context-
driven system domain. The students explore research problems to improve the
reliability and security of context-driven systems. Context-driven systems, such
as mobile apps, face constant streams of input from both users and context
changes in their environments. Users interact with apps through touch and speech
interfaces. These systems also respond to context events that occur in their
environments such as changes to network connection, battery level, screen
orientation, and more. The combined explosion of possible user events and
context event sequences pose new challenges that require cost effective testing
solutions. Students and mentors in this REU program work in small teams to
develop and empirically evaluate new software testing techniques for context-
driven systems using strategies such as reinforcement learning and
combinatorial-based techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project's broader
significance and importance are that it trains three diverse cohorts heavily
recruited from underrepresented groups. Students gain basic research skills to
better prepare them for graduate school, including working with researchers and
gaining the ability to formulate research questions, design experiments,
critically analyze results, and develop written and oral communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.