* 2149871
* REU Site: DIAMONDS: Directed and Mentored Opportunities in Data Science
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Lenore Cowen, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 404,206.00

The DIAMONDS: Directed and Mentored Opportunities in Data Science Research
Experiences for Undergraduates site has a special focus on recruiting and
welcoming students who are under-represented in data science and other STEM
fields, as well as those who have little access to research opportunities in
data science at their home institutions. It will provide early exposure and a
swift ramp-up to performing research in a rapidly expanding, high priority area,
where having the machine learning and data science toolbox will enable students
to participate in the data revolution. The program is designed to support
student success and build confidence. Therefore, it will emphasize the
interdisciplinary aspects of data science, enabling students to develop skills
in data analysis, analytical thinking, and problem solving, as well as technical
presentation development and delivery. The goal is to strengthen and diversify
the pipeline for graduate and professional data scientists through providing
supportive community experience to a diverse set of talented students. To
support this goal, a deep network of recruiting collaborations has been
developed, including regional partners in the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As DIAMONDS Scholars progress
through the program, they will gain (1) the ability to critically analyze data
and synthesize information; (2) awareness of tools for data analysis; (3) the
ability to critique and generate material for scientific communication; and (4)
awareness of guidelines for ethical conduct in research. Interest and commitment
to advanced study and careers in science and engineering is cultivated by
engaging undergraduate students directly in research as it is currently done at
the university level. With carefully chosen projects and highly experienced
faculty mentors, undergraduate students can participate in research experiences
that match the pacing and scope of how graduate students conduct research. The
REU Site mechanism will allow for augmentation of the research mentoring
provided to REU scholars by their individual faculty mentors with a
comprehensive program of exposure to other student and mentor research, a two-
week data science module to build on scholars' existing knowledge and skills,
social mentoring, cultural considerations, and career development
infrastructure. To encourage persistence in data science, the DIAMONDS REU will
provide scholars with a true taste of what it is like to continue in research in
graduate school or beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.