* 2149193
* Monetary Policy as a Driver of Financial Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Carolin Pflueger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 282,055.00

The actions and communications of central banks were viewed by many as important
tools to contain the economic fallout from the financial crisis of 2008-09 and
the Covid-19 pandemic. Even though financial markets are clearly an important
source of information for central bankers, the analyses of financial markets
data on the one hand and inflation and unemployment on the other usually proceed
separately, limiting their joint potential. This project will develop a new
fully structural macro-finance model and solution method integrating a small-
scale standard New Keynesian model of monetary policy with a standard model of
risk discounts in financial markets based on habit formation preferences. The
computational platform developed by this project will allow a broad set of
researchers to analyze finance habit preferences. By using this platform,
researchers in academia and policy institutions will be able to develop their
own models of the macroeconomic drivers of risks in financial markets,
ultimately leading to a better understanding of how these risks are impacted by
forces external to policy and policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI
will develop the first proof of concept model that integrates a standard New
Keynesian model of monetary policy (e.g. Gali (2008)) with highly non-linear
finance preferences and a corresponding solution technique. While both the
finance and the macroeconomic sides of this proposed model have been successful
in their independent literatures, the task of combining them has proven
challenging. One shortcoming of standard New Keynesian models is that they
assume constant risk aversion and therefore imply overly smooth prices for
stocks and bonds. On the other hand, a long-standing insight from finance
research is that investors discount risky stocks and bonds, and that these risk
discounts can be large and volatile (see e.g. Cochrane (2017) for a review). A
successful approach in finance research has been based on households’ habit
formation, which implies that investors require steeper risk discounts as
consumption falls towards a slowly moving habit level, as would be the case
after a sequence of adverse economic shocks (Campbell and Cochrane (1999),
Wachter (2005)). A key technical contribution of this research will be to
specify a macroeconomic model and solution method preserving the full
nonlinearity of Campbell, Pflueger and Viceira (2020)’s finance habit
preferences, which is needed to simultaneously model volatile stock returns and
a monetary policy rule for interest rates. The research team will then use this
model to advance our economic understanding of three empirical high-frequency
facts in financial markets: (a) Why do stock markets respond so strongly to
announcements by the Federal Reserve (Bernanke and Kuttner (2005))? This project
proposes that monetary policy moves risk discounts in the stock market precisely
because it is powerful for the real economy. (b) How effective is monetary
policy when short-term interest rates are stuck at zero? This project will newly
disentangle constraints on monetary policy from time-varying risk aversion as
reasons why the stock market responds more strongly to macroeconomic news during
recessions (Boyd, Hu and Jagannathan (2005) and Law, Song, and Yaron (2020)).
(c) This project will study to what extent learning about the monetary policy
rule occurs after the Federal Reserve has repeatedly surprised the public and
show how this learning contributes to sometimes puzzling responses of long-term
Treasury bond yields to monetary policy announcements, such as during the
“interest rate conundrum” of 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.