* 2149884
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research in Physics and Astrophysics at the University of Michigan
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* James Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 240,493.00

The Physics Department at the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor provides a
transformative research experience for undergraduate (REU) program for students
from around the country who otherwise may not have access to physics and
astrophysics research opportunities. The first objective of the program is to
prepare the students for a career in the physical sciences. The second objective
is for the students to perform cutting edge research in modern physics
laboratories with active research groups and dedicated faculty. The research
areas include astrophysics and cosmology, atomic, molecular and optical physics,
condensed matter physics, high energy physics, nonlinear dynamics, complex
systems and nuclear physics. Professional development is a critical part of this
REU program and students participate in tutorials on ethics, applying to
graduate school, applying for grants, scientific writing and giving scientific
presentations. A further programmatic initiative includes active recruitment and
careful selection for gender balance and under-representative minority
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the summer, ten students work closely
with faculty mentors on a carefully crafted ten-week research project. The
selected participants are interviewed to determine their general interests and
are then matched to faculty who are active in research in that area. The project
is defined based on the interest of the student and the research needs of the
faculty. In addition to the research project the students are exposed to a
variety of research topics and methodologies through a series of faculty
research seminars. Students engage in additional educational and social
activities, including safety training, machine shop and electronic shop classes,
lab tours and a variety of lunches with other students and faculty. These
activities allow students to put their research experience in a wider
perspective, to build a network of professional contacts, and to develop
professional skills in a scientific environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.