* 2149374
* Discrete and Rank Ordered Choice Models with Heterogeneous Preferences and Consideration
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Levon Barseghyan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2025
* USD 473,500.00

Researchers use economic theory and data on individual choices to study what
individuals want (preferences) in order to predict the welfare effects of
policies. It is therefore essential that individuals’ preferences are correctly
estimated. Existing methods of estimating preferences assume that the researcher
observes the set of all alternatives and the characteristics of each alternative
available to the individual, as well as the characteristics of all individuals
making choices. However, the economics literature shows that individuals may not
consider all alternatives available to them, or may not have access to all
existing alternatives in the market in making choices. This mismatch between
assumption and how people make choices may lead to mismeasurement of the
estimates of individuals’ preferences hence welfare analyses and policy
evaluations based on these estimated preferences may be wrong. This research
project develops new methods to identify and estimate the distribution of
preferences that recognize that there can be dependence between preferences and
consideration sets, and that consideration sets may depend on individuals’ and
alternatives’ characteristics. The methodology developed in this study will help
to better infer people’s wants from data, and hence help policy makers design
better policies to the benefit of consumers. The researchers will write and
freely distribute computer software to implement the new methods, hence make it
easier for others to use these novel methods. The results of this research
project will improve prediction, improve policy making and therefore increase
economic growth and improve the welfare of Americans. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops a new class of models that
combine preference heterogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity in consideration
sets, with the goal of building discrete choice models that are: (i) applicable
in many economic settings (e.g., school and college choice, insurance purchases,
vehicle choice); (ii) identifiable under conditions that are similar to those
required for identification of standard discrete choice models with homogeneous
consideration sets; (iii) easy to compute; and (iv) flexible enough to explain a
wide range of market phenomena that standard models have difficulty explaining.
A novel feature of the class of models is the unrestricted dependence between
heterogeneous consideration and heterogeneous preferences, as well as dependence
between consideration and regressors. The contributions of this project include,
establishing conditions for semi-nonparametric point identification on the new
models; a maximum likelihood-based estimator that achieves significant
computational gains relative to existing state-of-the-art models of discrete
choice; new testing methods for model specification and a new measure of model's
goodness of fit; and methods to carry out robust welfare analysis and study
policy questions. The project will also develop and freely distribute software
to implement the methods developed in this research. The results of this
research project will improve prediction, improve policy making and therefore
increase economic growth and improve the welfare of
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.