* 2149082
* Linear and nonlinear exciton dynamics with time-dependent density-functional theory
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Carsten Ullrich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 02/28/2025
* USD 272,070.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of light and matter
is of fundamental importance in science and technology: it determines the
characterization of materials through optical spectroscopy, forms the basis of
photovoltaics as a renewable energy resource, and opens up new technologies in
the area of quantum information. This award supports research and education
activities with an aim to develop theoretical and computational methods for
modeling light-matter interactions that are more accurate and efficient than
existing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When light gets absorbed in a
material, electrons are excited into higher states, leaving positively charged
“hole” states behind. The electrons and holes can team up and form pairs, called
excitons, which give rise to characteristic spectroscopic features and often
dominate the optical properties of materials. The theoretical and computational
description of excitonic effects is challenging, since the electron-hole pairs
exist within a solid-state environment of many electrons, and are influenced by
subtle interaction effects between them. This project will especially focus on
such interactions in two-dimensional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will utilize a quantum-mechanical method called time-dependent density-
functional theory, which has been very successful in describing the dynamics of
interacting electronic systems in many areas in physics, chemistry and materials
science. Within this theoretical framework, the PI will develop new ways of
accounting for the quantum behavior of many-electron systems in two-dimensional
materials. Another focus will be on a real-time description of light-matter
interactions that explicitly accounts for fast dynamical effects which allow the
simulation of experiments probing exciton dynamics on very short time scales in
2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will go hand in hand
with educational efforts focusing on the training and mentoring of graduate
students and postdocs and the development of innovative teaching methods. An
open-source library of computer simulations will be developed, to be used as
teaching tools for introductory courses in density-functional theory. This
addresses a clear need to make these advanced quantum mechanical topics more
accessible to learners from various backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education activities with an aim to develop and apply time-
dependent density-functional theory (TDDFT) based approaches for excitons in the
linear and nonlinear regime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research goal is to
extend the long-range corrected and the dielectrically screened hybrid
functional based approaches to describe excitons at finite momentum and in two-
dimensional (2D) materials. This requires the development of long-range
corrected exchange-correlation functionals with explicit matrix form in
reciprocal space, and of hybrid functionals that use momentum-dependent
dielectric screening models. These methods will be applied to describe dark
excitons, which are potential candidates for qubits in future quantum
information devices. The second goal is to describe ultrafast and nonlinear
excitonic effects in real time via the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation for
solids. This will be accomplished through a time-dependent version of the long-
range corrected exchange-correlation functional, suitably modified to enforce
the so-called zero-force theorem, and via hybrid functionals with explicitly
time-dependent dielectric screening. These methods will be developed and tested
with the help of 2D model systems, and they will be implemented in two codes,
INQ and Octopus. Applications will address exciton formation and dynamics in 2D
materials, the dynamical Franz-Keldysh effect, and excitonic effects in high-
harmonic generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will go hand
in hand with educational efforts focusing on the training and mentoring of
graduate students and postdocs and the development of innovative teaching
methods. An open-source library of Python-based computer simulations will be
developed, to be used as teaching tools for introductory courses in density-
functional theory. This addresses a clear need to make TDDFT more accessible to
learners from various backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.