* 2149988
* Towards Filling a Major Gap in the Greenhouse Gas Balance From the Arctic: Defining the Importance of N2O Emission in the North Slope of Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,286.00

The emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), a potent greenhouse gas (GHG), from arctic
soils to the atmosphere is unknown, but long thought to be negligible. New data
suggests otherwise, especially in areas subjected to disturbance where
vegetation cover has been lost. To better constrain these numbers and appraise
the large-scale importance of this GHG, the researchers will make measurements
across the coastal plain of Alaska. This project will continue the advancing of
a well-established outreach activities that involve local communities and
students in the North Slope of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that northern
wetland ecosystems are N limited, the research community has assumed the soil
emissions of N2O, a powerful greenhouse gas (GHG), is negligible. However, this
assumption ignores the large N pool associated with dead organic matter that can
be released upon disturbance. The investigatorâ€™s preliminary data from Alaska
suggest substantial N2O fluxes can occur, especially in terrain where ground
slumping has occurred, resulting in unvegetated areas. The investigators will
measure N2O fluxes using chambers across the North Slope of Alaska in vegetated
and unvegetated areas to quantify the large-scale importance of this GHG. The
investigators expect the results to be a step toward constraining the GHG
budget. This project will continue the development of a well-established
outreach component involving local communities and students in the North Slope
of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.