* 2149244
* Towards regenerative landscape futures: the role of policy legacies, environmental stress, and landscape change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Erica Smithwick, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2025
* USD 399,748.00

Millions of people depend on mixed agricultural and pastoral landscapes for
their livelihoods and because of these landscapesâ€™ unique conservation value.
However, many of these systems are increasingly threatened by climate extremes,
including drought, and pest outbreaks such as locust plagues, which threaten
agricultural productivity. As a result of these cumulative stressors, these
regions are experiencing increasing conflicts with global geopolitical
significance. This project aims to support landscape management approaches that
enhance human and environmental well-being in agropastoral systems. The results
of this project are intended to advance understanding of what landscape
patterns, processes, and ecosystem services best promote regenerative capacity
under contemporary and future stressors. This research also provides educational
opportunities for underrepresented students, advances a citizen science app to
monitor agricultural health, and promotes partnerships among scholars and
practitioners to better understand and support landscape-level decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds upon conceptual models and
techniques from multiple sub-disciplines of geography (landscape ecology, remote
sensing, land change science) and related frameworks (socio-ecological systems,
and resilience). The research develops the concept of regenerative landscape
design, in which landscape patterns and processes can be more purposely designed
to lead to more desirable futures. Using case studies that span broad gradients
in historical land tenure policies, biophysical settings, and contemporary or
future stressors, this research explores the challenges and opportunities of
landscape change and advances understanding of household adaptive capacity in
the context of these historical, contemporary, and future landscape patterns. A
better understanding of household and landscape level regenerative capacity can
enhance agricultural and pastoral productivity and help guide landscape-level
policies that support human well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.