* 2149427
* Development of New Techniques for Rock Deformation Using the Large Volume Torsion Apparatus
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 202,256.00

The field of rock deformation uses experimental devices to simulate the
conditions in Earth’s interior by generating tremendous pressures, temperatures,
and stresses. Deforming rocks in a laboratory setting allows researchers to
control precisely the conditions that they impose, and test systematically the
responses of rocks and minerals to these conditions. The data that are collected
are used to better understand Earth’s structure, dynamics, and geologic hazards.
For example, using rock deformation experiments scientists can determine the
viscosity of rocks in Earth’s interior. These data, in turn, help us to
understand why plate tectonics is found on Earth, but is absent on the other
rocky planets of our solar system. This project supports development of a new
type of rock deformation apparatus, in which specimens are subjected to
torsional deformation. The particular capabilities of the Large Volume Torsion
Apparatus (LVT2) enable experiments that reproduce conditions similar to those
along boundaries between Earth’s tectonic plates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LVT2
will be a uniquely capable tool for investigating the microphysics of rock
deformation, rheology at plate boundaries, and the origins of seismic anisotropy
in the crust and upper mantle. Previous support made possible the design and
construction of the LVT2. This current project will allow the investigators,
including a postdoctoral scholar, to (1) develop calibrations, techniques, and
standard operating procedures, and (2) conduct preliminary experiments of
scientific merit to evaluate the efficacy these procedures. Precise calibrations
and robust standard operating procedures will yield a high level of safety and
reliability, making rock deformation experiments more accessible to
undergraduate students, external collaborators, and other short-term visitors.
Support of a postdoctoral scholar will provide training to an early career
scientists. Preliminary experiments to investigate the development of
crystallographic preferred orientation will be used to better interpret seismic
anisotropy in the mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.