* 2149105
* RII Track-1: Anticipating the Climate-Water Transition and Cascading Challenges to Socio-Environmental Systems in America's Headwaters
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* David Williams, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 05/31/2027
* USD 7,442,888.00

The Anticipating the Climate-Water Transition and Cascading Challenges to Socio-
Environmental Systems in America's Headwaters (WY-ACT) project will bring
together researchers from across Wyoming to address critical water resource
challenges arising from climate change in Wyoming and the Rocky Mountain region.
Researchers will identify challenges, quantify risks, and predict societal
consequences of shifting climate conditions in the nation’s critical headwater
areas, limited by uncertainties in how hydrological, ecological, and
sociological systems interact. Wyoming provides the prefect system to study
these climate uncertainties due to its mountainous ecosystems that link high-
elevation National Parks and other federal lands to a mosaic of lower-elevation
tribal, state, federal, and private lands and waters. The project is designed to
create solutions to strains on water availability resulting from climate change
by building trusted networks with communities who will have opportunities to
provide input as well as help the project team formulate outcomes. The project
will provide significant opportunities to engage Wyoming communities in STEM
education and develop significant computational resources for the state. WY-ACT
will be administered by the University of Wyoming in collaboration with Central
Wyoming College and Western Ecosystem Technology, a private
company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Anticipating the Climate-Water Transition and
Cascading Challenges to Socio-Environmental Systems in America's Headwaters (WY-
ACT) project will create a world-class research and STEM training facility that
will address critical water resource challenges arising from climate change in
Wyoming and the Rocky Mountain region. WY-ACT’s goals are to: 1) identify
climate-driven risks to interacting hydrological, ecological and social systems;
2) reveal opportunities and limits for how communities and stakeholders respond
to climate-induced risks; 3) evaluate how the process of co-production enhances
adaptive capacity for key stakeholders by building trust in numerical models;
and 4) integrate the understanding and quantification of risks and uncertainties
across climate, hydrological, ecological, and social systems that are informed
by models, observations, and stakeholder collaboration. These project goals will
be achieved by a transdisciplinary approach that includes social science,
climate science, economics, hydrology, data science, ecology, and communication.
Additionally, this project recognizes the value of involving Tribal Nations in
co-production, and will include indigenous knowledge, practitioner knowledge,
experiential knowledge, and scientific ways of understanding to inform and
enhance the understanding of changing water availability and its
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.