* 2149550
* Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow (BEST) Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Crabtree, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 985,356.00

Commercial buildings are a predominant feature of U.S. cities that account for
almost 20% of greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) in the U.S. There is increased
pressure in the U.S. to reduce GHG emissions and conserve non-renewable energy
resources that is leading to a need to reduce the consumption of energy in
commercial buildings. At the same time, research on Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) certified buildings suggests that improved indoor
environmental quality increases worker productivity. The federal Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) estimates that there are 292,000 "HVAC Mechanics and
Installers" employed in the U.S. and that the field will add almost 40,000 new
positions between 2014 and 2024, a much faster than average rate of growth. A
study for the HVACR Workforce Development foundation estimates that 70% of
openings in the field are middle skill jobs requiring postsecondary education
and that the demand for these workers outstrips supply. To address these issues,
it is necessary to educate a workforce of Building Automation Systems (BAS)
Specialists as well as High Performance Building Operations Professionals
(HPBOP). The Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow (BEST) Center will
focus on growing its national network of community and technical colleges
interested in improving and/or developing new building science technician
education programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST Center proposes to serve as a
national vehicle for the collection, dissemination, and adoption of responsive,
timely, and exceptional educational programs, courses, lab applications, and
innovative instructional methods for the education of building systems
technicians. This project outlines three goals: 1) Transform the instructional
capacity of community colleges in the field of building technician education,
with an emphasis on HPBOP and BAS training and certification; 2) Engage industry
stakeholders and research partners in a national collaboration with community
colleges to support high quality building science instructional programs; and,
3) Strengthen the national STEM pipeline for building technicians, focusing on
outreach to both high school students and underrepresented adult learners. The
Center will continue to archive model curriculum and disseminate and promote
adoption of this model curriculum nationwide.