* 2149016
* EAR-Climate: An Open-Source Facility for Water-Organic-Rock-Microbe (WORM) Reaction Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Grayson Boyer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,275,352.00

Computer models are widely used to reveal underlying reasons for why water
compositions change, how soils develop, how toxic compounds spread through the
environment, how microorganisms access energy supplies and nutrients, and how
major geologic processes lead to the formation of ore deposits, petroleum
reservoirs, volcanoes, and natural disasters. All too often access to such
models requires advanced training, major commitments of time, and proprietary
software. The Water-Organic-Rock-Microbe (WORM) computational ecosystem provides
access to these calculations through an open-source, online platform with built-
in software tools and interactive demonstrations accessible to anyone through an
internet browser. Students, teachers, researchers, and members of the general
public have been actively learning about and performing geochemical calculations
on the WORM Portal since the server went live in early 2020. As a facility the
WORM Portal will broaden its variety of applications and its user
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new computational modules,
expand engagement throughout the Earth Science community including
underrepresented groups and students, and provide multiple new formats for
delivering WORM computational tools. This project will extend WORM modeling
tools to include mass transfer during weathering and alteration, and chemical
power supplies that support microbes in natural fluids and experimental media.
In addition, new complementary modules will enhance existing thermodynamic data
regression and estimation modules. Engagement will expand through online
workshops, tutorials developed from Indigenous perspectives, and in-class
student projects, as well as introductory and advanced videos. In addition to
maintaining the current WORM Portal and establishing its cloud-based
counterpart, access will be diversified though a portable, containerized version
of WORM operable out of internet contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded with contributions from the Geoinformatics Program, the
Instrumentation &amp; Facilities Program, and the Geobiology &amp; Low-
Temperature Geochemistry Program; and a collaboration between the Directorate
for Geosciences and Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and
open science activities in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.