* 2149705
* REU Site: Physiology, Ecology, and Development in Changing Oceans (PEDCO)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Adam Summers, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2025
* USD 349,617.00

This REU Site Award to the University of Washingtonâ€™s Friday Harbor Labs, in
Friday Harbor, WA, will support the training of 15 students for 8 weeks during
the summers of 2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 45 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-
represented group, will be trained in the program. Applications are encouraged
from a diverse group of motivated young scientists and students from
institutions with limited opportunities for research. HBCU, minority serving
institutions, and community college students are especially encouraged to apply.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done
through an online assessment tool. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU focuses on
the marine environment, with an emphasis on marine ecology, developmental
biology, disease ecology, and physiology. Mentors from the Departments of
Biology, Oceanography, Forestry, Wildlife, and Fisheries will be involved. The
program includes one on one mentoring as well as group training in cross cutting
topics that include ethics in research, statistics, career pathways, bias, and
diversity. Students should apply through the web portal (below). Applicants will
be selected by the PIs and mentors based on essays, interest in research, and
letters of recommendation to recruit a diverse cohort with a range of academic
experience. REU participants are selected by mentors and principal investigators
Examples of research projects include the ecology of armored shores, evolution
of meiofaunal organisms, armor in fishes, seagrass disease ecology, and
evolutionary morphology of fishes using micro-CT scanning and phylogenetic
comparative methods. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://fhl.uw.edu/research/student-financial-aid-for-research/summer- research-
internships/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Adam Summers at fishguy@uw.edu) or
the co-PI (Dr. Amy Cook cooka@evergreen.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.