* 2149602
* FDA Scholar Program: Blood-Mimicking Phantoms for Assessing Oximetry Performance of Photoacoustic Imaging Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound is a powerful tool to image diseases
including cancer, orthopedic disorders, and heart function. One limitation of
ultrasound is that it suffers from low contrast (contrast is the difference in
signal intensity between the region of interest and the background tissue).
Therefore, there is a large body of research into a special kind of ultrasound
known as photoacoustic imaging. Photoacoustic imaging uses light to generate
sound only in the area of interest—this increases the contrast. Unfortunately,
photoacoustic ultrasound is not yet approved for widespread use in people. This
might be partially due to a lack of devices and methods to validate and
standardize the novel imaging equipment needed for photoacoustic imaging.
Therefore, this work will create specialized plastic objects with optical and
acoustic properties that mimic human tissue with different amounts of tissue
oxygenation. These objects can be used to calibrate and standardize
photoacoustic imaging equipment. This proposal combines expertise from academia
and the Food and Drug Administration to identify materials that have similar
optical and acoustic properties as human tissue. We will then add dyes that have
absorption spectra similar to hemoglobin. The resulting test objects will
improve knowledge of how to best create photoacoustic imaging instrumentation
that measures tissue oxygenation and might also streamline regulatory approval
of this equipment. In turn, this will increase patient access to this important
imaging technique to ultimately advance the health and quality of life of US
taxpayers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Photoacoustic
imaging provides deep tissue imaging similar to ultrasound but with enhanced
optical contrast and additional functional and molecular imaging capabilities.
However, no standardized performance test methods or phantoms exist for
photoacoustic imaging system evaluation unlike mature techniques such as
computed tomography. The fundamental limitation—and scientific problem to be
studied here—is a lack of materials to simultaneously simulate tissue properties
over a broad range of optical wavelengths and acoustic frequencies. This leaves
investigators, instrument manufacturers, and regulatory agencies without clear
strategies to evaluate device safety and effectiveness. Our prior work with the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) built stable, biologically relevant imaging
phantoms with well-characterized optical absorption/scattering coefficients,
acoustic impedance, etc. that broadly simulate tissue over a wide range of
optical wavelengths and acoustic frequencies. We will now integrate chromophores
to simulate tissue oxygenation (SO2) over a range of oxygen saturation/perfusion
values. Objective 1 of this research will develop phantoms that simulate blood
oxygen-dependent photoacoustic spectra. Combinations of dyes will be selected to
develop tunable formulations that reproduce blood-like multispectral
photoacoustic signals at sets of discrete optical wavelengths commonly used for
photoacoustic oximetry. Photoacoustic-derived SO2 measurements will be compared
against ground truth values as well as against photoacoustic measurements in
bovine blood with variable SO2. Ground truth SO2 of bovine blood will be
measured by oximetry. Objective 2 will use the phantoms to establish
quantitative oximetry test methods. These methods will be performed on three
different photoacoustic systems located at UCSD and FDA. Phantoms with different
background optical properties and containing blood-mimicking inclusions at
different depths and mimicked SO2 levels will be used for parametric study of
photoacoustic device oximetry performance. Improvements in the SO2 measurement
accuracy of our three photoacoustic systems using various fluence correction
algorithms will be quantified to determine device sensitivity to tissue
properties and morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.