* 2149158
* Collaborative Research: Building a Framework for the Causes of and Solutions to the Pluralistic Ignorance Gap on Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Sara Constantino, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 219,319.00

When faced with large, complex societal problems, people rely on information
about others’ beliefs and behaviors to decide whether and how to act. Adaptive
social learning, however, only works when people accurately sense others’
thoughts and actions. Unfortunately, mounting evidence shows large, systematic
and persistent errors in perceptions about the beliefs and actions of others. In
particular, people most dramatically underestimate others’ climate concerns and
willingness to act. These underestimates can stifle civic engagement, productive
dialogue, policy support, and collective action by the general public, and
discourage responses from elected officials, who respond to what they see as
their constituents’ priorities. This research develops a framework to better
understand why people have mispreceptions and what methods can improve the
accuracy of perceptions. Closing this gap can encourage public and private
actors to take steps towards addressing climate change. Furthermore,
understanding the causes of persistent social misperceptions is relevant for a
broad range of problems. By studying a fundamental cognitive challenge for
collective action, this research contributes to scholarship on opinion formation
and supports the development of communication strategies that take into account
humankind’s social nature to more effectively mobilize climate
action.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Addressing collective action problems such as
climate change requires individuals to engage in a host of coordinated behaviors
to effect widespread systemic changes. Recent work suggests that individuals are
more likely to take action when they believe that others share their concerns
and desire for action. Yet, while most people are concerned about climate
change, they systematically underestimate others’ concern, which can inhibit
action toward addressing collective challenges. Drawing on interdisciplinary
research, this project uses cross-sectional, longitudinal, and experimental
designs across multiple samples to develop and test an integrative framework
illuminating drivers of pervasive social misperceptions and pathways for
correcting these biases. The proposed studies progress in three phases: 1)
identifying and testing plausible explanations for social misperceptions; 2)
developing and comparing methods for correcting misperceptions; and 3) testing
interventions in high-impact and ecologically valid contexts, including with a
sample of decision makers. The proposed research will advance the literatures in
cognitive science, judgment and decision making, social psychology, and
communications related to persistent and systematic misperceptions about
collective norms. The research extends previous work by identifying and testing
mechanisms by which misperceptions develop and persist and how they can be
ameliorated, helping policymakers and educators tailor messages
accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.