* 2149221
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Selling College: The Effect of Advertising on Enrollment Choices and Student Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,550.00

A college education can be a vehicle for economic opportunity and social
mobility, but prospective students with less educated parents or lower-income
backgrounds often lack information about available college options and their
benefits and costs. Given this, and the complexity of the higher education
market, it comes as little surprise that U.S. colleges—mostly for-profit
schools—have spent as much as $1.65 billion annually on advertisements in recent
years. Despite the proliferation of college ads, little is known about how
advertising impacts enrollment choices, and whether it remedies gaps in
awareness and information, which may improve individuals’ postsecondary choices
and degree attainment, or exploits the gaps using misleading or deceptive
content, which may lead to costly enrollment mistakes and widen socioeconomic
gaps in college completion. This project will investigate how college TV
advertising affects enrollment at less-selective postsecondary institutions. The
researchers will use several large datasets and state-of-the-art methods to
estimate the effects of college advertising on individuals’ enrollment choices,
degree completion, and earnings. The questions studied and knowledge generated
in this project are relevant to issues of college access and equity, as groups
historically excluded from U.S. higher education are more likely to be targeted
and influenced by college advertisements. The findings from this research will
provide empirical evidence to inform policy conversations about college
advertising, pricing, and accountability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies how college advertising impacts individuals’ tertiary enrollment
decisions, degree completion, and post-college earnings. The first part of the
project will examine how TV advertising affects demand for college. The PIs will
estimate causal impacts of colleges’ own advertising, and that of competitors,
on new undergraduate enrollments, and will analyze the patterns of advertising-
induced enrollment substitution across different types of colleges. To identify
the impacts of advertising on demand, the PIs will use a novel strategy that
exploits exogenous variation in the realized impressions, or views, of TV ads.
The PIs will implement the research design using a new dataset on college
advertising, created by linking ad-level data to annual institution-level data
on U.S. colleges. The second part of the project will study how college
advertising impacts students’ educational and labor market outcomes. The PIs
will combine advertising data with a longitudinal administrative database from
one large state containing education and wage data of high school graduates. A
border strategy will be used to identify and estimate the impact of advertising
on college persistence, degree completion, and wages. Results from the first
part of the project will show the extent to which colleges’ own TV advertising
generates new enrollments and whether competitors’ ads reduce enrollments or
generate positive enrollment spillovers. The results from the second part will
reveal if individuals’ educational and earnings outcomes are improved or
worsened by college ads, which will provide suggestive evidence of whether
college advertising is informative, deceptive, or
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.