* 2149344
* The Impact of Sustained Unconditional Cash Transfers on Labor Market Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Eva Vivalt, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2025
* USD 549,136.00

This research project will use a large data set and experimental methods to
investigate the medium and long-term effects of unconditional cash transfers on
labor market outcomes such as time use, job search, motivation, and worker
bargaining power. Policymakers across the globe increasingly use unconditional
cash transfers as mechanisms for promoting economic mobility and poverty
reduction. However, the long-term impacts of these programs, including what
happens when transfers end, remain insufficiently studied. Understanding how
unconditional cash transfers impact time use, job search, motivation, and worker
bargaining power is necessary for projecting the long-run impacts of cash
transfers, determining the overall effects of cash transfers, and using the
estimates to formulate labor market policies. A unique aspect of this study is
the combination of a large data set and an innovative research design that
allows the researchers to answer many questions that have not been answered
before. This research therefore makes important contribution to economic
science. The results of this research project will provide important inputs into
labor market and poverty reduction policies as well as establish the US as the
global leader in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages an
existing privately funded randomized control trial on unconditional cash
transfers, collect additional data at more frequent intervals and also use field
experiments to study how cash transfers affect: (i) job quality; (ii) time use;
(iii) inputs to long-run labor market outcomes; (iv) labor market outcomes when
cash transfers end. This study combines experimental variation in unconditional
cash transfers with unique data on job search, job satisfaction, time use, human
capital accumulation, and negotiation with employers and standard data on wages,
benefits, and employment to draw causality. The PIs have detailed data about
participants from administrative records, survey data, passively collected
mobile phone data covering a wide array of variables, thus allowing for a
nuanced understanding of labor supply decisions in the context of other choices
workers face. By collecting high frequency data on individual characteristics,
outcomes, and behaviors that have been unobservable in existing studies,
experimentally assigning treatment, and carefully accounting for differential
attrition, this study will make important contributions to the literature on
unconditional cash transfers. The results of this research project will provide
important inputs into labor market and poverty reduction policies as well as
establish the US as the global leader in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.