* 2149957
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates:  Multidisciplinary Research on Student Success in STEM at the Rochester Institute of Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Dina Newman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 01/31/2025
* USD 398,271.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to the Rochester
Institute of Technology will support the training of ten students for ten weeks
during each summer over three years. The project will provide an opportunity for
college students to be engaged in STEM education research. STEM education
researchers are experts in a scientific field who apply a combination of
scientific disciplinary expertise, educational and social-science research
methods, and findings from the cognitive and neurosciences to investigate
questions about undergraduate learning within a scientific field. In this
project, college students will take part in mentored research projects and
participate in professional development activities to improve their
understanding of research practices and skills, communication, and future career
options. Knowledge from the research will be used to guide practices to improve
STEM learning and inclusion. While the number of STEM degree earners is growing,
there is a disparity among who, exactly, gets to earn those degrees. The project
has potential to make a critical contribution to the field on issues related to
diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this REU site is to grow the community of STEM education
researchers who will implement practices that promote the learning and success
of all STEM students. Students will participate in cutting edge STEM education
research that will contribute to the field of STEM student success. The project
team will (1) recruit and retain diverse undergraduate students in the STEM
community, (2) engage undergraduates in rigorous, publishable education
research, (4) support undergraduates to develop professional skills and build
their identity as scientists, (4) prepare undergraduates for STEM careers and
STEM Education Ph.D. programs, and (5) introduce future educators to evidence-
based practices in teaching, mentoring, and assessment. The project team will
recruit applicants from a wide variety of institutions and select STEM majors
who are passionate about education research and who contribute to the diversity
of the STEM community. Project outcomes and self-reported survey data will be
reported annually. REU participants will be tracked after the REU experience in
order to follow student career paths. Project participants will gain knowledge
of inclusive and evidence-based strategies to improve their own professional,
research, and networking skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.