* 2149809
* Collaborative Research: ANSWERS: Solar Energetic Particles, Solar Neutrons, and a New Space Weather Facility in Hawaii
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Veronica Bindi, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 06/30/2026
* USD 613,131.00

This project will measure the most powerful particles emitted by the Sun, i.e.,
Solar Energetic Particles (SEPs) and Solar Neutron Particles (SNPs). These
particles pose risks to astronauts and can lead to significant degradation or
failure of electronics in space. Monitoring the particles and developing alert
systems are important to advance resilience against such space weather hazards.
Because SNPs arrive earlier than SEPs, their detection provides several extra
minutes of warning for taking action. The project team from the University of
Hawaii, University of New Hampshire, and University of Arizona will set up a new
space weather (SW) center in Hawaii and deploy a neutron monitor (NM) on the
summit of the Haleakala volcano. They will analyze energetic particle data from
the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS) on the International Space Station and
ground-based NMs. A report on these observations will be made available in real
time to global and domestic users. The SW center will also provide extensive
outreach programs advancing science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
expertise, especially among young women and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses the causes of ground-level
events from SEP events, specifically in the context of propagation and event
characteristics. The team will analyze SEP events detected by AMS, employ models
for tracking particle propagation in various regions of the heliosphere and
Earth's magnetosphere and atmosphere, and extend the coverage of the NM network
to a station particularly suitable for detecting SNPs and galactic cosmic rays
with rigidity cutoff above 13 GV. Comparing direct measurements in space by AMS
with those on the ground by NMs will shed light on the atmospheric shower
cascades that lead to secondary particle production and probe the validity of
different models for nuclear interactions in the low energy range (hundreds of
MeV to few GeV) involving iron and light elements up to oxygen. Real-time
monitoring data, parameters related to the interplanetary and geomagnetic
environment, and space weather alerts will be provided by the SW center. High
school students will be engaged in the science through science festivals, visits
to the NM detector and working with NM and AMS studies at the SW center. ANSWERS
projects advance the nation’s STEM expertise and societal resilience to space
weather hazards by filling key knowledge gaps regarding the coupled Sun-Earth
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.