* 2149402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Matching new agricultural technology with the demand for innovation of low-income farmers
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Miguel Gomez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2023
* USD 32,075.00

Small-scale farmers are often slow to adopt seemingly profitable new
agricultural technologies even though these innovations are crucial for farm
productivity growth and economic development. This research project addresses
this question and identifies ways to improve the efficacy of agricultural
research and technology adoption. Although agricultural research centers are the
main suppliers of agricultural technology, they often do not tailor new
technologies to the needs of small-scale farmers. This constraint limits their
ability to prioritize and target innovations. However, little is known about the
impact of these supply-side constraints on technology adoption. This research
will conduct a field experiment to estimate the effect of imperfect targeting on
farmers’ take-up of improved crop varieties. The results of this research will
inform agricultural policy about the potential gains in reducing the mismatch
between agricultural innovations and farmers’ demand for new technology and how
best to do so. The results of this research will improve the pace of development
and adoption of new agricultural technologies, increased agricultural yield and
farmers’ incomes, and in the process, increase economic growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has identified factors that limit agricultural
technology adoption by focusing primarily on farmers’ failure to adopt. This
research project expands the literature by testing an alternative explanation:
the supply of agricultural technology has a limited ability to internalize
farmers’ heterogeneity in the absence of well-functioning input markets. This
research will conduct a field experiment that simulates counterfactuals to plant
breeders’ release decisions to study the impact of those decisions on farmers’
purchases of new seeds. In the first stage of the experiment, on-farm trials
will be used to estimate the performance of five new crop varieties and capture
farmers’ revealed preferences for these seeds. Results from the trials will
inform the assignment into treatment in the second stage when a random group of
farmers receives an offer to adopt the new variety recommended by breeders. For
comparison, another group receives an offer for a new variety of their
preference. Thus, in the experiment, each farmer effectively faces his or her
own synthetic seed market. The researchers will measure differences in take-up
rates between these groups and the impact of differential adoption on farming
outcomes. Finally, the research will study farmers’ responses to different
levels and sources of information to understand how to improve breeders’
recommendations. The results of this research will improve the pace of
development and adoption of new agricultural technologies, increase agricultural
yield and farmers’ incomes, and in the process, increase economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.