* 2149759
* Collaborative Research: Developing a high-resolution framework to define human-environment interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Faith, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 51,926.00

This interdisciplinary project will examine the role of climate-driven
environmental change in shaping the behavioral evolution of early modern humans.
Scientists have long proposed that environmental pressures influenced complex
behaviors that parallel those of recent hunter-gatherers. Yet, it has been
challenging to identify cause-effect relationships in the archaeological record.
These challenges stem from the rarity of precisely dated sites that preserve the
archaeological and paleoenvironmental data needed to disentangle natural and
human system interactions. This project will resolve this issue by assembling a
diversity of high-resolution climatic, environmental, and archaeological
datasets to understand the nature of the transition from Middle to Later Stone
Age technologies. In addition to addressing fundamental questions about the
emergence of behavioral complexity in Homo sapiens, this work builds U.S.
scientific research capacity by fostering research links across networks of
scholars, and providing a foundation for undergraduate and graduate student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from Middle to Later Stone Age
technologies is one of the most prominent behavioral shifts observed in Homo
sapiens’ evolutionary history. Understanding what precipitated this transition
is closely intertwined with discussion and debates about the origins of modern
human behavior. This project tests the hypothesis that the technological,
dietary, and social shifts associated with the Middle to Later Stone Age
transition result from climate-driven environmental change, specifically changes
in the seasonal distribution of foods and other resources. This work will be
accomplished through a combination of (i) archaeological excavations that will
document behavioral change across the Middle to Later Stone Age transition,
coupled with (ii) the assembly of both local- and regional-scale
paleoenvironmental records that will inform on past climate dynamics and its
effects on terrestrial ecosystems. The datasets generated in this study will
contribute to unresolved questions about modern human origins. They will also
enable future research across numerous disciplines, including archaeology,
paleontology, paleoecology, and paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.