* 2149443
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Resource-efficient, Strongly Consistent Replication for the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Aleksey Charapko, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 249,591.00

Data storage within cloud computing systems relies upon replication protocols
that store copies of data on multiple servers for reliability. A desirable
property of a replication protocol is strong consistency - the ability of
multiple servers with copies of data to act as a single, highly performant
system with one copy of the data, even when some of the servers fail. Existing
strongly consistent protocols improve performance at the cost of sacrificing
resource efficiency, which increases the cost of data storage on the cloud. This
project aims to explore the inefficiencies in current protocols and design new
protocols for cloud computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study the resource efficiency of existing replication protocols, focusing on
cloud deployments in resource-shared settings. Such investigation would be
incomplete without including other environmental factors, such as programming
language and framework choices. In addition, the project will use the
investigation results to design new resource-efficient protocols and
optimizations. These will leverage the core algorithmic improvements in addition
to new hardware technologies, such as Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) and
Non-volatile Memory (NVM). The developed protocols will streamline
communication, avoid unnecessary message exchange, prioritize lower overhead
communication strategies, and reduce work
amplification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and technology transfer aspects
play a significant role in this project. This work will facilitate bidirectional
technology transfer between academia and industry through meetings and
collaborations. To further remove technology-transfer barriers, all protocols
and algorithms will be well-documented and open-sourced. This project will bring
under the spotlight the importance of building resource-efficient software in
cloud computing environments and will develop a new class, projects, and lab
modules emphasizing design techniques and programming practices that increase
resource efficiency in the cloud software. Through the curriculum and teaching,
the project aims to engage undergraduate students and students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will release all code
artifacts, data, and curriculum materials on the GitHub platform. If applicable,
any large datasets or raw data materials will be stored in a public cloud
storage system. The project will maintain the GitHub repository, available at
https://github.com/resource-efficient-replication. Upon the completion of the
project, the GitHub handle will remain active for historical
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.