* 2149863
* REU Site: Vanderbilt University Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics &amp; Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Keivan Stassun, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 413,981.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award continues the funding of the Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at Vanderbilt University which offers
undergraduate physics and astronomy students the opportunity to work closely
with faculty on forefront research projects in a variety of subfields of
physics. The areas include astronomy and multimessenger astrophysics, biological
physics, condensed matter physics including materials and nanoscience, nuclear
physics, and particle physics, as well as projects involving the increasingly
important and cross-cutting area of big data and data science. The research
mentors are all renowned researchers and all have committed to personally
directing the students. An extensive research infrastructure, including the
facilities of several large interdisciplinary centers, will be available to the
students. Physics students will also have the opportunity to visit major
facilities at government laboratories, both domestic and international,
including FermiLab, Brookhaven, Oak Ridge, and CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
part of the program will be a continued emphasis on the participation of a high
percentage of underrepresented minority students, women, and/or persons with
disabilities, and more than half of the students will be from institutions with
limited research opportunities. Furthermore, there is a strong emphasis on
leadership development. The program includes training in ethical conduct of
research, and, as part of the program's emphasis on developing the future
workforce, includes the aforementioned focus on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in physics. The best practices learned through building
this program and through extensive work with national physics societies,
especially the minority physics societies, are employed in recruiting
participants. The program is designed to build ties between the Vanderbilt
mentors, all of whom are supported researchers, and faculty at the studentâ€™s
home institution. This builds a larger community, provides for continued support
for the student, and enhances the ability for continued mentoring and research
participation of the student. In addition, students have the opportunity to
participate in the Vanderbilt Pre-Launch program, a mini-course that introduces
principles of entrepreneurship, offered through the NSF I-Corps Site program at
Vanderbilt. They also can benefit from short courses in computing and data
science offered through the Vanderbilt Data Science Institute and/or the
Vanderbilt supercomputing center (both directed by members of the Physics &amp;
Astronomy faculty). Finally, students are offered the opportunity for training
in the integration of research with education through the Fisk-Vanderbilt
Physics &amp; Astronomy Roadshow outreach program. This site is supported by the
Division of Physics, the Division of Astronomical Sciences, and the Division of
Materials Research within NSF's Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.