* 2149103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stakeholder interactions in innovating electric grids
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Alison Cool, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 11/30/2023
* USD 11,953.00

Decarbonization is an important goal of climate policy and one that relies
heavily on electrical infrastructure as a means of reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. Different stakeholders emphasize different means of achieving a
common goal, from smart technologies involving automated use of algorithms, to
approaches involving more consistent monitoring by scientists and engineers.
This project aims to evaluate the concerns and hopes of various stakeholders in
electrification projects. It tests theories in cultural anthropology to
understand how level of involvement (state versus lab versus community) and
priorities (person- versus environment-centered) shape understandings of
electrification goals and outcomes. It contributes to the training of a doctoral
student in scientific cultural anthropology and its results will be disseminated
widely to academic and non-academic audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers use participant observation and semi-structured interviews to answer
the following research questions: 1) What challenges do electrical engineers
perceive in building electrical infrastructure? How are these resolved? 2) What
role do data scientists play in contributing to design and innovation of
electrical infrastructure? What additional goals do they incorporate into this
process? 3) How do other stakeholders, such as residents and policymakers,
understand and seek to contribute to this process? Answers to these questions
will provide insights that are relevant to shaping electrical infrastructure and
will inform our understanding of how different perspectives converge and diverge
in the context of shared goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.