* 2149647
* REU Site: MathILy-EST (MathILy Early Scholarly Training)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Sarah-Marie Belcastro, Mathematical Staircase, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 02/28/2025
* USD 312,263.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This award will renew and expand support for the
MathILy-EST (MathILy Early Scholarly Training) Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site. The MathILy-EST REU will increase the depth of the
mathematical workforce by providing training opportunities to students early in
their mathematical careers, especially those who do not have other research
opportunities and who are deeply but informally prepared to engage in
significant mathematical work. Past sessions have trained diverse cohorts, with
significant participation by students belonging to groups underrepresented in
mathematics; such students are especially encouraged to apply. The eight-week
summer research program will train 9 early undergraduates in mathematics
research each year and train one graduate student in research supervision each
year. The program targets exceptional first-year college students, with second-
year and entering college students also considered for participation. In
particular, the MathILy-EST REU will give participants early experience in
active acquisition and creation of mathematical knowledge, which will in turn
enable them to succeed in traditional mathematics classes. Training in software
use, CV construction, presentation skills, and writing will give participants
the informal knowledge and career skills needed to be competitive in the STEM
workforce. All participants will therefore be well prepared to excel in the
mathematical sciences throughout college and beyond. MathILy-EST will be run on
the same campus as MathILy (serious Mathematics Infused with Levity), a 5-week
very selective program of inquiry-based educational experiences for highly
talented high-school students. The two programs will hold regular joint
activities. There will be significant cross-pollination between MathILy-EST and
MathILy, and specifically will provide MathILy-EST students with additional role
models and mentors from the MathILy staff, will result in MathILy-EST
participants acting as research role models to MathILy students, and will expand
the near-peer networks of both groups. This creation of community will increase
both MathILy-EST and MathILy participant persistence in acquiring further
mathematical education and research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MathILy-EST
REU participants will work together to produce original research, present their
results at conferences, and submit their work to undergraduate or research
journals. They will attend presentations by visiting and staff mathematicians on
mathematics topics, on mathematical career paths, and on choosing graduate
schools. They will learn to read mathematics papers and texts. The mathematical
focus of MathILy-EST will change each year. The projects will be drawn from the
following topics according to mentor availability: combinatorial representation
theory, arrangements of subspaces over finite fields, discrete and computational
geometry of folding, and diagrammatic structure of the Thompson group. MathILy-
EST REU students will present their research progress to each other on a regular
basis, with feedback provided on their research methods and presentation skills.
Students will be asked to record work in writing (in LaTeX) weekly, to provide
practice in writing formally and fodder for paper drafts once research has
progressed to the point of publication. At the end of the MathILy-EST REU
program, the director will make plans with students, including sub-goals and
timelines, for dissemination of their research results. This will include
discussing potential local (MAA) and national (JMM) conference presentations and
paper submissions. More details are available at
http://www.mathily.org/mathilyest/index.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.