* 2150102
* REU Site:  Experimental and Computational Spectroscopy:  Fundamental Probes of Molecules, Molecular Interactions, and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bern Kohler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2025
* USD 388,469.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Ohio State University will support 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2023 â€“ 2025. These REU students will conduct
research under a faculty mentor and participate in weekly meetings that provide
training in the conduct of research, scientific communication skills, and
strategies for attaining four-year or postgraduate degrees in STEM fields. The
program will strive to support a diverse group of participants recruited from
two- and four-year colleges and universities that generally lack specialized
instrumentation for research. There will be an effort to recruit student
participants from underserved areas such as Rust Belt cities and Appalachian
counties in Ohio and neighboring states. The research training will be focused
on how to use laboratory instruments and computers to learn about molecules and
materials using electromagnetic radiation such as UV, visible, infrared, and
radio frequency radiation. This research theme overlaps foundational ideas
taught in initial chemistry courses, ensuring that even beginning students have
some existing subject-matter knowledge upon which they can build. Training in
the interactions between light and matter (i.e., spectroscopy) is critical for
creating a workforce prepared for 21st century jobs in fields such as biomedical
imaging, materials characterization, and quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site at Ohio State University (OSU) is
designed to amplify the impact of two recent NSF mid-scale instrumentation
awards for new spectroscopy-based facilities: The National Extreme Ultrafast
Science Facility (focused on high-intensity lasers), and the National Gateway
Ultrahigh-Field NMR facility. Visiting scientists at these two user facilities
from around the world will give weekly seminars to which REU participants will
be invited. These students will be engaged in individual research projects in
spectroscopy-focused research groups within the OSU Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry. Weekly workshops will focus on developing scientific communication
skills with the assistance of current Ohio State Ph.D. students from a wide
variety of backgrounds, adding an international flavor to the mentoring process.
One focus will be to recruit student participants from regional undergraduate
institutions, including many smaller ones with limited research opportunities
that serve large numbers of first-generation college students. The REU program,
augmented by long-term outcome tracking and assessments of program
effectiveness, will provide these students with mentoring and networking
opportunities to enhance their career opportunities in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.