* 2150171
* REU Site: Princeton Neuroscience Institute Summer Internship Program
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jonathan Cohen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 372,630.00

This REU Site award to Princeton University, located in Princeton, NJ, will
support the training of 10 students annually for 9 weeks during the summers of
2022 - 2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group,
will be trained in the program. Students will conduct research projects with
faculty and trainees at the Princeton Neuroscience Institute (PNI) and will
present the results of their work at an end of summer in an internal research
conference, as well as at the Leadership Alliance National Symposium. Assessment
of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Research at PNI spans the breadth of field, from molecular to human
cognition to theoretical neuroscience. Summer interns are assigned to one lab
for the duration of the program for an independent research project. PNI also
offers a 9-week professional development workshop aimed at helping students
successfully compete for entry into PhD programs in neuroscience or related
fields. The summer program offers coding classes in Matlab and Python. Faculty
give weekly lectures on their own research, and REU students willhave an
opportunity to meet with former interns who have gone on to graduate programs
and other research positions. An NSF GRFP workshop will take place mid-summer.
In addition, there are weekly responsible conduct of research discussions. All
students will present their research at the end of the program and will be
invited to attend the Society for Neuroscience Annual meeting. To apply to the
program, students are required to submit a personal statement, transcripts, and
two letters of recommendation to be reviewed by the program Director and faculty
members. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://pni.princeton.edu/education/summer-programs, or by contacting the
Director of the program, Dr. Ed Clayton (ec12@princeton.edu) or the PI, Dr.
Jonathan Cohen (jdc@princeton.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.