* 2150064
* Supporting Student Science Identity and Success through Field Experiences and Course Exploration
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Snyder, SAN DIEGO COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,956.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Pilot project aims to increase the
number of students choosing STEM degree and career paths. This project from San
Diego Mesa College will develop and explore collaborative learning opportunities
that expose students to authentic research experiences that are designed to
strengthen students’ STEM identity. Specifically, the project will revise
existing curricula and compare three models for providing classroom- and field-
based research experiences across three courses in biology, physical geology,
and the physical sciences. The research projects and activities will be
developed with community partners, which will allow students to tap into their
interest in their community and the world around them. Also, building from
existing academic and science skills courses, the project will develop, test,
and refine an online science identity module that will allow students to acquire
new perspectives and important skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research
experiences will be developed to align with topics covered in the three targeted
courses. In the first model, all students in the general physical science course
will complete research projects embedded directly into the four main course
units. Depending on the location and available facilities, student research
projects will be conducted either in the field or in the classroom using
original data. The second model will provide an optional, multi-day field
experience focused on biodiversity for students in the second biology course
offered for majors. Finally, the project will develop and offer a 10-day, for-
credit summer research course emphasizing geoscience and astronomy. The project
evaluation plan will use surveys, focus groups, and student outcome data to
explore the impacts of the online module and the various research experiences on
student participants. Outcomes will be disseminated to local and national
communities of interest, including 2- and 4-year HSIs looking to provide similar
experiences for their students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.
Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.