* 2150124
* REU Site: Control of Gene Expression for Biological Effect
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 350,240.00

This REU Site award to Boston University, located in Boston, MA, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities or from under-represented groups, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. The research will be
conducted in the area of cell and molecular biology and will be important for
training the next generation of scientists in this important research area for
the nationâ€™s technological development. Assessment of the program will be done
through online surveys. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths and program training
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in this REU Site will be trained
primarily by mentors in the Biology Department at Boston University and will
carry out research related to the control of gene expression for biological
impact. Research will be conducted using a variety of organismal and cell-based
models and will use state-of-the-art methods for examining gene expression. In
addition to research, students will be trained in responsible conduct of
research (scientific ethics), diversity in the workplace, and career
development. Students will apply to the program through an online application
form, and students will be selected by program staff in consultation with
potential research mentors. Sample research projects include the effects of
climate change on gene expression patterns in coral and sea anemone models, gene
networks in basal and stimulated immune cells, and gene programs involved in the
development of muscle cells, sea urchin embryos, and plant structures. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://bu.edu/surf, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Thomas D. Gilmore at
gilmore@bu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.