* 2150087
* REU: Research Experience for undergraduates in Genomics, Proteomics, Metabolomics and Data Science
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Ramesh Katam, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 327,972.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Florida
A&amp;M University, located in Tallahassee, FL, will support the training of 8
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022 - 2024. It is anticipated that
a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the
program. The REU participants will gain research experience in cutting-edge
technologies to encourage pursuit of advanced degrees and careers in STEM.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Students will be encouraged to form
networks critical to their development as scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
REU program focuses on systems biology research, integrating Omics Technologies
and Data Science, to understand interactions in a living system. A
multidisciplinary faculty team from biology, chemistry, and computer science
will serve as mentors. Examples of research projects for REU students include
investigations that 1) Determine molecular responses for cross-tolerance
mechanism in the host using both abiotic and biotic factors; 2) Unravel the
disease pathways and networks in model organisms, and 3) Develop computational
models to predict plant-host interactions. This program will train students on
the responsible conduct of research and laboratory biosafety. Recruitment of
students will utilize hard copy and digital-based advertising. Students will be
selected based on their academic record, faculty recommendations, and research
interest. Students will be tracked to determine their continued interest in
their area of study and the lasting influence of the research experience.
Assessment of the program will be done through the Student Assessment of
Learning Goals (SALG URSSA https://salgsite.net). More information about the
program is available by visiting http://www.famu.edu/index.cfm? or by contacting
the PI, Dr. Ramesh Katam (Ramesh.katam@famu.edu; 850-559-3134) or the co-PI, Dr.
Virginia Gottschalk, (gladiatrx3@gmail.com)
850-561-2750).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.