* 2150136
* REU Site: Secure, Accessible, and Sustainable Transportation
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Wanli Xing, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/28/2025
* USD 397,382.00

The University of Florida will conduct a REU site to host a diverse cohort of
students who will (1) engage in high-impact research on emergent autonomous and
sustainable transportation systems with engineering faculty and graduate student
mentors, (2) get trained in foundational research skills through hands-on
projects, workshops and trainings, and (3) disseminate research results through
oral and written communication. As we move towards autonomous transportation, it
is critical to explore and comprehend the needs and trade-offs among security,
sustainability, and accessibility to improve human lives and benefit society.
The site will specifically target engaging students from minority serving
institutions and universities with limited research opportunities that
contribute to the diversity of the future workforce. A unique feature for the
site is the emphasis on cross-disciplinary collaboration for research
activities. Students will get the opportunity to work on problems spanning
Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Civil
Engineering, jointly mentored by faculty members from different engineering
disciplines with a history of collaboration on transportation
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will engage students in cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research problems of national interest including: (i)
cybersecurity challenges to autonomous transportation, (ii) impact of autonomy
on persons with disabilities, and (iii) techniques to exploit autonomy for
sustainability. In addition to addressing some critical problems in
transportation, the research will help participants comprehend the role of
connectivity and computing to address problems of global impact. Participants
will obtain unique exposure to a variety of state-of-the-art technologies,
platforms, and tools. Furthermore, the site will include systematic training and
events for the participants to hone their problem-solving skills and learn to be
independent researchers. This site has the potential to produce a new generation
of engineering students and professionals and to advance understanding and
discovery of autonomous transportation systems while fostering
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.