* 2150296
* REU Site: ChemE-NYC: Climate and Health Solutions
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* V. Faye McNeill, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2025
* USD 364,499.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the Department of
Chemical Engineering at Columbia University will engage undergraduates recruited
from across the country in summer research experiences. Students will apply
engineering science fundamentals to address problems related to climate and
human health and conduct research with close collaboration and mentorship from
faculty and graduate students. Students will engage in individualized projects
on problems ranging from battery characterization to air pollution to organelle
synthesis. The program will include a seminar series to showcase faculty
explaining how their research applies the fundamentals of physics, chemistry,
biology, and engineering to create climate and health solutions. Students will
also participate in events to experience the rich entrepreneurial opportunities
in New York City, as well as learn about graduate school applications and
effective scientific communication. Particular attention will be paid to
recruiting students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), women’s colleges and colleges with
limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site focuses on
chemical engineering research, graduate opportunities in STEM, and life in New
York City. The student population targeted is underrepresented minority (URM)
and female undergraduates. Students will have access to cutting-edge research
facilities related to electrochemical energy, soft matter, catalysis, in situ
battery characterization, air pollution data sets, and biomolecular engineering.
Seminars, workshops, and activities in NYC will be used to create an effective
and inclusive research environment and experience for the students. Students
will pursue individual, hypothesis-driven projects related to climate and health
solutions. Research projects will sharpen their understanding of thermodynamics,
kinetics, transport phenomena, and reactor engineering, and learn new
experimental and computational methods. An end-of-summer symposium will build
the REU students’ abilities in scientific communication. This REU site seeks to
recruit URM and female undergraduates, building upon relationships with HBCUs,
MSIs and women’s colleges. The research experience will help students better
understand what chemical engineering and graduate studies in STEM entail, as
well as learn science and techniques critical to climate and health-related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.