* 2150491
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Computational Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Juana Moreno, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2025
* USD 404,972.00

Computational simulations are rapidly emerging as a co-equal branch of inquiry
with experiment and theory. In parallel, automated instruments store massive
amounts of measurement data. However, computational science will only fulfill
its full potential if advances in undergraduate and graduate education accompany
advances in hardware. The 30 undergraduate students participating in this
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program are engaged with authentic
computational science projects, learn how to use state-of-the-art
cyberinfrastructure tools, manage large amounts of data, experience activities
that characterize research careers, and work in interdisciplinary research
teams. The Center for Computation &amp; Technology (CCT) at Louisiana State
University provides an ideal setting for the REU student to become familiar with
interdisciplinary research. For ten weeks in the summer, the students work
collaboratively with mentors on a wide variety of computational science
projects. With research groups exploring gravitational waves, complex emergent
phenomena in material science, or computational music and arts, the participants
work on cutting edge research in computational sciences. By preparing the next
generation of students in the computational sciences, this project serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a clear need for training
the workforce on computing and computational science. However, the majority of
students learn little, if any, Computational Science (CSci) in the classroom and
are not prepared for CSci research or data science research. This project
provides an evidence-based approach to address these issues and prepare the next
generation of students. One of the current barriers in CSci education is that
while CSci is intrinsically multidisciplinary, traditional academic departments
set rigid boundaries between disciplines. Because the LSU Center for Computation
&amp; Technology is not an academic unit, it provides an ideal setting for REU
students to become familiar with interdisciplinary research by participating in
multidisciplinary research teams. During the ten week session, participants
participate in activities that characterize research careers, such as presenting
their research in scholarly forums and working on the soft- and hard-skills
needed in interdisciplinary research. Faculty mentors work with the students in
individual and group meetings, and provide activities that help students
appreciate the nature of multidisciplinary research and the value of working as
a team. At the conclusion of the REU, the students are encouraged to continue
their CSci research and present their work at their home institution, informing
others about computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.