* 2150434
* REU Site: Combinatorics and Coding Theory in the Tropics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Pamela Harris, University of Puerto Rico in Ponce
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 01/31/2026
* USD 435,207.00

The REU Site: Combinatorics and Coding Theory in the Tropics is a joint project
between the University of Puerto Rico in Ponce, Williams College, and East
Tennessee State University. Faculty mentors will lead in a series of open ended
mathematical research projects ten undergraduate participants and two
experienced peer mentors each summer of three years for nine weeks. The research
projects chosen for the students are contemporary; difficult but tractable; of
interest to the wider mathematical community; in areas of research actively
investigated by leading researchers supported by NSF; and usually lead to more
questions with every new result. Whereas the investigations often result in
publications in peer reviewed journals, the site provides an experience akin to
what students would encounter in a research career. Demographically,
participants reflect the diversity of the nation’s workforce pool: The selected
student groups are at least 50% female; at least 40% from underrepresented
groups; at least 40% first generation college attendees; and at least 50% from
schools with limited undergraduate research opportunities. Students are
carefully mentored and taken “from a relatively dependent status to as
independent a status as their competence warrants” (nsf19852). The program takes
place in Ponce, Puerto Rico; offers a bilingual research environment; and builds
a rich Hispanic research community from both Latinos in the U.S. and Latinos in
Puerto Rico, creating a familiar environment for Hispanic students and preparing
students from Puerto Rico for graduate studies life in mainland U.S. The REU has
a strong peer mentorship aspect provided by experienced peer mentors who have
already been successful in dealing with previous REU’s research projects and in
navigating the difficulties in undergraduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research areas include algebraic coding theory,
probabilistic combinatorics, discrete geometry, and classical combinatorics.
Students may use (a) deep methods in discrete combinatorial probability, and (b)
classical combinatorics -- in tandem with classical analysis (inequalities,
asymptotic analysis etc.). The concept of concentration of measure continues to
be at the intellectual focus of several of the students' research activities.
Projects in the combinatorics of parking functions are also offered. These begin
with classical enumerative techniques, and based on student background and
interest, further explore problems related to hyperplanes arrangements,
partially ordered sets, Young tableaux, and discrete geometry. Students will use
programming to uncover patterns and formulate conjectures leading to proofs of
results in the area. In projects related to Coding Theory students might improve
bounds on parameters of difference classes of binary Goppa codes, might improve
on existing encoding and decoding algorithms of algebraic geometry codes, find
bounds on the parameters of Polar Grassmann codes, or use linear codes in
applications to DNA barcoding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.