* 2150532
* Collaborative Research: HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Transfer Students’ Success in Quantum Information Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Emily Halvorson-Otts, Pima County Community College District- NORTHWEST CAMPUS
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 03/31/2027
* USD 266,602.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project will develop an
interdisciplinary field of national importance, Quantum Information Science, by
supporting the transfer of community college students into quantum information
science related majors including Electrical and Computer Engineering, Optical
Sciences and Engineering, Computer Science, and Physics. The project will employ
evidence-based practices to engage, guide, and support community college
students to explore quantum information science as a career choice. These high-
impact practices will support a diverse group of students as they pursue quantum
information science and will improve student outcomes and inclusivity for this
critical, yet nascent workforce. This work will help to inform others on the
transfer experiences of community college students as they transition to four-
year colleges. The project will generate new knowledge about (1) transfer
process gaps and bottlenecks, (2) administrator attitudes and perceptions of the
transfer process across institutions, and (3) the degree to which students’
status as underrepresented and/or low-income correlates with their negative
perceptions of the transfer process. This project will generate knowledge on
institutional transfer readiness, increase community college student interest in
quantum information science, and facilitate student transfers into a four-year
university through summer research experiences, faculty and peer mentoring, and
cross-institutional advising mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the NSF Engineering Research Center for Quantum Networks and aims to
encourage community college students’ transfer into quantum-related 4-year STEM
majors. Community college students will participate in summer research
experiences at the Center for Quantum Networks universities as well as a variety
of development and technical workshops. This will be augmented with peer and
faculty mentoring and a peer-led retreat. Academic advisors from the community
college and the university will convene to develop a crosswalk of program
requirements. The project team will perform a gap analysis of existing 4-year
university support programs and will survey administrators and students to
gather their perceptions of the transfer process. This project leverages
institutional coordination to ensure that successful programming and initiatives
occur systematically across campuses and within STEM disciplines. Dissemination
plans include publication of results in the INCLUDES network, through the
Center’s website and the affiliated Quantum Resource Hub, whose audience
includes industry and academic researchers, educators, and students. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.