* 2150796
* Collaborative Research: Grain to Channel Scale Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Cohesive Sediment Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Judy Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 343,176.00

Each year, the United States loses billions of dollars in property and large
areas of habitat to erosion. To mitigate erosion-related damages and habitat
losses, restoration projects import sediment to eroded areas. The success of
these restoration efforts depends on their ability to retain sediment, so that
restoration design requires a good understanding of sediment transport.
Currently, there are established methods for predicting the transport of non-
cohesive sediment, such as sand and gravel, relative to flow conditions and
sediment particle size. However, it remains difficult to predict the transport
of cohesive sediment, such as clay or mud, which is ubiquitous in aquatic
ecosystems and consists of very fine particles. Predicting cohesive sediment
transport is challenging because these fine particles have a strong tendency to
stick together and form aggregates. These aggregates greatly change the
effective size of the sediment particles and their interaction with the flow.
This project will combine experiments and numerical simulations at a range of
scales to understand how fine cohesive particles form aggregates and how
aggregation controls the transport of sediment in water. Predictive equations
for cohesive sediment transport will be developed. The results of this study
will help improve designs of restoration projects to mitigate erosion-driven
property and habitat losses. Next-generation environmental scientists and
engineers will be trained at the graduate, postdoctoral, and undergraduate
levels. Science videos about erosion will be created and disseminated to the
public. Demonstration experiments will be used to raise K-12 studentsâ€™ interest
in environmental science and public understanding of erosion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine multiscale experiments and
numerical simulations to understand the fundamental physical factors governing
cohesive sediment transport. The study will directly address key challenges
related to the multiscale and multiphysics nature of cohesive sediment transport
dynamics that currently inhibit understanding of these processes. This includes
the fact that transport that occurs at channel and ecosystem scales is
controlled by the micro- to mesoscale interactions between nanometer-size clay
particles, which are the main contributors to sediment cohesiveness, and by the
multiphysics couplings between particle mechanics and fluid flow. The planned
research will combine nano- to microscale confocal imaging and coarse-grained
molecular dynamics (CGMD) simulations, micro- to mesoscale millifluidic
experiments and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations, and channel
scale flume and outdoor stream experiments and CFD simulations to fundamentally
understand the critical impacts of clay aggregation and gelation on channel-
scale cohesive sediment transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.