* 2150234
* REU Site: Physics at Indiana University Bloomington
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* John Carini, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 368,787.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award supports the renewal of the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in physics at Indiana University (IU).
The program will support up to fifteen participants for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2022-24 to carry out experimental and theoretical research projects
in a broad range of areas in the IU Physics Department and the IU Center for
Exploration of Energy and Matter (CEEM). Twelve (12) students from schools
throughout the U.S. will be recruited, with preference to students from
institutions where research opportunities for undergraduates may be limited. Two
or three (2-3) local IU students will also be invited to participate in the
program. Special programs for the students include orientation sessions on lab
safety, weekly seminars on current research in physics, discussions on
professional development and scientific ethics, and short progress reports. At
the conclusion of the program, the students will present their results in talks
at a closing symposium and develop a way to share their results to a technical
audience. They will also be encouraged and supported to continue working on
their projects as well as to present their work at professional meetings during
the following academic year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program provides
interested and promising undergraduate physics majors with significant and
challenging experiences in scientific research in a research-intensive
environment. Students will be matched to projects appropriate to their level and
interests, and early contact of students and mentors will be encouraged. The
participants will gain original research experience by working as integral parts
of ongoing research programs under the supervision of faculty members and senior
research staff. Students will learn about a broad range of current research
areas through seminars and peer interactions. Research projects will be
available in a variety of areas, including experimental and theoretical research
in astrophysics, biophysics, condensed matter physics, elementary particle
physics, materials physics, and nuclear physics. The program emphasizes the
development of clear, honest, and concise scientific communication and
presentation skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.