* 2150226
* REU Site: Discrete and Continuous Analysis in Appalachia
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Tom Cuchta, Fairmont State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 02/28/2025
* USD 323,352.00

The Department of Computer Science and Mathematics at Fairmont State University
will host an eight-week REU Site during the summers of 2022, 2023, and 2024. A
primary goal of the site is to increase the preparedness of undergraduate
students from the Appalachian region to pursue graduate school and STEM-focused
careers. The program emphasizes the participation of students from groups that
are underrepresented in mathematics, especially students from rural areas,
first-generation college students, and students from a low socioeconomic status.
The REU provides research experiences in calculus on time scales, a branch of
mathematics that unifies and extends the common calculus and related theories,
and has applications in mathematical biology, engineering, finance, and
statistics, among others. Students improve their research abilities as well as
their technical, oral, and written communication skills and acquire an
understanding of educational and career opportunities available beyond an
undergraduate degree. Participants are required to present their work based on
the program projects at an annual local undergraduate research symposium and
encouraged and assisted in preparing peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, ten undergraduate students, with
roughly half from schools in the Appalachian region, are recruited to attend an
eight-week long REU site. The first week of the program is dedicated to building
the mathematical and programming prerequisites of participants, and to the
formulation of research projects connecting calculus on time scales with control
theory, special functions theory, and probability theory. Students provide
reports of progress to advisors each week and present their work to all
participants on Fridays. Professional development opportunities are offered on
how to apply for graduate school, on strategies for effectively working in a
group environment, on software systems for scientific document preparation, and
on giving technical presentations. Participants are also exposed to other
research areas in mathematics through a weekly Distinguished Speakers Series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.