* 2150265
* REU Site: Research Opportunities in Systems Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Jennifer Eklund, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2025
* USD 404,009.00

This REU Site award to the Institute for Systems Biology (ISB), located in
Seattle, WA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2022-2024. It is anticipated that at least 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented
group, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done using an online instrument.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths. The program aims to support undergraduate students to develop interest,
build confidence, and generate the knowledge to pursue careers in scientific
research, specifically systems biology. All students will participate in a
research project developed with the guidance of a mentor; be included in all
events at ISB, including lab meetings and retreats; participate in ongoing
professional development course that includes deepening research skills,
learning systems biology specific skills, and exploration of the responsible
conduct of research; and complete a poster with the support of their mentor and
other ISB staff to be shared at an ISB-wide mini-symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential projects include a variety of wet lab focused,
computationally focused, and mixed wet and computational focused research.
Potential research projects include: quantifying diatom resilience in changing
oceans, using microbial communities to characterize denitrification, in silico
pathogen invasion assays, developing new technologies for analyzing
extracellular vesicles, and network analysis of a stochastically activated
bacterial metabolic pathways. Students with a demonstrated interest in fields
such as systems biology, computer science, information science, applied
mathematics, and/or engineering are all good fits for the types of research
projects available. Students are selected based on their interests and the steps
theyâ€™ve taken to pursue those interests, including courses taken, skills
developed, and other activities. More information about the program is available
by visiting https://isbscience.org/about/careers/internships/summer-
undergraduate-research-experiences-program/ or contacting Dr. Jen Eklund at
jen.eklund@isbscience.org. This award is supported by the Department of Defense
ASSURE Program in partnership with the NSF REU
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.