* 2150270
* REU Site: NSF REU in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Carol Gross, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2025
* USD 404,922.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of California San Francisco, in San Francisco, California, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-
2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will be exposed to UCSF’s interdisciplinary
collaborative research environment, and will undertake training covering
biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, and genomics. In
addition to undertaking an independent research project, students will learn
foundational skills in the presentation of scientific findings, will participate
in journal clubs and lab meetings, and will present at national conferences.
Assessment of the program’s learning and training outcomes will be done through
the online SALG URSSA tool and students’ career outcomes will be tracked to
assess the professional outcomes of the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this program are to provide: a) state of the art, hands-on
training in molecular biosciences and b) a co-curriculum that communicates
skills, information, and experiences required for successful transition to
graduate school and to research careers in the biological sciences. Students are
recruited nationally at ABRCMS/ SACNAS meetings, via outreach visits, and by
word of-mouth via former NSF-REU participants. Participants are selected by a
faculty committee that considers personal and professional accomplishments, and
extenuating circumstances. The centerpiece of the program is an intensive
research experience in which students are paired with outstanding UCSF faculty
and student mentors to learn modern techniques used to solve complex research
problems. Projects are designed to maximize a productive, positive, and
realistic immersion in scientific research. A unique co-curriculum prepares
students intellectually and psychosocially for success in graduate school, and
includes required scientific training in responsible conduct of research.
Finally, this REU leverages activities to develop UCSF graduate students into
effective and supportive professional mentors, some of whom serve as direct
mentors and others as teaching assistants. More information about the program is
available by visiting https://graduate.ucsf.edu/srtp or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Carol Gross at carol.gross@ucsf.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Liz Silva at
elizabeth.silva@ucsf.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.