* 2150702
* Building the Capacity of Future Teachers through Authentic Research Experiences Involving Data Analytics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Antonie Rice, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 01/31/2025
* USD 361,296.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective STEM
teachers with knowledge of data science. Since data driven discovery is a high
priority across all areas of science and engineering education and research,
future STEM professionals, including today’s students, will need to be able to
gather and analyze data to solve problems. In order to help students to thrive
in a data-intensive society, teachers themselves require opportunities to
develop their own skills and understandings related to data science and
scientific research. To meet this need, this project will engage prospective
secondary STEM teachers in mentored summer research experiences related to
biological applications of data science. Accompanying the research experiences
will be a professional development program. This professional development
program will be aimed at increasing pedagogical and content knowledge. It is
also aimed at developing communication skills and incorporating enrichment
experiences to illustrate and emphasize ways research can be applied to build
prospective teachers' capacity to incorporate research and other inquiry-based
learning in the classroom. By providing prospective teachers with firsthand
research experiences involving data analytics, the project has potential to
improve the quality of STEM teaching related to data science as well as to
contribute to teachers’ satisfaction and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston includes collaborations with
teacher preparation programs at University of Houston, University of Houston
Clear Lake, and the Texas Education Agency Region 4 Service Center. The project
will immerse six future secondary STEM teachers per year in authentic research
experiences related to life sciences data mining and analysis, with a total of
18 participants over three years. The project has four fundamental goals. A
primary project goal is for these prospective teachers to receive authentic
research experiences involving a variety of data analytical approaches to
investigate questions from neuroscience as well as molecular and cellular
biology. A second goal is to incorporate accompanying professional development
opportunities designed to expand the research experiences and to equip these
perspective STEM teachers with the skills and understanding to bring research
and professional development experiences to their future classrooms. A third
goal is to evaluate the impact of project components on prospective teachers’
growth and preparation. To meet the project's fourth goal, project outcomes will
be disseminated to other investigators and institutions interested in improving
and enhancing STEM pre-service teacher preparation. Project evaluation will
include studying the impact of the research experiences and engagement in the
professional development program on the participants, and will include
information from completion of the project's curriculum, analysis of reflective
journal entries, assessment of science identity and science teaching efficacy,
and results emanating from continued engagement with partnering researchers and
the host institution. Project results will be disseminated through
communications with project collaborators, publications in peer-reviewed
journals, presentations at local and national meetings, and web-based
strategies. This Noyce Research Experiences for Pre-Service Teachers project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.