* 2150792
* Collaborative Research: Improving Our Understanding of Supercells from Convection Initiation to Tornadogenesis via Innovative Observations, Simulations, and Analysis Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Yvette Richardson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,114,048.00

Decades of study of supercell thunderstorms and tornadoes have resulted in
better forecasts, better warnings, and increased public safety. However, despite
this progress, there are still fundamental questions about tornado formation and
the initiation of storms in environments that are conducive for tornadoes. This
project will use new observations and new analysis techniques to uncover answers
about the origin of tornado rotation and whether surface friction is an
important factor, and how wind changes with altitude affect the initial
development of thunderstorms. The results of the research may provide
forecasters with more clues to why some storms form tornadoes while others do
not within the same environment. The researchers also plan to contribute to
public understanding of science through various outreach mechanisms, and will
train multiple graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a
range of questions related to supercell thunderstorms, from initiation to
tornado formation. The tornado-related research is guided by three core
questions: 1) How important is baroclinically generated vorticity to the
development of tornadoes, 2) Is the underlying surface a critical vorticity
source for tornadoes, and 3) Why do supercell storms in similar environments
often behave so differently? To address these questions, the research team will
interrogate a number of well-observed tornadic storms from the VORTEX-II and
TORUS field campaigns. Diabatic Lagrangian analysis (DLA) techniques will be
conducted on multi-Doppler radar data and combined with swarm-sonde
thermodynamic observations to create 4D thermodynamic and velocity fields, which
will then be used in material circuit analyses to demonstrate the baroclinic
origins of low-level circulation. Additionally, the material circuit analyses
will be used on an existing 25-member ensemble of 75-m resolution numerical
model simulations. New simulations will be conducted with a more generalized
non-equilibrium lower boundary condition, using the two-layer model concept from
the engineering community to address the frictional component of the project.
New modeling simulations will also be conducted to address uncertainties related
to convective initiation in shear and environmental controls on convective
modes. The research team plans to target the following questions for the
convective initiation (CI) work: 1) What are the variety of ways that vertical
wind shear inhibits or facilitates CI, 2) How does their relative importance
depend on the altitude and depth of the shear, and on the characteristics of the
airmass boundary involved in CI, and 3) To what extent do the characteristics of
an airmass boundary, such as its horizontal temperature gradient, depth, and
forward speed relative to the environmental winds above the boundary, influence
the organization of convective storms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.