* 2150134
* REU Site: Quantitative Biology at Northwestern University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Rosemary Braun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 03/31/2025
* USD 332,871.00

Hosted at Northwestern University, the Quantitative Biology REU (QBREU) program
will provide intensive summer undergraduate research experiences at the
interface of the mathematical and life sciences. Participants in this eight-week
program will develop and apply cutting-edge mathematical and computational
models to address questions ranging from basic molecular biology to biomedical
applications. Recruitment efforts at primarily undergraduate institutions
(including community colleges) and minority-serving institutions will be
conducted with the aim of encouraging applications from students from
underrepresented groups. A diversity peer-mentoring program will provide
academic and professional support for participants. The program begins with an
intensive computing practicum, after which students will work closely with
faculty mentors on research projects in mathematical and computational biology.
Weekly workshops will train students in scientific writing and presentations,
interdisciplinary communication, and the graduate school and fellowship
application process, and will provide information about career opportunities.
QBREU students will be integrated with the Center for Quantitative Biology at
Northwestern University [CQuB], providing an exciting intellectual environment
and a broad view of quantitative biology research. The program culminates in a
Research Symposium during which QBREU students will present their work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QBREU will contribute to the training of a diverse
workforce with expertise in quantitative biology and interdisciplinary research.
It will promote interest and prepare students to develop novel mathematical
strategies for the study of living systems. Through its emphasis on inclusive
recruitment and culturally aware mentor training, QBREU will contribute to
diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM. Student research projects will
encompass a variety of mathematical approaches (from differential equations to
probabilistic models of phase transitions to topological data analysis) applied
to biological processes ranging from gene regulation to morphogenesis. Students
will be closely mentored by diverse faculty spanning multiple departments, and
will receive additional mentorship from CQuB PhD students and postdocs as well
as Northwestern University Diversity Fellows. A comprehensive evaluation plan,
including validated surveys and structured interviews administered by evaluation
experts, will provide actionable feedback and measures of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;https://sites.northwestern.edu/quantitativebiologyreu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.