* 2150238
* REU Site: Summer Research Experience on Resilient Carbon-Free U.S. Electric Power Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Ortmeyer, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 382,895.00

The Summer REU on Resilient Carbon-Free U.S. Electric Power Systems at Clarkson
University will provide research opportunities focused on a sustainable and
resilient U.S. electricity power grid by 2035. Each year, a cohort of 10
undergraduate students, with an emphasis on attracting participants from
research limited institutes and underrepresented groups, will be recruited to
participate in the summer research. These REU students will be mentored by
Clarkson faculty and conduct research into data analytics, machine learning,
advanced control, and power system analysis for improved grid resiliency and
grid integration of renewable energies. Professional development activities will
include invited seminars and field trips hosted by the industry partners, e.g.,
National Grid, New York Power Authority, and National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, to broaden students’ knowledge of energy infrastructures. The
outcome of the program will be the next generation of engineers and scientists
with interdisciplinary knowledge to address the pressing challenges faced by
this country’s electric power grid for a sustainable and resilient energy system
of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clarkson University will host a new 3-year
REU site featuring a ten-week immersive summer research program for ten
undergraduate students annually. The REU has a goal of attracting at least 50%
of the students will be from two- or four-year colleges with limited research
resources and at least 50% from underrepresented groups including unpresented
minorities, women, veteran or first-generation students. The program’s
distinguishing elements include: (1) research projects addressing the challenges
faced by the power industry to achieve the nationwide goal of resilient carbon-
free U.S. electric power systems by 2035; (2) professional development
activities such as training of ethics in research, communication skills, and
preparing a strong application to graduate school to foster students’
educational &amp; career development; and (3) bootcamp on grid resiliency and
sustainability, field trips and invited talks to stimulate and sustain students’
interest in graduate studies in the electric power sector. These research
activities will focus on resiliency and carbon-free grids of the future
including grid assets hardening with 5G networks, renewable integration, data
analytics for outage management, converter control for solar and offshore wind,
and cyber-resilient control of distributed energy resources. Following the
summer experience, mentors will support their students to submit appropriate
research results for publication in peer-reviewed IEEE
conferences/journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.