* 2150628
* Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Restricted Latent Class Models for Cognitive Diagnosis
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Steven Culpepper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 315,000.00

This research project will advance dynamic, cognitive diagnostic assessments for
tracking student skill acquisition as an alternative approach to the static
classification of student skill mastery. Existing formative assessment
frameworks require extensive prior content knowledge and theory concerning the
nature of student skill mastery and the process by which skills are joined to
determine cognitive performance. This project will provide researchers with new
tools for inferring the learning process from dynamic, longitudinal data on
student performance and offer a framework for evaluating substantive theory for
how students learn. A central concern in the educational sciences is formulating
and evaluating interventions. The project will develop accurate methods for
researchers to gain a fine-grained understanding as to the effectiveness of
learning interventions. The new methods will leverage student responses to
longitudinal assessments to offer educators and policymakers with insights
regarding the status and timing of student mastery of educational content. The
methods also will shed light on the effectiveness of educational interventions
with the goal of establishing strategies for formulating personalized learning
interventions to accelerate student learning. To achieve these aims, the project
will advance fundamental theory in statistics and psychometrics. In addition to
broadening methodological theory, the project will strengthen the educational
assessment infrastructure. The research to be conducted will create a robust
foundation for the development and administration of real-time formative
assessments that adapt to the needs of students and provide educators with
timely information to inform instructional decisions. Graduate students will be
involved in the discovery process, and theoretical developments will be
incorporated into the graduate curriculum. Publicly available software will be
created to provide researchers and decision makers with cutting-edge
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will consider statistical
problems at the heart of the social, behavioral, and health sciences, and will
highlight the interplay among the fields of psychometrics, latent class
modeling, longitudinal data analysis, and Bayesian statistics. The project will
involve complex statistical modeling and will addresses issues related to
computational complexity. New methods and algorithms for dynamic restricted
latent class models (D-RLCMs) will be developed. Novel Bayesian methods will be
used to deploy D-RLCMs to classify student mastery over time. The longitudinal
skill classifications will provide educators and stakeholders with a fine-
grained trajectory of student performance and learning. The project will deploy
a hidden Markov model (HMM) framework that enables precise information regarding
the probability students transition into states with greater content mastery.
The mathematical theory of HMMs will be advanced in the project by establishing
new identifiability theory to accurately infer student longitudinal skill
profiles and learning trajectories. Methods will be developed to provide a
powerful evaluation of the role of contextual factors in learning environments,
such as student or school characteristics and pedagogical techniques. The
methods to be developed will harvest the wealth of longitudinal student response
data to provide decision makers and educators with actionable evidence to
improve student learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.