* 2150326
* IQ-Bio-REU: Interdisciplinary and Quantitative Biology Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Esther Peterson, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 347,015.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, located in San Juan, PR, will support
the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Undergraduate students
in any STEM field, particularly individuals from groups historically
underrepresented in science, are encouraged to apply. Students will participate
in a scholarly environment throughout the summer including the presentation of
their work to the research community at UPRRP. After participating in the
program, students will be encouraged to present their work at national and
international conferences. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will be immersed in a mentored
research project that allows for the exploration of biology using computational
and quantitative tools, such as: the application of statistics to the life
sciences, the integration of quantitative analyses towards understanding
molecular changes in organisms, and the use of big data and machine learning
approaches to document the effects of climate change on biological systems.
Through skill development workshops and hackathons, students will receive
training and practice for fluency in research techniques related to data
analysis and visualization, computing, and bioinformatics. Career development
workshops will offer guidance in the process of applying to graduate school,
obtaining funds for research, and exposure to concepts and theories that will
help participants navigate career transitions in science. The criteria for
evaluation of student application will be academic performance and a
demonstrated interest in pursuing a career in science at the intersection of
biology and computational sciences. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://iqbioreu.uprrp.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Juan S. Ramírez-Lugo at juan.ramirez3@upr.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Esther Peterson
at esther.peterson@upr.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.