* 2150054
* Washington STEM Teachers Engaging in Leadership, Learning, And Research
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2028
* Mark Oursland, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,292,339.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing and retaining diverse
STEM teacher leaders. It seeks to secure exemplary STEM teacher leaders by
growing and supporting a network of STEM instructional change agents across
Washington state. Using a novel Central Washington University Master’s degree
program in STEM Leadership as a network hub, these teacher leaders are expected
to guide other STEM teachers in their local high-need districts to use inclusive
STEM teaching practices. The project is designed to especially benefit students
from historically underserved communities and backgrounds underrepresented in
STEM disciplines by developing the knowledge, skills, and perspective of STEM
teachers to provide instruction in culturally responsive ways. The teacher
leaders are expected to increase the relevance of STEM by connecting students
with appropriate STEM community partners. Such efforts intend to allow for
fuller participation in STEM by all learners, which may contribute to the
development of a more diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at Central Washington University includes partnerships with McFarland Middle
School, Wahluke School District, Yakima School District, Educational Service
Districts (ESDs) 112 and 121, Career Connect SW STEM Network (partnered with ESD
112), Apple STEM Network (partnered with ESD 171), and the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory. Project goals include growing a network of STEM
instructional change agents by developing Master Teacher Fellows’ (MTFs)
capacity to lead other STEM teachers in using culturally responsive pedagogy,
integrating project-based STEM curriculum, and incorporating authentic
assessment practices. Another goal is supporting the systemic change efforts of
MTFs through an effective network that promotes collaboration among a wide range
of STEM stakeholders, including STEM teachers, administrators, and
community/industry partners. MTFs will study peer mentoring and coaching
frameworks to develop skills in using a coaching cycle and effective strategies
in support of other STEM teachers’ effectiveness. A total of 16 diverse K-12,
experienced and exemplary teachers of STEM are to be selected and supported as
MTFs over six years to lead instructional change efforts in their local contexts
(school/district) through cycles of collective inquiry. MTFs are expected to
disseminate findings from these collaborative inquiry projects both within their
local contexts and via an online portal to the larger network of STEM
stakeholders statewide. This is intended to expand understanding of how multiple
levels of the education system can work synergistically to enhance STEM teaching
and learning. The project’s research and evaluation efforts have the potential
to ascertain the efficacy of the Keck/PKAL model in facilitating systemic change
in cross-institutional K-12 settings (i.e., across schools, districts), and thus
contribute to the growing body of research on supporting networked change to
improve STEM instruction. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.