* 2150301
* REU Site: Sunshine Institute for the Interaction of Light with Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Bridget DePrince, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2025
* USD 405,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Florida State
University, located in Tallahassee, FL, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. In this program, funded by the
Division of Chemistry and the Department of Defense ASSURE program, participants
pursue interdisciplinary research projects emphasizing photochemistry,
photophysics, and spectroscopy. Although students are encouraged to apply from
across the country, the site emphasizes the recruitment of students from Florida
and the Southeastern United States, particularly those from institutions with
few research opportunities and those part of underrepresented groups in
chemistry. Participants also take part in a professional development and ethics
training, with a focus on science communication and preparation for graduate
school or industrial careers. They will also be trained in chemical safety.
Through independent research projects and weekly events including workshops,
seminars, and Photochemistry Caf√©s, this site broadens participation in STEM and
encourages the pursuit of research careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students participate in hands-on research that is of
great interest to modern science and technology. In particular, the research
projects that are designed to advance knowledge relevant to solar-energy
conversion, photochemical reactions, ultrafast photophysical events, and
photomagnetic effects. Participants also receive training in synthetic
chemistry, a variety of analytical techniques, and theoretical methods.
Continued post-program mentoring is provided to the REU participants after they
return to their home institutions; they are encouraged to present their work at
their home institutions and at professional conferences. This program will build
on long-standing efforts by the FSU Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry in
training undergraduates through an active research involvement, which has
motivated many students to pursue graduate degrees and to enter careers in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.