* 2150076
* REU Site: Integrated Bioengineering Research, Career Development, and Outreach Experiences at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kristen Billiar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 413,454.00

This renewal REU site will provide research experiences for ten undergraduate
students per year at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. A diverse cohort of
students from groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering and from
institutions with limited research opportunities will be recruited to increase
access to high-quality research opportunities and mentors in engineering.
Students will work in laboratories tackling projects in various aspects of
bioengineering. They will engage in a “Boot Camp”-style training for
foundational technical skills and pursue professional development opportunities.
Students will contribute to broadening awareness of bioengineering by developing
“Stories in Bioengineering” and hands-on activities for middle-school age girls.
The integrated experience will not only guide a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students through a research project, but will also raise their social awareness
and capacity to see broad options for engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a diverse, inclusive, and globally
engaged engineering workforce, we must engage students at early stages of their
educational careers who might not otherwise have a research opportunity. For
this REU site renewal, participants will perform research in bioengineering. The
objectives of the proposed project are to: 1) engage thirty undergraduate
students from populations underrepresented in engineering (e.g., disadvantaged
backgrounds, underrepresented minorities, women) in bioengineering research
wherein they are guided towards independence in solving open-ended problems, 2)
aid students in developing their societal awareness in engineering design and
their professional skills and confidence, and 3) facilitate high-quality
mentored experiences between the REU participants, faculty advisors, and
graduate student mentors that extends beyond the duration of the REU program.
Students will begin with a bioengineering techniques training “Boot Camp”,
followed by weekly workshops addressing research, communication, ethics,
mentoring, and graduate school as well as socially directed engineering design
and innovation will help the students’ gain professional skills and personal
confidence, critical for the students’ success in research. The REU participants
will develop “Stories in Bioengineering” videos and hands-on activities for
middle-school age girls with broad public
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.