* 2150517
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Underground Science at the Sanford Underground Research Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Brianna Mount, Black Hills State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 251,244.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Black Hills State University (BHSU) will host a 10-week
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program centered on underground
science at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF). This program will
recruit six undergraduate students each year to participate in exciting
underground research projects as well as professional development, social and
outreach activities. Underground science offers possibilities for
interdisciplinary research across a variety of disciplines including physics,
chemistry and biology. Recruitment efforts of the BHSU REU site will be
especially focused on American Indian, female and community college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SURF hosts and performs some of the most
important physics experiments of our time, searching for evidence of dark matter
and investigating the physics of neutrinos. Students The students will
particularly be offered the opportunity to engage in research related to these
experiments by assaying materials for radiopurity measurements, helping to
characterize the LZ detector and testing the chemical purity of noble gases.
Additionally, research at SURF is being carried out in the study of life deep
underground, with applications to medicine and astrobiology, in particular in
the diversity of microbial environments and in the isolation of novel microbes.
Complementary chemistry research will also be performed to determine the local
environment in which these microbes live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.