* 2150501
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: BigDataX: From theory to practice in Big Data computing at eXtreme scales
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Kyle Chard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 41,559.00

This project extends the BigDataX program, a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) and the
University of Chicago (UChicago). The BigDataX REU site focuses on undergraduate
research in both the theory and practice of big data computing at extreme
scales. BigDataX includes a diverse group of 10 undergraduate students per year
for three years, who will conduct research over a 10-week period in the area of
big data and will address problems related to the design, analysis, and
implementation of run-time systems and storage systems to support big data
applications. The site aims to make extreme scale computing more tractable,
touching every branch of computing in high-end computing and data centers. The
research advancements will impact scientific discovery, and they will strengthen
a wide range of research activities enabling efficient access, processing,
storage, and sharing of valuable scientific data from many disciplines. The
proposed research projects will place students in the middle of a technological
revolution opening doors to many real-world applications. The PIs have a
comprehensive and proven educational plan integrating undergraduate students
with PhD students with incremental manageable goals, aimed at allowing students
to achieve publishable results within the summer program. Furthermore, with an
emphasis on recruiting from underrepresented populations, the site will improve
the diversity of university faculty, researchers and practitioners in big data
and distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the
BigDataX REU site is to promote a data-centric view of scientific and technical
computing, at the intersection of distributed systems theory and practice. The
site includes six mentors, with complementary expertise from theory to systems,
programming languages, distributed systems, storage management, and data
science. The mentors have extensive experience in mentoring undergraduate
students, collectively having worked with over one hundred undergraduate
students in research activities, publishing dozens of peer-reviewed workshop,
conference, and journal papers at top venues together with undergraduate
students. The students that will be part of the BigDataX program will be exposed
to big data applications, large data sets, and various distributed systems such
as the Mystic reconfigurable testbed at IIT, Chameleon cloud and the Theta
supercomputer (and the upcoming Aurora supercomputer) at Argonne National
Laboratory, various NSF-sponsored high performance computing resources, and
commercial clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.