* 2150228
* REU-Site: SURFO - Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography 2022-2024
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Martha McConnell, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2025
* USD 328,123.00

The University of Rhode Islandâ€™s (URI) Graduate School for Oceanography (GSO),
located in Narragansett, RI, will host a Research Experience for Undergraduates
Site program. The program, called Summer Undergraduate Research For Oceanography
(SURFO), will bring ten to twelve undergraduates to the GSO campus each summer
for a ten-week internship. SURFO research experiences are designed for science,
math and engineering students who will have completed their junior year of
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GSO has extensive research facilities and many
mentors who are available to support undergraduate research projects. SURFO
interns use their quantitative STEM background in projects, for example,
involving fluid dynamics and transport, biogeochemical transformations, ecology
and diversity, autonomous platforms and exploration and discovery. A SURFO's
research may include, but is not limited to, laboratory work, field work, data
analysis, instrument development, and model simulations of the ocean realm.
SURFO students develop an individual research topic under the mentorship of a
URI faculty member, Marine Research Scientist or Post-Doctoral Fellow and carry
out a program of research from the proposal-stage, to conduct and analysis, and
concluding with the dissemination of their results in an oral presentation and a
written document. The written document is in either journal manuscript or NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship Proposal format. Recruiting efforts include
continued work with the Puerto Rico - Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (PR-LSAMP), Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS), the NorthEast LSAMP, and resources
identified by the American Geophysical Union, the American Meteorological
Society and The Oceanography Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.