* 2150952
* Supporting and Preparing Future STEM teachers through Scholarships and Teaching Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Jessica Barone, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2027
* USD 801,501.00

The project aims to serve the national need for STEM teachers by providing
scholarships and support to help high-achieving students complete their
undergraduate STEM degrees and teacher certifications. In addition to
scholarships, the project will implement several evidence-based and innovative
strategies that introduce students to teaching and provide teaching experiences
early. In the process, the project will focus on developing STEM discipline and
pedagogical content knowledge for future teachers, while dispelling
misconceptions about high-need schools. Project components will include winter
intersession and summer internship programs to provide early placement and field
experiences related to high-need schools. Likewise, the project will implement a
program where pre-service teachers work with experts to create STEM learning
activities that will be shared with local schools. Scholars will receive career-
related support, mentorship and exposure to topics such as teaching in high-need
schools, trauma-informed teaching, and culturally responsive
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at SUNY College at Geneseo is
collaborating with Monroe Community College (MCC), and includes partnerships
with Dansville Central, a high-need rural school district near Geneseo, and East
Rochester, a high-need school district near MCC. This project also partners with
the New York State Master Teacher Program, a community of STEM teachers
dedicated to developing expertise in content and pedagogy. As an integral part
of the project, master teachers will provide scholars and first-year teachers
with mentorship and networking. The primary goals of this five-year project are
to: recruit, retain, support, graduate, and place eighteen (18) highly qualified
STEM teachers; implement and evaluate evidence-based and innovative strategies
for improving teacher preparation; improve self-efficacy of STEM undergraduate
majors pursuing secondary certification; and support and evaluate programming
aimed at helping STEM teacher candidates become highly effective in-service STEM
educators. This project will be guided by past research and theories related to
the role of self-efficacy, teaching community support, and the need to adjust
notions related to the nature of high-need schools as part of teacher
development and retention. Evaluation will use a mixed methods approach aimed at
indicating the level that the project goals are met and to what extent scholars
apply their knowledge to high-need classroom settings. The projectâ€™s leadership
team will disseminate findings at conferences and via publications so that
others might gain new insights to help improve teacher preparation programs and
fuel the STEM teaching community. In addition, teaching materials created by
interns and scholars will be available to local schools beyond the project. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.