* 2150966
* Turning the Tide: Teaching Mathematics in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Jennifer Szczesniak, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2027
* USD 820,280.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality
mathematics teachers to teach in rural, small town, and urban high-need school
districts. The project will take a grow-your-own linear approach that spans from
local high schools to area community colleges to a four-year institution. A
recruiting focus will be on positively influencing high school students to join
the mathematics teaching profession by educating them on the benefits and
rewards of teaching. After high school, the education pathway for students will
begin at a two-year college. After completing a community college degree,
participants will transfer to a mathematics major and pre-service teacher
program at a four-year college, where they will gain teacher licensure. Upon
graduation with a baccalaureate degree, they will return to high-need schools as
mathematics teachers. To prepare undergraduate students for the teaching
profession, the project will incorporate a three-pronged immersion model. (1)
Students will receive enhanced mathematics education coursework, mentoring, and
dual advising from STEM and STEM education faculty. (2) They also will have
special field experiences through a residency model beginning in community
college. (3) The project will facilitate professional development opportunities
to develop participantsâ€™ professional identities as teachers prepared to succeed
in high-need schools. Overall, the project aims to increase the number of STEM
graduates prepared to teach mathematics in high-need schools and address the
mathematics teacher shortage in central Pennsylvania and across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Shippensburg University includes
partnerships with Harrisburg Area Community College and Hagerstown Community
College, along with five high-need local education agencies (LEAs) with high
teacher turnover rates; namely, Carlisle, Chambersburg, Steelton-Highspire,
Upper Dauphin, and Waynesboro. The project has two underlying goals. First is to
recruit, provide scholarships, prepare, and graduate thirty (30) highly
qualified mathematics teachers within the five-year duration of the project. A
second goal is to place these new teachers in high-need schools, primarily in
the central Pennsylvania area. The project will be informed by the theoretical
basis of a grow-your-own teacher model in which young students who are
interested in becoming teachers are fostered and supported. In concert with
this, the project will build on residency models of teacher practicums, in which
students who remain in one school for three years have been shown to improve
teacher effectiveness and retention in high-need schools. Mixed-methods project
evaluation will explore the effectiveness of programmatic components, ranging
from recruiting high school students to graduation and placement in high-need
school settings. Lines of investigation on the project's immersion model will
generate new knowledge and fill gaps in the literature by testing methods to
influence the effectiveness of: the grow-your-own theoretical framework and
interorganizational pathway; the efficacy of preparing preservice teachers for
high-need classrooms through community building, content mastery, service
learning, and increased field experiences; and early and ongoing mentorship for
novice teachers. Through publications and regional and national meetings, the
project team will disseminate evidence collected to inform other higher
education professionals seeking to improve teacher preparation and placement
programs. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.