* 2150321
* REU Site: Hybrid Design and Fabrication
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Christopher McMurrough, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 402,181.00

Over three years, this maker-centered Research Experiences for Undergraduates
site will recruit 30 students from diverse and interdisciplinary backgrounds to
participate in developing smart material toolkits, AI-assisted and sensor-driven
tools, and smart creative environments. This project will create an authentic
undergraduate research experience that incorporates elements of maker culture to
develop positive coping mechanisms needed to overcome the ambiguity of open-
ended research questions, foster personal identity formation within the research
community, and bolster scientific and creative curiosity. Its research builds on
craft-based methods to design digital fabrication practices that allow users to
maintain agency in the making process which has been shown to democratize access
to advanced materials and fabrication techniques, enable grassroots innovation
from hobbyist and professional communities, and broaden participation in STEM
fields. Each research activity is situated within a community of practice and
designed to engage REU students with stakeholders and peer researchers,
including external mentors from internationally recognized human-computer
interaction programs. Students will benefit from professional development in
design thinking, additive and subtractive fabrication, and human subjects
research. The interdisciplinary research experience and training will contribute
to a high-demand research skill set for REU participants portable to a variety
of science and technology disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Projects will focus
on a diverse range of underdeveloped materials within digital fabrication
including clay, silicone, glass, biomaterials, and textiles which will provide
both an experiential and collaborative learning substrate and attract
underrepresented and underserved students in communities peripheral to science
and engineering education. While a core advantage of digital fabrication is
automation and abstraction, it has also contributed to removing users from
directly interacting with a material. These material-based interactions are
central to how experiential knowledge develops and are core contributors of
creative cognition. Collectively, undergraduate researchers will help develop
and disseminate digital fabrication toolkits and user interface systems to
further promote material and technological literacy in both academic and
independent "do it yourself" communities. Exemplar artifacts developed under the
mentorship of professional art and design faculty will be disseminated through
social and popular media and generate inspiration, excitement, and critical
reflection around interdisciplinary collaborations between art and technology.
Evaluation of the site using a Maker Competencies framework will provide
valuable knowledge to the REU community on the effects of maker-centered
training on the undergraduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.