* 2150649
* Secondary STEM Teacher Education Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Pascal Ricatto, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,065,877.00

The project aims to serve the national need of supporting the preparation of
high-quality science and mathematics teachers by recruiting a diverse population
of teacher candidates, providing a high-quality teacher preparation program, and
ensuring that graduates are supported in their initial years of teaching. It
addresses the shortage of qualified STEM teachers in New Jersey, where 42% of
school districts have at least one school that qualifies as high-need. The
project will provide two-year scholarships to undergraduate students and one-
year stipends to graduate students to support them through the teacher
certification and induction programs. These students will be supported through
coursework, advisement, mentorship, and internships with teachers in partner
districts. The project will investigate and address the particular needs of
transfer students. Project outcomes have the potential to offer a model for
community college-university partnerships to improve STEM teacher education
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Montclair State University
involves partnerships with Bergen Community College and several high-need
districts including Kearny, Hackensack, and Passaic School Districts. Project
goals include the recruitment, preparation, and support of 30 Scholars over five
years. Scholarships will be awarded to Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science,
Physics, Computer Science, and Mathematics majors in their junior and senior
years and students in their second and final year of the Masters of Arts STEM
teacher certification program. The project will incorporate best practices
gleaned from STEM education research related to teacher knowledge, professional
development, and inclusive teaching practices. Research on the project,
involving surveys of Scholars at various stages of the program, will inform the
continuing refinement of the model and will be disseminated through publications
and presentations. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.