* 2150878
* Understanding How Bacteria Sense Mechanics Upon Attaching to Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Vernita Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 548,102.00

Biofilms are communities of microbes that are bound to each other and to a
surface by a matrix of polymers and proteins. They foul and corrode
infrastructure and cause chronic infections. At present, approaches to making
surfaces that prevent infection have met with only limited success. The goal of
this project is to determine how bacteria sense the mechanics of the surface
upon attachment and respond to surface mechanics by starting to develop a
biofilm. This work will establish basic knowledge that can be used to design
surfaces that resist the development of biofilms by not giving bacteria the
mechanical cue(s) needed to start forming a biofilm. Thus, the scientific aims
will improve biofilm prevention and thereby benefit public health and
infrastructure such as water treatment, shipping, and oil transport. Mentoring
and education in ethics and mindset will improve the undergraduate environment
and pipeline for STEM majors. A study of classroom education methods will
improve undergraduate STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this project is to develop a predictive framework for understanding
how bacteria use proteins in their cell envelopes to sense and respond to the
mechanics of the surface to which they attach. The working hypothesis is that
bacteria do this by transducing stresses and deformations in their envelopes
that depend on the elasticity of both the bacterium and the substrate as well as
the energy of adhesion with the surface. This study will extend studies of P.
aeruginosa and generalize to include another rod-shaped Gram-negative bacterium
(Escherichia coli), a rod-shaped Gram-positive bacterium (Bacillus subtilis),
and a spherical Gram-positive bacterium (Staphylococcus aureus). Atomic force
microscopy (AFM) will be used to measure the adhesion forces between bacteria
and a wide range of test substrates with different surface chemistries and
elasticities; AFM will also characterize the elasticity and topography of
substrates. High-throughput culturing in well plates will be used to measure
bacterial accumulation and growth on substrates, as well as the increase in
antibiotic resistance that is a biofilm phenotype. Finite-element modeling will
characterize the stresses and deformations that arise when different types of
bacteria attach to different substrates. Trends shown by modeling will be
validated by measuring the activity of mechanosensitive ion channels that are
more open when the membrane stress is greater. Quantitative confocal microscopy
and image analysis will measure the intracellular signaling that arises as a
result of bacteria attaching to surfaces and the intercellular signaling that
arises as a result of bacterial growth on the surface. Genetic manipulation
(reporter strains and isogenic knockouts) will be used to measure signaling and
to elucidate the role of specific gene products, such as candidate
mechanosensory proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.