* 2150432
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Satellite and Ground-Based Remote Sensing at NOAA-CESSRST--Enhanced Engagement
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Reginald Blake, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2025
* USD 590,500.00

This REU site will provide undergraduate students from both community colleges
and four-year institutions an opportunity to conduct full-time, collaborative
satellite and ground-based remote sensing research under the mentorship of
experts in the field. Each year, ten (10) STEM students (five from community
colleges and five from four-year institutions) will be recruited from the City
University of New York’s (CUNY) 23 campus-wide institutions. For fifteen weeks,
these students will become part of a community of research scholars who are
actively engaged in state-of-the-art remote sensing research and applications.
They will participate in research group meetings, seminars, oral and poster
presentations at local, regional, national conferences, and in citizen science
collaborations. Particularly, they will engage a local, environmentally active,
but scientifically underserved community in fundamental and cutting-edge,
neighborhood-scale, multi-platformed, urban heat island studies in the Bedford-
Stuyvesant community of Brooklyn, New York. Engagement in these activities will
afford promising undergraduates from two- and four-year institutions the
opportunity to work with scientists and engineers and to conduct research at one
of the nation’s premier scientific centers for Satellite and Ground-Based Remote
Sensing. Satellite and ground-based remote sensing is a critically important,
unique, and young area of science, and it is practically unknown to most of the
undergraduates at CUNY. The activities combine year-long (Summer, Fall, Winter,
and Spring) research experiences with multidimensional/layered mentoring,
academic support systems, and a robust learning community that produce holistic
and engaging stimuli for the scientific and academic growth and development of
the student participants. The activities will allow the undergraduate
researchers to hone their acquired skills and knowledge by being research
mentors to high school students in the New York City public school system and
citizen science enablers to members of the local community. The scientific and
educational value of the program derives from two main sources: 1) a focus on
the transfer of learning from sciences and mathematics to technology, computer
systems and engineering applications where fundamental principles learned in
particular natural sciences and mathematics courses are applied to real-world
problems, and 2) the scientific, mathematical, and engineering expertise of the
NOAA-CESSRST and ReSESS (REU site) research scientists, all of whom are
professionally active scholars who conduct their research and mentor students at
the REU site.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research at the REU site focuses on the
application of satellite and ground-based remote sensing to the study of the
atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the biosphere, the lithosphere, and the cryosphere.
Overall, the site conducts state-of-the-art satellite and ground-based remote
sensing, ground-based field measurements, data processing and analyses, modeling
and forecasting, satellite algorithm development, and calibration and validation
of satellite products. These activities underpin the REU site’s research
endeavors in Coastal Water Remote Sensing, Middle Atmospheric Remote Sensing,
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing, Tropospheric Remote Sensing, Nowcasting,
Vegetation and Soil Moisture, Snow Cover, Snow Depth, Sea-Ice, Water Resources,
and Hurricanes among a plethora of other research areas that includes urban
climate, climate change, and the urban heat island effect. Among the specific
research projects that REU students will participate in are: Planetary Boundary
Layer Analyses using Ceilometers and Lidars, Geolocation Correction of Satellite
Precipitation Estimates Using a Radar-Gauge Product, and Analyzing the Diurnal
Cycle of Urban Land Surface Temperature using Satellite Remote Sensing and in-
situ Applications. Students will receive tiered-mentoring, training in ethics,
mini courses in GIS, python and MATLAB, and an opportunity to present their
research at a national conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.