* 2150216
* REU SITE: Research and Leadership Enabling Advanced Discoveries (RLEAD) in Chemical Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Angel Marti, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2025
* USD 404,200.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Rice
University, located in Houston, TX sponsors the preparation of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. In this program, funded by the
Division of Chemistry and the Department of Defense ASSURE program, students
participate in research projects focused on advancing Chemical Nanoscale Science
and Technology. As part of the program, the students are exposed to a variety of
professional development and leadership training activities in addition to
personal mentoring in their individual projects. The combination of strategic
recruitment, research, professional development, and leadership activities
allows this REU site to support education and diversity to prepare the new
generation of leaders in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The participating students
work on individual projects related to different subareas in Chemical
Nanosciences including, Nano Materials, Nano Medicine, Nano Organic, Nano
Theory/Computation, Nano Physical, and Nano Imaging. In addition, the students
partake in professional leadership training in collaboration with the Doerr
Institute for New Leaders, professional development activities in partnership
with the Rice Center for Career Development, and the Rice Office of Graduate and
Postdoctoral Studies, and scientific literacy activities organized by the PI
team. The long-term objective of this REU site is to enhance the preparation,
number, and diversity of students pursuing graduate degrees and careers in STEM.
Appropriate representation is ensured by recruiting students through established
partnerships with minority-serving institutions and primarily undergraduate
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.