* 2150401
* REU Site: Ocean Science &amp; Engineering at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 2022-2024 Program
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2025
* USD 334,609.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), located in Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
for ten undergraduates each year who will participate in the Summer Student
Fellows (SSF) program. WHOI is one of the largest independent oceanographic
institutions and research fleet operators in the world, and SSFs are offered a
wide range of research opportunities. Students are recruited nationally from all
major science and engineering disciplines, usually during their Junior year in
college. Each Fellow is matched with an advisor(s) and is encouraged to discuss
potential projects with them. Fellows and advisors together complete a work plan
early on, then during the summer, each SSF conducts independent research and
makes two presentations: a five-minute mid- summer oral progress report, and a
final oral or poster presentation on their research. A written final project
report is required. Professional development activities include a special
lecture series, a one-day field experience on the R/V Tioga, a Responsible
Conduct of Research workshop, training on how to prepare a scientific poster,
and discussions about graduate school with a postdoc/graduate student panel.
SSFs often present their results at professional conferences after the program
is over and/or co-author publications in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WHOI’s REU program is aimed at students
interested in exploring the full range of sub-disciplines within oceanography.
This includes biological, chemical, geological, and physical oceanography, plus
ocean engineering and marine policy, with several of these disciplines requiring
strong foundations in math and physics. For example, the program offers
opportunities for physics, engineering, and math majors to explore application
of their undergraduate major to areas of study that they may not have yet
envisioned, such as ocean circulation, robotics, and climate modeling. Summer
Student Fellows (SSFs) also have access to state-of-the-art analytical
instruments, sampling devices and modeling programs for their research projects
in a wide range of disciplines; themes that crosscut disciplines include oceans
and climate, the Arctic, autonomous underwater vehicles and systems, and human-
ocean interactions and impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.