* 2150798
* Collaborative Research: Microengineered Tumor-Mimetic Collagen Landscapes to Test the Role of Prognostic Structural Cues on Cell Migration Through the Extracellular Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Vinay Abhyankar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2025
* USD 340,722.00

The spread of cancer from the primary tumor to other locations in the body is
called metastasis and is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
The overarching goal of this collaborative research project is to determine how
collagen properties that predict metastasis work together to guide cancer cell
movement toward blood vessels. The project team will create a library of three-
dimensional (3D) hydrogels containing different combinations of collagen
properties and identify the properties that guide cancer cells through the tumor
microenvironment. The new knowledge developed in this project will help
researchers understand how different cancer cell sub-populations interact with
their environment and identify possible targets for future anti-metastatic
treatments. This project will also enhance the Rochester-area science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) pipeline by establishing a
mentored summer program to support undergraduate student research at the
Rochester Institute of Technology and University of Rochester campuses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer metastasis is a process wherein tumor cells take on
a migratory phenotype, invade the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM), and
infiltrate lymph and blood vessels. These circulating tumor cells can then seed
secondary sites. The collagen-rich tumor ECM provides structural guidance cues
that promote cell migration during the matrix invasion process. Using second
harmonic generation (SHG) imaging of tumor collagen, it has been established
that collagen fibers aligned perpendicular to the tumor-host interface are
predictive of patient metastasis. The project team has recently shown that SHG
forward/backward (F/B) imaging, sensitive to the spatial organization of
collagen fibrils that comprise collagen fibers, is an independent predictor of
metastasis in breast cancer patients. These fibril-level properties measured by
SHG F/B are referred to as the collagen fiber internal structure (FIS). Although
aligned collagen fibers and SHG F/B are both predictive of metastasis in human
patients, it is unclear how these multiscale properties combine to influence the
motility of tumor cells during matrix invasion. This project aims to test the
hypothesis that FIS and fiber alignment properties combine in a synergistic and
hierarchal manner to influence cell migration through the tumor ECM. The first
objective is to use F/B measurements and fiber alignment properties from human
tumor samples with known metastatic outcomes as a guide to microengineer 3D
collagen scaffolds that replicate the multiscale tumor-mimetic collagen
characteristics. The second objective is to systematically investigate how
combinations of tumor-mimetic F/B and fiber alignment influence migratory
characteristics of tumor cells with different metastatic potentials and then
evaluate the role of Discoidin domain receptors as collagen FIS receptors. This
project represents the first 3D microengineering efforts to combine and
independently tune two clinically relevant structural cues, F/B and fiber
alignment, and systematically evaluate their effects on tumor cell motility.
This work could help advance metastatic prediction algorithms, support future
therapeutic design efforts, and provide insight into the receptors that modulate
cell-ECM interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.