* 2150057
* HSI Pilot Project: Developing an Inquiry-Based Research Module to Promote Academic Success in a Diverse Undergraduate STEM Student Population
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Brenda Whaley, Houston Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,905.00

The importance of this project is that aims to increase the academic success
rates of sophomore STEM students and narrow the achievement gap between under-
represented minority (URM) or first-generation (FG) and other cohort members by
immersing students in an authentic research experience. Attrition rates for STEM
students in their second year are significant, especially for URM and FG
students. The project supports students during this critical period, they will
persist in STEM majors and ultimately increase their representation in the
workforce. Houston Baptist University (HBU) is a four-year undergraduate
Hispanic-Serving Institution in Houston, Texas, the most diverse city in the
nation. HBU’s College of Science and Engineering student population is 18%
African Americans, 47% Hispanic, and 19% FG. Instructors and peer-mentors will
guide students through a research project which promotes the development of
their research and interpersonal skills, both essential in the STEM workforce.
The expected outcome of this work is to promote students’ self-identification as
scientists, which will ultimately lead to increased academic
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply the knowledge students
are learning in their sophomore-level Cellular and Molecular Biology course,
which in turn is expected to increase success rates. Students will also receive
purposeful instruction in research techniques and interpersonal skills, to
prepare them for a future STEM career. Both short and long-term goals of this
project include increased success rates in STEM courses, narrowing achievement
gaps between URM/FG students and other members of their cohort, increased
graduation rates, and an increase in sense of belonging within the STEM
community. The project’s focus on student driven research is a proven approach
for increasing science engagement of minorities, Hispanics, and women and will
increase overall student retention in STEM programs and prepare young people for
entry into the STEM workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.