* 2150005
* REU: Training Globally Engaged Undergraduates in Food Security Research in Kenya:  A Focus on Tropical Food Crops, as the Key to Feeding the World
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Anne Osano, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2025
* USD 339,582.00

This REU award to Bowie State University (BSU), located in Bowie, MD, is a
10-week program to train 8 students (24 total) in summers 2022 – 2025. The
students are from schools with limited research opportunities and under-
represented groups. Research is conducted at Egerton University (EU) in Nakuru,
Kenya, Africa. Students learn how research is conducted, and present their
results at scientific conferences. Research focuses on genetic, physiological,
and ecological mechanisms underlying crop responses in a changing environment
seeking food security. Assessment of the program will be performed using online
surveys. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific theme focuses on hidden food
treasures of the forgotten, underutilized and ignored food crops, which are
highly nutritious with rich reservoirs of genetic diversity that can fit well
into existing agricultural systems. This Program contributes to the national
need of training a global workforce. The program is hosted by BSU’s Department
of Natural Sciences and Egerton University, Department of Crops, Horticulture
and Soils. Students’ first week is at BSU for an intensive boot camp on the
history and culture of Kenya, safety, ethics/responsible conduct of research,
basic scientific principles and skills to prepare for the research project. The
next 8 weeks involve research at EU, followed by a closing symposium where
students present research results. Student projects include: characterization of
Rhizobia; Dolichos lablab accessions; Climate Smart approaches for promotion and
adoption of Arid and semi-Arid Sorghum; Indigenous Vegetable Project: A focus on
Cassava; Analysis of multi-environment adaptation and its effect on nutrient
profiles of finger millet genotypes (Eleusine coracana L. Gaertn); Diversity of
endophytes in Kenyan forgotten food crops. Virtual Metabolomic workshops are
offered by the USA team. Students learn literature review, experimental
techniques and design, data collection and analysis as well as professional
development. Recruitment and participant selection focus on students with
outstanding research potential from underrepresented groups. Application forms
are available on the BSU REU Program website as downloadable electronic files.
Applications will be evaluated by a Selection Committee. More information is
available by visiting https://www.bowiestate.edu/academics-
research/colleges/college-arts-sciences/departments/natural-sciences/research-
experience-for-underg/, or by contacting the PI, Dr. Anne Osano at
aosano@bowiestate.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.