* 2150751
* Building capacity to recruit future STEM teachers in Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Amy Greene, Albright College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 74,399.00

The project aims to serve the national need of increasing the number of
effective secondary STEM teachers. The project will explore models for
recruiting more individuals to STEM teaching careers through partnerships with
two local high-need high schools and a local community college. The project team
will study how high school dual enrollment courses and transfer from the
community college could provide pathways to STEM teaching careers. High school
and college students from across partner institutions will be surveyed to
investigate barriers and interests in STEM teaching careers. This project will
explore models for recruiting future secondary STEM teachers that could inform
other colleges and universities across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Albright College includes partnerships with Muhlenberg High School,
Reading High School, Reading Area Community College, and the Science Research
Institute (SRI) at Albright College. The overarching project goal is to
investigate new models for increasing the number of STEM majors who pursue
secondary STEM education teacher certification at Albright College. This will be
accomplished by strengthening STEM education partnerships with local high
schools, recruiting high school students to STEM research experiences at SRI,
and examining dual enrollment courses as a recruitment tool. Additionally, the
project team will work with local community college partners to determine how to
streamline the process for STEM transfer students to pursue a co-major in
secondary STEM education. Further, the project will leverage current STEM
majorsâ€™ immersive teaching experiences as a mechanism to recruit future
secondary STEM teachers. All project efforts will be informed by survey data
collected from high school, community college, and Albright College students to
investigate interests in and barriers to students pursuing STEM teaching
certification. Evaluation will be accomplished by an Advisory Board composed of
stakeholders from local high schools, the community college, and across Albright
departments and programs. This Capacity Building project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.