* 2150520
* Promoting Student Persistence, Learning, and Understanding Through an Expanded MESA Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* James McGarrah, Bakersfield College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,704.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to expand Bakersfield
College’s Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement (MESA) program and study
the impact of its various aspects on student success. MESA participants at
Bakersfield College have improved course completion rates and other outcomes,
and are on a path to graduate with an associate degree in a STEM discipline
and/or transfer to four-year institutions. The project has three main goals: (1)
expand the number of MESA program student participants from 107 to 200 students
per semester to establish a baseline for future study and give preliminary
insight to challenges that might exist for further expansion; (2) determine
which of the general MESA program components have the greatest impact on student
success; and (3) build awareness and explore how to better integrate MESA into
the Guided Pathway organization of Bakersfield College. Major components of the
MESA program that will be explored include workshops, informal and peer
mentoring, volunteering in the community, undergraduate research, opportunities
to attend conferences, industry and laboratory field trips, and job shadowing.
Understanding how to grow the program while maintaining positive outcomes will
provide important insights, particularly for community colleges that serve rural
populations as they look to implement successful strategies for bridging the gap
for underserved groups to access the STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Often at community colleges, the path to
transfer in STEM takes longer than two years and the number of students who
successfully transfer can be low. This project will contribute to the knowledge
base in STEM education by studying how key components of Bakersfield College’s
MESA program, which accounts for 48% of STEM pathway degrees while only engaging
6% of STEM pathway students, can be scaled up without diminishing outcomes.
Major data sources include focus groups of current MESA program participants, a
survey of MESA graduates, and a survey to gauge awareness of the MESA program
across the proposing institution. The expected results are to identify the
critical elements of the program needed to increase the number of participants
and maintain its level of effectiveness. The results of the research study will
be disseminated amongst similar institutions, particularly those that serve
large minority populations and may be looking for scalable strategies to support
STEM degree completion. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.