* 2150664
* Understanding the Co-Evolution of Phylogenomic Signal, Gene Linkage, and Recombination Rate Through Comparative Genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Terje Raudsepp, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

One of the major themes that have emerged from the genetics literature from the
past decade is that each speciesâ€™ genome is a mosaic of many different genetic
histories. A daunting challenge facing biologists is how to accurately interpret
this large and complex collection of genetic histories to identify which of
these most likely represent the true relationships among living and extinct
species. The rate at which chromosomes exchange information (i.e., recombine)
has been shown to be one of the most reliable predictors of which DNA sequences
within chromosomes can best reconstruct ancient relationships of living species.
Our goal is to retrace the evolution of mammalian chromosomes and their
recombination rates across time, from the genomes of living species back to
their inferred 100-million-year-old ancestor. We will identify those shared
chromosome regions that have recombined at the slowest rates and provide the
greatest fidelity to reconstructing mammalian evolutionary history. We will also
determine whether specific genes preferentially evolve within regions of
historically high or low rates of chromosomal change. Our findings will greatly
benefit researchers seeking to resolve other parts of the Tree of Life, by
leading to more efficient approaches for determining evolutionary history at
both shallow and deep evolutionary timescales. We will create a new public web-
database for mammalian genetic maps that allows researchers to browse
chromosomes, genes, and recombination rates across the mammalian Tree of Life.
This project will train a diverse cohort of scientists across multiple academic
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposal is predicated upon pairing new high-
quality, chromosome-level mammalian genome assemblies with a recombination map.
An explicit goal of this project is to generate a detailed history of mammalian
genes and chromosomes annotated with their local recombination rates. We will
create a novel, publicly accessible resource of recombination maps allowing
researchers to trace the evolution of recombination rate and chromosome
evolution across the mammalian tree of life, from the inferred ancestor to each
living species. We will also generate the first mammalian phylogeny based on Y
chromosome data, the only chromosome that contains regions that have
historically lacked meiotic recombination. Our findings will contribute to the
goal of resolving the mammalian tree of life and inform ongoing controversies
surrounding the mode and tempo of early placental mammal evolution, while
improving our understanding of the relationship between chromosome architecture,
recombination, and local gene content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.