* 2150323
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Self-sustaining Peer Mentor Support System for Computer Science Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,947.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Implementation and Evaluation Project aims to
build a sustainable, inclusive learning community for HSI Computer Science (CS)
students through a peer mentoring program to enhance the quality of CS education
and to increase the retention and graduation rates of students in CS,
particularly Hispanic students. CS suffers from several disparities along racial
and gender lines that limit the participation of students in a field that is
becoming more critical for their future career paths and for society as a whole.
The project team has identified two reasons leading to this problem that will
addressed in this project. First, there is a critical shortage of educational
resources for our undergraduate students in the first CS course. Many students
struggle with the introductory curriculum and existing resources don't appear to
be sufficient, particularly for underrepresented groups. Second, students,
especially underrepresented students, are not affirmed in their CS identities
and sense of belonging. This project will implement a peer mentor program to
develop an effective, evidence-based, and sustainable program for the
preparation, tutoring, and ongoing support of undergraduate students in the CS
department at SFSU and evaluate its effectiveness. By recruiting diverse peer
mentors, training them in equitable and inclusive pedagogical techniques, and
establishing an affirming mentoring procedure, this project will develop mentors
themselves to become future leaders while creating a safe and inclusive learning
community for entry level CS students. This program will directly benefit
approximately 800 CS students at SFSU, including 750 students who are enrolled
in the introductory CS class and 50 peer mentors each calendar
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By building an inclusive, sustainable community of
learners that affirms the experiences and identities of underrepresented
students, the project will help diversify the CS pipeline, leading to a wider
range of ideas and approaches that can be brought to bear on society’s most
pressing problems. Research will support programmatic activities as well as
contributing new knowledge important to addressing the needs of CS students from
marginalized groups. The team will explore three research questions: (1) to what
extent does participation in peer mentoring affect mentees’ sense of belonging,
CS identity, and retention in the field? (2) to what extent does participation
in an inclusive pedagogy class support peer mentors in developing a growth
mindset and asset-based thinking, identifying the need for inclusive teaching
practices, and implementing such practices? (3) what are the benefits to peer
mentors in participation in the program, including their sense of belonging and
CS identity? Assessment will use a mixed-methods approach, triangulating the
results of Likert-scale surveys, open-ended surveys, semi-structured interviews,
course artifacts and grade distributions. It is anticipated that mentees’ and
mentors' sense of belonging, CS identity, and program retention will increase.
Results will be disseminated through CS and STEM education conferences and
publications and the CSU Chancellor's office. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.