* 2150531
* REU Site: Physics Research at UC Merced
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Brian Utter, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,948.00

This award establishes a new REU site in the Department of Physics at the
University of California – Merced, where each summer ten undergraduate students
will participate in physics research across a range of subfields ranging from
biophysics, condensed matter, atomic, molecular and optical physics, soft
condensed matter, and astrophysics. UC Merced Physics has a dedicated faculty
and active, cutting-edge research programs with which to engage students. The
Department leverages its strong history of supporting undergraduate research as
well as institutional partners, including the Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Center, to provide a comprehensive program of targeted research
opportunities, comprehensive professional development plans, community building
activities, and dedicated mentoring. Knowledge generated through the conducted
research projects will impact a variety of scientific disciplines. Student
presentation and publication of data will be encouraged to actively participate
with the relevant research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
engage a diverse and talented cohort of undergraduate students who will benefit
greatly from engaging in physics and material research research at a formative
stage in their trajectories to graduate school or the scientific work force. The
University of California – Merced, as a Hispanic-Serving Institution with a
large percentage of first-generation students, situated in the San Joaquin
Valley in central California, has both the institutional resources and campus
culture to support a diverse and talented cohort of students traditionally
underrepresented in physics and science. Participants will gain research skills
in physics, as well as scientific self-efficacy through program activities.
Collaborators on campus, including the faculty, graduate student and
postdoctoral scholars, will benefit from the impacts of contributing to the
mentoring and collaboration with the REU participants. Participant support to
attend conferences to present research outcomes will extend the reach to impact
a variety of physics subfields and serve as a capstone experience for
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.