* 2150089
* REU Site: REU Chemical Biology Site at New York University
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 01/31/2025
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support 10
undergraduate students for 10 weeks of research training and professional during
the summers of 2022-2025 at New York University (NYU). This site, managed by
Professors Paramjit Arora and Daniela Buccella, will introduce young scientists
to the rapidly growing and technologically important research field of chemical
biology. The site aims to introduce undergraduate science majors to cutting-edge
research at the chemistry-biology interface that will capture their interest in
science and engineering careers. It will provide students with basic
professional skills to succeed in graduate school and beyond, and increase the
awareness of various career opportunities in science and engineering fields.
Finally, the site will also create a collaborative environment to broaden
participation in chemistry by recruiting and supporting a diverse set of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this REU Site, programming combines
research, professional development training, and social activities designed to
foster a sense of community among student participants and mentors. The research
component will be integrated with thematically related efforts at NYU, including
new university initiatives in the Department of Chemistry such as the Biomedical
Chemistry Institute (BCI), the Laboratory of Molecular Recognition and Synthesis
(LMRS), and the Center for Computational Chemistry (C3). Featuring open lab
spaces specifically designed to foster communication and collaboration between
research groups with complementary expertise, the site will provide an
interdisciplinary science experience to the participants as each student will
have the opportunity to interact with at least two groups that have ongoing
collaborations and joint students. Participants will explore fundamental aspects
of chemical biology through projects that range from computational design to
organic synthesis of biomolecular scaffolds to biochemical analysis of molecular
interactions. A series of workshops will provide the students with professional
development exercises that often are lacking in traditional undergraduate
curricula, including skill-building activities in scientific writing and
presentation, and workshops related to ethics of research and
publication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.