* 2150107
* EF: Collaborative Research: MTM 2: Marine Invertebrate Microbiome Assembly, Diversification, and Coevolution
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Purushotham Bangalore, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 505,300.00

Microbes associated with marine invertebrates are of broad interest for
establishing the rules of life for host-microbe associations. Although some
marine invertebrates host only one or two types of microbes, others host
thousands of different kinds of microbes. The project goal is to understand how
and why particular microbes are hosted by invertebrates; whether the diversity
of these microorganisms is related to the diversity of their hosts; and how
these associations change over evolutionary time. The investigators are training
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students how to assess microbiome
diversity; how to use novel software to search, categorize, and compile data
from DNA sequence archives; and how to identify and classify marine
invertebrates. They are integrating graduate students and undergraduate students
in the development of a high-school-based program to mentor students in the
assessment of marine invertebrate biodiversity, training the next generation of
scientists in invertebrate biology, host-microbe ecology, and evolutionary data
analyses. In addition, research scientists are being trained to use novel data
mining and compilation software to address unexplored questions in host-microbe
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigating three ecological
and evolutionary processes that structure the biodiversity of microbiomes:
assembly, diversification, and coevolution. While previous studies have focused
on the host-specificity of microbiomes, the project shifts the perspective from
host evolution to microbial evolution. The project is developing models of host-
symbiont interactions that function across multiple spatial, temporal, and
taxonomic scales. By incorporating theories from evolutionary ecology and
metacommunity ecology, the investigators are assessing the relative importance
of environmental filtering, host-associated selection pressures, spatial
connectivity, microbial competition, cospeciation, and host switching on the
assembly of microbiomes. Through the use of phylogenetic comparative methods,
the project is testing whether different clades of symbionts and clades of hosts
respond to these forces differently. The investigators are examining how
microbiomes both impact and respond to the process of host speciation in
sympatry and allopatry. To accomplish these goals, novel software and
evolutionary models are being developed to support large-scale analyses of
microbial diversification and colonization of eukaryotic hosts. These models are
being experimentally tested by using a replicated series of settlement
structures to examine the assembly of sessile marine invertebrate communities
and the assembly of their associated microbiomes. In addition, marine sponges
are being used as model organisms to contrast allopatric and sympatric
microbiome divergence over evolutionary time. These investigations are enhancing
our broader understanding of the roles of microbiomes in sustaining
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Understanding
the Rules of Life: Microbiome Theory and Mechanisms Program, administered as
part of NSF's Ten Big Ideas through the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.