* 2150088
* REU Site: Solving Societal Grand Challenges with Electrical and Computer Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jamie Phillips, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 350,858.00

This three-year REU Site: Solving Societal Grand Challenges with Electrical and
Computer Engineering at the University of Delaware will work with ten students
per year. Traditionally, the societal impact of research breakthroughs led by
electrical and computer engineering (ECE) have been self-contained within the
discipline (for example, wireless communications, integrated circuits, the
Internet, and smartphones). This landscape is rapidly changing, with
disciplinary research breakthroughs that align with broader global challenges.
The Site will offer a set of research projects that span the broad range of ECE
subdisciplines, while directly aligning with broader impact areas defined by the
National Academy of Engineering (NAE) Grand Challenges. This approach will
provide context for student participants, showcase the connection and impact of
ECE on improving lives, increase motivation for their studies, and help to
broaden the base and appeal of ECE to a diverse population. The recruitment will
target a diverse and talented cohort of undergraduates from institutions with
limited research opportunities, with emphasis on local institutions with
predominantly undergraduate programs, community colleges, and HBCUs. These
partnerships will provide new opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups in science and engineering to pursue engineering and career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU Site: Solving Societal Grand
Challenges with Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) at the University of
Delaware will will develop a cohort of 10 undergraduate students annually to
research defined scientific questions in the field of ECE, ranging from computer
engineering to nanoelectronics to signal processing and machine learning. Each
project will feature a critical research question with societally relevant
impacts. Specific foci for research areas include the ability to advance machine
learning techniques for medical imaging and cybersecurity, advance signal
processing techniques for neuroscience and detection of cyber-attacks, explore
new semiconductor devices for solar and thermal energy conversion, and develop
new tools for scientific computation and cybersecurity education. The projects
will employ active learning, where students will receive specific training on
scientific literature searches, scientific processes, and effective science
communicating strategies. The program will allow the undergraduate students to
gain valuable experience in research, scientific inquiry, and to develop
technical and methodological skills to succeed in graduate STEM studies or
future career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of Engineering Education and Centers
(EEC) and the Department of Energy (DOE), National Energy Technology Laboratory
(NETL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.