* 2150863
* The hidden side of selenoprotein S: its binding and reaction partners beyond protein degradation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sharon Rozovsky, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 952,813.00

This research aims at gaining fundamental insights into how a protein that
utilizes the trace element selenium can execute its vital cellular functions
despite its apparent lack of a stable shape. Furthermore, it will deepen our
understanding of the advantages selenium confers to the chemistry of cellular
life. An integral part of this project is its training of undergraduate and
graduate students with physical, neurobiological, emotional, or learning
disabilities. As active participants in this project, students with disabilities
will gain invaluable research experience from which they are otherwise often
excluded. Support and mentorship, both critical for their success and career
progression, will be provided through two avenues. The first is through the team
leader and members that work with them daily. The second is through an extensive
network of students and professionals facing similar challenges that have been
proven to be an invaluable, complementary source of support, opportunities, and
encouragement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like all selenoproteins, selenoprotein s
contains the genetically encoded amino acid selenocysteine. The use of the
highly reactive selenium necessitates a tight, resource-intensive regulation,
and all selenoproteins characterized so far exploit this costly amino acid for
enzymatic function. Yet, despite their undisputed importance, the functions of
many selenoproteins remain unidentified and await proper characterization. This
project aims to fill this knowledge gap for the intrinsically disordered
selenoprotein S, part of membrane-bound multi-protein complexes. Its function
spans protein quality control, vesicle trafficking, lipid synthesis, and
signaling. However, neither its direct protein partners nor the role of its
reactive selenocysteine are currently known. To understand the enigmatic
function of selenoprotein s, its interactome will be analyzed to pinpoint which
proteins are key interactors. This will illuminate to which functions and
pathways selenoprotein s directly connects. Then a selected subset of the
identified interactors will be used for crosslinking, structural and proteomics
studies to determine the interaction site(s) and its detailed structure.
Together, this research will provide fundamental insight into the use of
selenium in redox biology and the cellular roles of selenoproteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award was funded by Molecular Biophysics (Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences) and the Chemistry of Life
Processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.