* 2150299
* REU Site: Research Challenges of Computational Methods in Discrete Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Nathan Shank, Moravian University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 03/31/2025
* USD 364,440.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The REU site “Research Challenges of Computational
Methods in Discrete Mathematics” is a collaboration between Moravian University,
Cedar Crest College, and Kutztown University that will bring ten students to
Moravian College for nine weeks each summer to concentrate on research projects
associated with discrete computational mathematics and its role in stimulating
new research. The program goals are to publicize the growing importance of
computational methods in discrete mathematics among a cadre of students and
early-career researchers to help establish it as a tool in their research
arsenal, encourage participants to continue their education into graduate school
and pursue careers in research, and contribute toward the training of the
twenty-first century workforce particularly among women, minorities, and first-
generation students. The intellectual focus of this research concentrates on the
increasing importance of integrating computer technology into discrete
computational methodology, as well as its contribution to other fields, such as
algorithmic applications in computer science, biology, physics, data security,
and medicine. Mentors are drawn from institutions within the Lehigh Valley
region in Pennsylvania, and an emphasis will be placed on recruiting diverse
groups of students. The planned activities outside of the student research
projects will also serve the students well, including professional development
workshops and field trips to local companies that could increase participants’
exposure to career possibilities. Participants will also interact with local
middle and high school students through the Lehigh Valley Summerbridge program,
as well as with students in nearby REUs through a regional conference at the end
of the summer program to share their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
computer technology makes it possible to explore mathematical concepts with
computational speed and precision not available to previous generations of
mathematicians. Computer simulation in particular plays a central role in the
application of computer systems for research in discrete mathematics, harnessing
computer power to promote the use of new paradigms in mathematical discovery.
Examples include applications such as error checking in cryptography and
mathematical games of strategy on connected graphs, both of which benefit from
the insight produced by computer-generated examples. This program will equip
students with the necessary tools to understand (as well as close) the gaps
between conjecture, a statistically significant result, and a formal proof.
Research projects include discrete mathematics topics such as arithmetic
structures and their critical groups, wide and Latin non-repeating consecutive
partitions, computing strategies for graphical Nim, network reliability
parameters, and problems emanating from generalizing existing sequences in the
Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. The mentors have experience accessing,
researching, and contributing to open problems in computational methods and
discrete mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.