* 2150618
* Collaborative Research: Mantle metasomatism during serpentinization in subduction zones: Insights from in-situ boron isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kennet Flores Reyes, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 137,689.00

Subduction zones are regions of our planet where tectonic plates converge. These
regions are among the most geologically active on Earth, expressed by high rates
of volcanism and seismicity (e.g., the Pacific Ring of Fire). They are
ubiquitous features on Earth and represent the most extensive element recycling
system between the interior and exterior of our planet. The processes occurring
in subduction zones involve an enormous amount of fluids from different sources,
which change the chemistry and alter the composition of the surrounding rocks
from the surface to depths of ~100 km. The present project aims to better
constrain the source(s) and paths of these fluids, as well as their role on
subduction zone processes such as rock-fluid interaction and volcanism. This
project will be carried out by faculty that belong to underrepresented groups in
geosciences as well as impact students from a minority-serving institution in
the NYC area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serpentine forms by alteration of the mantle
by aqueous fluids and contains up to 14 wt. % of water, making it one of the
most important records of fluid-rock interactions in subduction zone processes.
Therefore, it represents a critical mineral to study the source and role of
aqueous fluids within convergent plate boundaries. Recent studies based on boron
(a fluid mobile element) suggest that serpentinites found in suture zones record
processes that occurred mainly in: (i) the subducting slab, (ii) the mantle
wedge, (iii) the hydrated forearc. Thus, serpentinites in suture zones represent
the largest trackable record of aqueous fluids responsible for mantle
metasomatism from different sources. Although the two main fluid endmembers in
terms of B isotopes (seawater and high-pressure metamorphic fluids) are well-
characterized, little is known about how these fluids mix, overprint, and evolve
with the changes in P and T during subduction. The main goal of this study is to
characterize fluid mixing/overprinting and secondary processes occurring in
serpentinites collected in suture zones, using B isotopes and B contents. Our
study will provide a better picture of the dehydration/(re)hydration processes
occurring during subduction. Additionally, these data are necessary to
understand the role of fluid(s) in triggering deep earthquakes and better
constrain the fluid(s) responsible for mantle melting in subduction
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.