* 2150622
* Authentic Research in STEM Educator Preparation for Issues of Culture, Justice, and Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* David Bollivar, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 01/31/2027
* USD 538,024.00

The project aims to serve the national need of recruiting and preparing high-
quality and diverse teachers in STEM disciplines to teach in high-need schools.
Teachers that share attributes with students of color are important as role
models for success in STEM. However, high-need school districts often have a
small percentage of teachers of color. This project will increase the percentage
of teachers of color in high-need schools and improve the overall academic
success of students in these schools. The project will use direct recruitment at
local high-need schools to identify prospective teachers. Once recruited,
prospective teachers will engage in a week-long science introduction experience
prior to starting classes at the university with the goal of creating a
community of learners. They will engage in STEM education that uses current
teaching methods and participate in food and agriculture related research to
further foster their interests in STEM. Teaching preparation will involve
extended practice in the classroom and hands-on learning. As a part of the
education of these prospective teachers, they will also learn about issues of
culture, justice, and equity. New, practicing teachers will be supported by
university faculty mentoring and post-graduation
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Illinois Wesleyan University
includes partnerships with Bloomington District 87 and McLean County Unit
District No. 5 Public Schools. Project goals will include adding up to twenty
new STEM teachers of color over five years to teach in high-need schools in a
manner that supports the partnering school districtsâ€™ objectives of recruiting a
more diverse STEM teaching force. The project will prepare biology, chemistry,
mathematics and physics teachers with a strong foundation in research, improving
experience-informed STEM teaching in community high-need schools. Further, the
project will add to the well-documented benefits of STEM undergraduate research
experiences (UREs) by exploring the ways in which UREs impact preservice
teachers. Through the guidance of faculty mentors, the emphasis on food and food
production in the UREs will offer the preservice teachers an authentic and
relatable context for investigating complex STEM issues. The ways in which
rigorous STEM content acquired through local and familiar means may be effective
at fostering teacher content knowledge and retaining STEM educators. A
sustainable model to recruit, train, and mentor teachers of color in the STEM
education field will be implemented, assessed, modified when needed, and
disseminated to institutions and investigators wishing to enhance preservice
STEM teacher education. The potential increase in STEM teacher retention through
rigorous preparation and mentoring that fosters a sense of professional
community will also be analyzed. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.