* 2150910
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Disinfection Method to Prevent Infection in Peritoneal Dialysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Sarah Lee, Relavo, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to increase access to peritoneal dialysis
(PD). Over 554,000 kidney failure patients in the US require some form of
dialysis each year but only 58,000 receive PD, despite its lower cost of care.
Despite the many benefits and advantages of PD compared to in-center dialysis,
adoption is limited due to the risk of peritonitis, an infection of the
peritoneal membrane. Peritonitis occurs in nearly 30% of PD patients each year
and is responsible for the death of 1 out of every 6 patients who receive PD.
The proposed device significantly and broadly reduces the risk of peritonitis,
resulting in nearly $2 billion in Medicare savings and improved clinical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will further develop a medical device that internally
disinfects catheter tubes in a closed system. This innovative disinfection
method is designed to prevent microbial infection threats during peritoneal
dialysis. The aim will be to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of the
disinfection prototype, including evaluations of its ease of use. The technology
will be designed to meet medical device design and safety standards. The project
will perform optimization studies, develop cGMP-ready manufacturing processes,
and develop an advanced prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.