* 2150143
* REU Site: Accountability, Behavior, and Conflict in Democratic Politics
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Sharece Thrower, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 11/30/2025
* USD 133,461.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.
It has both scientific and societal benefits, and integrates research and
education. This 8-week summer program provides mentored research experiences to
a diverse group of 10 students per year, who engage in a set of activities
designed to build skills and produce research on pressing socio-political
questions. A key societal benefit is the production of research that generates
new insights into the peaceful conditions, behaviors, and edifices that permit
societies to flourish. This objective carries positive implications for national
security: key global challenges are declining physical security and growing
deficiencies in institutions that deliver effective policies and protect basic
freedoms. To meet these challenges, we need to equip researchers with cutting-
edge capabilities and we need to produce policy-relevant scientific research. A
critical contribution to education is to build students’ interest and skills in
the development, interpretation, and communication of rigorous social science
research. An important contribution to national welfare is to prepare and
support young citizens in the pursuit of careers involving the production,
presentation, and consumption of rigorous social science research, especially in
ways that advance strong societies and institutions. In addition, the program
contributes to building a stronger research community by engaging and creating
networks for scholars from minority-serving institutions, teaching institutions,
and larger research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU participants are
guided through two complementary experiences: a mentored independent research
project and collaboration on a faculty affiliate’s project. Students attend
skill-building sessions on research design, scientific inference, data analysis,
professionalization, research communication, faculty research presentations, and
career panels. The site engages collaborating partners at minority-serving
institutions universities, local colleges, and professional organizations to
amplify awareness of the program and recruit a wide range of participants. The
site will generate new discoveries on how accountability, behavior, and conflict
shape democratic politics. Topics include contentious politics, governance
failings and their consequences, political polarization, and responsiveness in
government institutions. The REU site will (1) provide mentored research
opportunities to a diverse group of students; (2) train faculty and student
mentors; (3) equip students with research skills, networks, and other resources
for career development; (4) elevate the visibility and voices of individuals
from under-represented groups; (5) connect with and include faculty from
minority-serving institutions and a diverse network of researchers; and (6)
provide students with the tools to effectively communicate research findings to
academic and non-academic audiences. The site will provide mentored research
experiences on topics related to accountability, behavior, and conflict in
democratic politics; build interest, skillsets, and knowledge at the cutting
edge of social science research; and prepare and support students entering
career paths that involve the production, presentation, and informed consumption
of scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.