* 2150557
* Conference on Advances in Bayesian and Frequentist  Theory and Methods for Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Zhiqiang Tan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 01/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This project supports the Conference on Advances in Bayesian and Frequentist
Theory and Methods for Complex Data, which will be held on April 8-9, 2022 at
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey. The conference will bring together
established, mid-career, and early-career researchers with diverse expertise to
discuss the latest advances, current challenges, and emerging directions in
statistical theory and methodology, with a particular focus on high dimensional
problems. The conference will provide an important venue to stimulate
interdisciplinary collaboration for tackling problems involving large and
complex data. This initiative will also provide support for participation of
early-career researchers and graduate students, including women and those from
underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been
a substantial and diverse development in statistical sciences to analyze and
extract knowledge from high-dimensional and complex data, which can be found in
various settings, from scientific research to industrial applications. Such
development has often been powered by the connection and cross-fertilization
between frequentist and Bayesian statistics. This conference will provide a
unique opportunity for direct comparison and connection between frequentist and
Bayesian approaches in high dimensional settings. The event will feature 18
plenary talks which will highlight the most recent research results in the
field. A poster session will also be organized to encourage presentations from
early career researchers and graduate students. More information can be found on
the conference webpage: https://www.stat.rutgers.edu/conference-on-bayesian-and-
frequentist-theory-and-methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.