* 2150343
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Statistics at Lafayette College
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Qin Lu, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 04/30/2025
* USD 223,080.00

This award supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the
Department of Mathematics at Lafayette College. The REU Site will operate for
eight weeks in the summer and one week in the academic year in each of the years
2022, 2023, and 2024. Each year, mentors from the Lafayette College mathematics
department and from institutions in the surrounding Lehigh Valley will lead ten
students chosen from across the United States on innovative research projects in
various fields in mathematics, applied mathematics, and statistics. Students
will be guided in developing a variety of skills important in the research
process, including literature review, critical thinking, mathematical writing,
and oral presentation. Summer activities will include talks by renowned guest
speakers, instruction in navigating post-college experiences, and discussions of
issues of social impact and diversity in the mathematical fields. Students will
also develop important social skills, leading to productive partnerships in
research and society. The summer experience will culminate in presentations at
the Joint Mathematical Meetings and the preparation of articles for submission
to high-quality journals, introducing students to the opportunities the
mathematical fields offer with direct personal exposure. Both faculty and
mentors will grow through the experience as skills for research and mentoring
are fostered, leading to the promise of continued success at their home
institutions and beyond.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Three projects will be offered
each year, appropriate for students with varying levels of mathematical
background and a diversity of interests. The pool of projects ranges from
statistical concepts to applied mathematics including modeling radiotherapy
treatment and the volatility index for the stock market to theoretical projects
in graph theory, fractals, and combinatorics. A mentor will work daily with
three to four students on one of these projects, helping students to develop
independent research habits and skills appropriate for successful mathematical
research. The experience will lead to tangible products that are presented at
meetings and conferences or in refereed journals as well as to the development
of both students and mentors as skilled active contributors to mathematical
research. In addition, the site will advance goals in diversity in the
mathematical fields indirectly through education and directly with partnerships
with students and faculty from HBCUs from the Baltimore area. All participants
---students and mentors alike---will actively contribute to new knowledge in the
mathematical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.