* 2150290
* REU Site: Summer Program at Harvard in Earth and Environmental Research (SPHEER): Investigating a changing planet across multiple timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Miaki Ishii, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2025
* USD 523,416.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site at Harvard provides a 10-week
intensive program for undergraduates to conduct research in the earth and
environmental sciences. The program draws on the broad skills and knowledge of
the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences (EPS) and incorporates the place-
based knowledge and expertise of communities that are or soon will be profoundly
affected by climate change. Ten students each summer work closely with EPS
faculty and graduate students to gain hands-on experience in research on Earth
system changes. Such changes occur across multiple timescales, from decades to
millions of years. Through SPHEER, students deepen their understanding of linked
land-atmosphere-ocean processes, including the potential consequences of
unchecked human activity. Experts from communities experiencing the effects of
environmental change are invited to give seminars and engage with REU students
and mentors in order to incorporate the place-based historical knowledge,
perspectives and priorities of these communities into current
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of SPHEER is investigation
of the drivers and consequences of Earth system change. Research projects
involve the study of atmospheric chemistry and physics, climate change,
geochemistry, geology, and geophysics. Specific SPHEER objectives are to (1)
mentor students in pioneering research; (2) help students understand the
interplay between field and laboratory research, data analysis, and modeling in
studying environmental change; (3) immerse students in practicing these new
skills; (4) familiarize students with pathways to graduate school and careers;
(5) engage a diverse group of students in careers centered on the changing
Earth; and (6) incorporate diverse cultural perspectives in the study of
environmental change. Targeted participants include students at historically
black colleges and universities, Hispanic serving institutions, and tribal
colleges and universities, as well as historically marginalized students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics at majority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.