* 2150899
* Developing Elementary STEM Teachers Through Mentorships, Interdisciplinary Instruction, and Cultural Competencies
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Mark Beekey, Sacred Heart University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,033,183.00

This project aims to serve the national need of producing high-quality STEM-
prepared teachers who will teach in low-income, multicultural elementary
schools. This project aims to recruit and prepare 18 new STEM teachers over five
years who will commit to teaching in high-need school districts. A partnership
between Sacred Heart University and Housatonic Community College will help
community college students enter the elementary education field. It is
anticipated that this will increase the diversity of prospective teachers, as
many community college students are from ethnically or racially diverse
backgrounds, are often first-generation college students, or are from
financially under-resourced families. To be effective in high-need classrooms,
prospective teachers need to be culturally responsive while teaching students
how to be a scientist. The proposed project will provide mentoring and
professional development in culturally responsive STEM teaching, and it is
expected the teachers will develop a strong STEM identity and understand the
connections between different STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Sacred Heart University includes partnerships with Housatonic Community College
and Ansonia, Bridgeport, and Stratford Public Schools. This project supports
students who receive a Bachelor of Science degree focused on the biological and
physical sciences and a Master of Arts in Teaching in elementary education. The
project is based on the need for culturally responsive and trauma-informed
pedagogy to effectively teach children in high-need classrooms. The development
of a STEM identity in prospective elementary teachers will help them foster the
same sense of identity in their future students. The project will research how
project activities support prospective teacher understanding of how culture
influences STEM learning and teaching. It will also investigate Scholar
understanding of the interconnectedness of different STEM disciplines and their
development of a STEM identity. Project evaluation will generate further
evidence to demonstrate the ability of project activities to promote teaching
efficacy. Joint programming with Sacred Heart University and Housatonic
Community College will create a pathway from community college to elementary
STEM education. Broader impacts include improved STEM education in high-need
areas and a teacher preparation model that may be replicated. Dissemination will
occur regionally in Connecticut and nationally. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.