* 2150369
* Undergraduate Research and Innovation Experience in Cancer Diagnosis and Therapeutic Intervention
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Sagnik Basuray, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2025
* USD 463,231.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites project at the New
Jersey Institute of Technology focuses on Cancer Diagnosis and Therapeutic
Intervention. With increased diagnoses and a lack of affordable treatment, there
is a need for seamless and inexpensive approaches to detect and treat various
types of cancer. The development of sensitive and accurate methods for detecting
cancer in the early stages is essential, as ninety percent of all cancer deaths
are caused by metastasis of original tumors. Ten students each year will engage
in research, education, and training activities. In particular, underrepresented
minority groups such as African American, LatinX, women, students with
disabilities, and first-generation college students will be heavily recruited.
Students will use scientific methods to investigate real-world research
problems. Participating students will strengthen their academic networks,
increase their attractiveness for graduate research programs, and learn about
and pursue future career opportunities in innovative cancer research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year REU project at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) will engage 10 students per year in 10-week research
experiences in Cancer Diagnosis and Theraputic Intervention. With increased
diagnoses and a lack of affordable treatment, there is a need for seamless and
inexpensive approaches to detect and treat various types of cancer. The
development of sensitive and accurate methods for detecting cancer in the early
stages is essential, as ninety percent of all cancer deaths are caused by
metastasis of original tumors. Faculty mentors will introduce students to
dynamic cancer-related research in physics, biochemistry, and chemical,
electrical, and materials engineering. The program will lead to research and
innovation by: 1) engaging undergraduate students to foster innovative research
cancer diagnostics to therapeutic intervention, 2) cultivating multidisciplinary
research among NJIT faculty, and expanding to collaborate with multiple
universities using the undergraduate students as a bridge and 3) increasing the
participation in research by underrepresented minority groups, resulting in
participants being co-authors on publications and presenters at scientific
conferences. The project framework supports participants in team learning around
a meaningful project. Students participate in professional development
activities beyond direct research, and build learning and professional
relationships through layered mentoring in a world-renowned research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.