* 2150905
* Examining the Factors that Influence Retention and Effectiveness of Computer Science Teachers in High-Need Middle and High Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Shannon Campe, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,299,488.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing and retaining effective
computer science (CS) teachers in high-need schools. Access to CS education is
disproportionately distributed across public schools. High-need schools have
greater numbers of students from groups that are underrepresented in computing
fields; they are also more likely to have teacher turnover and less likely to
have experienced teachers and CS opportunities. This research project will
investigate how teacher preparation programs can increase CS teacher retention
in high-need schools and prepare teachers to deliver effective, equitable CS
instruction. This is essential due to the increasing demand for STEM teachers,
particularly in high-need schools, and the call for K-12 CS teachers who are
prepared to engage students from underrepresented groups. With turnover
particularly high among secondary CS teachers, the goal is to generate
information that can be used to increase the longer-term retention of CS
teachers in high-need schools. The project will also identify the features of
programs that prepare teachers to deliver effective, equitable CS
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is led by ETR (Education,
Training, Research) Associates in partnership with three Noyce-funded projects
at New York University, California State University Fresno, and Louisiana Tech
University and their surrounding school districts of New York City Public
Schools, Fresno Unified, Central Unified, Sanger Unified, Bienville Parish,
Caddo Parish, Lincoln Parish, Ouachita Parish, Richland Parish, and Winn Parish.
Project goals include addressing research questions around what individual,
interpersonal and institutional factors play a role in how teacher preparation
programs can increase the retention of CS teachers in high-need schools. The
research also intends to investigate how teacher preparation programs can
prepare teachers to deliver effective and equitable CS education in middle and
high school classrooms. The research will be guided by socio-ecological and
social justice pedagogical content knowledge theoretical frameworks. An initial
conjecture map that documents research-based hypotheses about how to prepare
teachers to persist and engage in effective CS instruction will steer the work.
The study aims to recruit up to 80 teachers who are being prepared to teach CS
in high-need middle and high schools. They will participate during their pre-
service preparation program and their 2-year in-service teaching requirement, as
well as beyond this teaching requirement. Mixed methods will be used to collect
survey, interview, observation, and institutional data over time. The data will
be analyzed to describe teachers’ development of CS knowledge and social justice
pedagogy, their experience as a student teacher and a novice lead teacher, their
community of support, their identity as a CS teacher, as well as features of the
preparation program and school sites. Using a design-research approach, the team
will use the data to iteratively refine the conjecture map and make changes at
the program level at each institution. This project has the potential to
contribute to understanding of how programs can prepare teachers to deliver CS
content in an equitable and inclusive way, including identifying promising
preparation strategies and supports to address factors that affect retention in
high-need schools. It is intended to result in a theoretical model that can be
used to inform the design of programs that can increase CS teacher retention and
support equitable CS instruction in middle and high school. The geographic
dispersion of Noyce projects will increase the likelihood that the results will
be relevant to a range of populations and settings. An advisory board of experts
on computer science education, teacher preparation, and equity in computing will
monitor and provide feedback on project milestones, as well as contribute their
expertise to the design of recruitment, data collection, and data analyses.
Study findings will be disseminated to researchers and practitioners through
publications, presentations, and a CS teacher professional development toolkit.
This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.