* 2150213
* REU Site: Swarms of Unmanned Aircraft Systems in the Age of AI/Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Thomas Yang, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 322,886.00

Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University establishes a new Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site to engage participants in research in drone swarms.
The emerging concept of drone swarms, which is defined as the ability of drones
to autonomously make decisions based on shared information, creates new
opportunities with major societal implications. However, future drone swarm
applications and services pose new networking challenges. A resurgence of
Artificial Intelligence and machine learning research presents a tremendous
opportunity for addressing these networking challenges. There is an overwhelming
need to foster a robust workforce with competencies to enable future drone swarm
applications and services in the age of AI/machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project establishes a new Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site with a focus on networking research for drone swarms
in the age of AI/machine learning at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. The
goals of the REU Site are: (1) attract undergraduate students to state-of-the-
art drone swarm research, especially those from underrepresented groups, and
from institutions with limited opportunities; (2) develop the research capacity
of participants by guiding them to perform research on drone swarms; (3) grow
the participants’ technical skills to enable a wide variety of beneficial
applications of drone swarms; (4) promote the participants’ integrated
AI/machine learning and drone swarm competencies; and (5) prepare participants
with professional skills for careers. The focus of the REU Site is on the
design, analysis and evaluation of innovative computing and networking
technologies for future drone swarm applications and services. To be specific,
research activities will be conducted in three focus areas, notably dynamic
network management, network protocol design, and operationalizing AI/machine
learning for drone swarms. Each year eight undergraduate students will
participate in a ten-week summer REU program to perform networking research for
drone swarms under the guidance of research mentors with rich experiences in
AI/machine learning and drone swarms. This REU site is expected to foster
workforce knowledge and skills about developing new computing and networking
technologies for future drone swarm applications and services. This site is
supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the
NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.