* 2150492
* REU Site: Quantitative Research in the Life and Social Sciences: an interdisciplinary and intergenerational REU experience
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* John Nagy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 02/28/2025
* USD 388,799.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In a modern world highly driven by data, quantitative
reasoning and quantitative literacy has become increasingly important. The
Quantitative Research for the Life and Social Sciences Program (QRLSSP) is an
8-week Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program that will host 12
students each summer. This summer program will offer undergraduate research
opportunities that involve solving problems in the life sciences and social
sciences using quantitative tools from mathematics, statistics, and data
analysis. The program is uniquely structured to incorporate student-selected
research projects on problems that lie in applied mathematics and statistics,
with applications to the life and social sciences. The program will recruit,
train, and mentor underrepresented minority students, first generation students,
and students enrolled at small, non-PhD-granting institutions and community
colleges, which will help broaden the participation of students pursuing
graduate degrees and STEM careers. The students will participate in professional
development activities, and the program is structured to follow and support
student participants for up to 6 years post-REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
will be trained to propose research questions that interest them, with the
intention of naturally increasing engagement. The program will expose the
students to mentors with a wide variety of expertise to develop a greater
understanding of universal issues in the biological and social sciences.
Students will also be trained to use software for mathematical modeling to
enhance their computing toolkit for their future use and research. Participants
will be encouraged to give presentations at a variety of conferences to improve
presentation skills, build confidence, and disseminate their work to a broader
audience. The program will expose participants to a diverse set of successful
faculty and researchers who will serve as role models, and will provide
opportunities for networking, community building, and peer support. Mentorship
training and opportunities for new faculty and for graduate students seeking to
join academia as a profession will help improve STEM education and educator
development as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.