* 2150186
* REU Site: DIMACS REU in Algorithms from Foundations to Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Lazaros Gallos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2025
* USD 486,224.00

This project builds on the long-running Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program at DIMACS, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
Computer Science at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey. The program
provides a rich scientific and cultural experience to ten outstanding
undergraduates each year mentored by faculty from several Rutgers departments
and DIMACS industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of
the project are mainly focused on algorithms and complexity, emphasizing the
traditional strengths of DIMACS in theoretical computer science, applied in
settings that include social networks, DNA analysis, prediction markets, and
others. Student research spans both theory and applications showcasing
algorithms in big data analytics, privacy and cybersecurity, bioinformatics,
machine learning, and analysis of algorithms for streaming and privacy. In
addition to involving mentors from different areas and even different
disciplines, the program integrates activities with nearby industry partners, it
recruits graduate students who act as assistant mentors, and combines with other
Rutgers undergraduate research programs to add cultural diversity and an
international element, through partnership with the European-funded CoSP program
which is led by the Department of Applied Mathematics in Charles University,
Prague.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program immerses students in a unique
multidisciplinary environment for conducting research on the design, analysis,
and use of algorithms. A carefully planned schedule offers students a rich
research experience that combines one-to-one mentoring with seminars, workshops,
field trips, and other activities for a broad and enriching scientific
experience. The program makes a special effort to recruit members of groups
underrepresented in computer science as well as students from institutions with
limited opportunity for undergraduate research, through contacts with minority-
serving institutions and announcements to relevant mailing lists and websites.
In addition to leading to scientific papers and talks, new collaborations are
developed with mentors, graduate student assistant mentors and program
coordinators. Involving graduate student assistant mentors and postdocs develops
the mentoring skills of junior researchers, while offering the REU participants
the ability to directly observe graduate student life. An important goal of this
program is to build awareness of graduate school and the breadth of options for
post-graduate careers and research. In this way, the program informs the
students on choices about further education and future careers, and gives them
the foundation and confidence to pursue these choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.