* 2150167
* REU Site: Integrative Microbial and Plant Systems (IMPS)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Imara Perera, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 240,472.00

This REU Site award to North Carolina State University (NCSU), located in
Raleigh, NC, will support the training of 10 students per year for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2022- 2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from groups underrepresented in the biological sciences, as well as
from schools with limited undergraduate research opportunities will be trained
in the program. A hands-on research experience is a critical component of
college STEM education. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program
will be done using the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after
the program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual focus of the program is on understanding productive plant-microbe
interactions to ultimately benefit plant performance and positively impact food
security. NCSU has a strong core of plant and microbial biologists, working in
the areas of sustainable foods, fuels, and computer modeling of fundamental
biological mechanisms. The faculty mentors participating in this REU program
share overlapping and complementary interests and expertise and there is strong
synergy between lab-based and computational approaches. Students will be able to
choose from four major research themes including stress resilience, nutrient
acquisition in plant and microbial systems, signaling in plant-microbe systems,
and plant-microbiome modeling. During the 10 week period, students will engage
in full-time lab research. Additionally, students will attend scientific
seminars and workshops on professional development, responsible conduct of
research, career opportunities in academia and industry, the graduate school
application process and a field trip to a local biotechnology company. Students
will present their findings at a symposium held during the final week of the
program. Housing, a stipend, meal and travel allowances will be provided.
Students from underrepresented minority groups and from colleges with limited
research opportunities are encouraged to apply. Selection will be based on
research interests, academic record and recommendation letters. More information
about the program is available by visiting https://cals.ncsu.edu/plant-and-
microbial-biology/students/integrative-molecular-plant-systems-research-
experience/ , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Imara Perera at iperera@ncsu.edu) or
the co-PI (Dr. Amy Grunden at amgrunde@ncsu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.