* 2150191
* REU Site: Advancing high-performance computing opportunities in undergraduate research at UW-Eau Claire to meet challenges of multidisciplinary computational science
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Rahul Gomes, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/28/2025
* USD 385,762.00

Recent years have witnessed a significant growth in computationally intensive
scientific and engineering studies involving large-scale data processing,
thereby driving groundbreaking innovations across STEM disciplines. These
studies require an interdisciplinary approach, where a combination of domain-
specific expertise and knowledge of developing scalable algorithms is necessary.
The ten-week Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at University
of Wisconsin – Eau Claire will provide a comprehensive research experience in
high performance computing (HPC) and inspire a diverse group of students to
pursue careers in STEM disciplines related to multidisciplinary computational
science. The REU site will support research for ten undergraduate students each
summer engaging them in a collaborative research experience with the central
theme of designing computationally intensive algorithms and simulation models
using HPC. The goal of the program is to attract students to careers in STEM and
train them to use advanced hardware and computing resources, providing an
opportunity that most undergraduate students do not get to experience during
their course of study. The REU site will also work to promote national STEM
workforce diversity goals by recruiting students from underrepresented groups in
STEM at two-year colleges, where research opportunities are limited. With its
focus on HPC and its application in diverse scientific disciplines, the project
will serve to fulfill several of the key goals of NSF: to advance discovery and
learning, to promote inclusion in the science and engineering workforce, and
provide an integrated strategy to advance the frontiers of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a focused research experience provided
by research mentors, students will have the opportunity to develop new
algorithms that utilize HPC infrastructure to solve scientific problems.
Students will learn to complete research projects, develop simulation and
predictive models, analyze results, prepare manuscripts for submission in
journals, conference proceedings, and do technical presentations. A total of ten
projects from five separate research domains in computational science will be
made available to the students. These domains include (1) deep learning and
computer vision with applications in biomedical imaging, pattern recognition,
and geospatial data analysis, (2) machine learning and its application to social
media analytics, (3) quantum chemical simulation to probe events at the electron
level, (4) multiscale modeling and simulation to explore complex biomolecular
structure and function, and (5) computational astrophysical study of stellar
structure and evolution. Additionally, the REU program will develop leadership
and interpersonal skills through seminars in undergraduate research, diversity
in STEM, scientific writing, ethics in computing, preparing for graduate school,
service learning, and career planning. The REU program will also engage students
through invited guest speaker presentations and field trips. The success of the
REU site will be assessed by internal evaluation along with evaluation resources
and services offered through the Comparative Evaluation for NSF CISE Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (CERP-REU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.