* 2150488
* REU site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Wind Energy Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Stefano Leonardi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 391,703.00

This 3-year REU project at the University of Texas-Dallas provides on-site
research experiences for undergraduates that contribute toward the U.S. reaching
its strategic goal of achieving 35% contribution of wind energy systems to the
electricity grid by 2050. Ten participants each year will contribute to research
in wind-energy technical thrust areas, including modeling &amp; measurements,
diagnostic &amp; control systems, and design &amp; manufacturing. The
combination of research and professional development activities aims to
stimulate the pursuit of life-long learning and interest in advancing the
science of renewable energy. Activities to promote diversity and inclusion are
central to the project, particularly recruiting students from under-served
groups to advance their STEM-related career preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals and scope of the University of Texas-
Dallas REU project comprise three wind-energy thrust areas: 1) Modeling &amp;
Measurements: simulation for power production, power fluctuations, and loads;
experimental measurements for wind farm performance diagnostic and model
validation; wind resource characterization. 2) Diagnostic &amp; Control Systems:
condition monitoring for wind turbine systems; optimization of energy capture
and load mitigation in wind turbines and wind farms; wind farm controls for wake
management. 3) Design &amp; Manufacturing: next generation wind blade designs,
manufacturing and testing methods, additive manufacturing of wind turbine
components. Undergraduate students will engage in a variety of projects that
lead to a greater understanding of wind energy systems and their competitive
design. This includes seeking to uncover the impact of turbulence and wake
dynamics on power production and fluctuations, developing novel control
algorithms to increase the capture of energy while mitigating structural loads,
and discovering new diagnostic methods based on physics-based modeling and deep-
learning algorithms to determine the health status of wind turbine components as
well as operating strategies to increase their lifetime. In addition, students
will explore novel materials and methods that can potentially be adopted to
fabricate wind turbine blades and towers at reduced
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.