* 2150360
* REU Site: Materials Research with Data Science (MAT-DAT)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Melissa Pasquinelli, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 468,938.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the value of an undergraduate degree has
been challenged as demands for greater accountability in higher education have
been driven by economic climate and employment considerations. The demand for
professionals with science and engineering knowledge and the ability to handle
data is increasing across all disciplines. This trend is especially applicable
to materials science and engineering, where professionals with both domain and
data science knowledge are in very short supply. Thus, it is vitally important
to train our future scientists and engineers to be able to gather, handle and
interpret complex data. The most efficient way to bridge the gap is to implement
student training in data science using hands-on approach, by combining learning
modules and research experience. In this REU Site at North Carolina State
University, ten students from various academic backgrounds in STEM will be
recruited to spend ten weeks of mentor-guided research experiences. Projects
will integrate machine learning, informatics, statistical and mathematical
methods, and other data science tools in experimental and computational-based
materials discovery. A diverse cohort of participants will be recruited each
year, leveraging established relationships with minority-serving institutions,
and targeting institutions with limited research opportunities. Exposing the
students to data science through this REU program is aimed at encouraging them
to pursue careers in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will strive to provide young
materials engineers with training and hands-on experience in data science
through their involvement in cutting-edge materials engineering projects within
NC State community. Projects will integrate machine learning, materials
informatics (MI), statistical and mathematical methods, and other data-science
tools in experimental and computational-based materials discovery. This REU site
is focused on improvements of student knowledge and experience in cutting-edge
experimental and computational characterization techniques and application of MI
tools that can be used to guide the discovery of novel materials. Through the
collection of data and application of MI techniques and principles to their
research projects, the students will elucidate new perspectives of engineered
materials systems and will be able to directly apply this knowledge to the
improvement of system designs and/or the investigation of novel materials
applications. The REU site activities are designed to connect students to the
data science and materials informatics methods and approaches of their research
and to help prepare them for an excellent career in STEM. Focused recruiting
efforts will aim to increase participation by underrepresented groups. In
addition, the program will enhance graduate students' education by providing
mentorship training and experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.