* 2150368
* REU Site: Purdue Undergraduate Research Experiences for Plant Biology and Data Science (PURE-PD)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Natalia Doudareva, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 265,770.00

This REU Site award to Purdue University, located in West Lafayette, IN, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from under-represented groups, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how to conduct research and generate
hypotheses, and will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Through diverse research projects the program will increase the
participation of students in STEM disciplines and prepare them for careers in
plant biology in the era of data science. Assessment of the program will be done
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Purdue
Undergraduate Research Experiences for Plant Biology and Data Science (PURE-PD)
program aims to provide student participants with advanced training in basic
plant biology and data science. The PURE-PD program was developed as an
interdisciplinary collaboration between the Center for Plant Biology, Purdue
Libraries and the School of Information Studies. Research projects in the PURE-
PD program are diverse and include the regulation of nutrition signals, plant
health monitoring, plant host-pathogen interactions, and the regulation of
developmental processes, which collectively offer a significant and
agriculturally relevant research environment for student participants. In
addition, each student will be involved in professional development activities
including research ethics, research data management and scholarly communication.
Applicants will submit their materials via the program website and need to
include digital transcripts, a statement of purpose describing career goals and
research interests, and two recommendation letters. Candidates will be selected
based on their excellence in academic performance and strong interests in
science by a committee consisting of three faculty mentors. A holistic project
evaluation will be conducted at the end of each summer session for the iterative
improvement of the program. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://ag.purdue.edu/cpb/intern/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Chao
Cai at caic@purdue.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Natalia Dudareva at
dudareva@purdue.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.