* 2150364
* REU Site: STEM Education Research through a Social Justice Lens
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 02/28/2025
* USD 348,540.00

This REU Site award to TERC, located in Cambridge, MA, will support the training
of eight students for ten weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. Students will
perform research in the field of informal STEM education. Their projects will
have a theme of advancing social justice and equity. The social justice theme
aims to attract students to STEM education research, as evidence suggests
students value working toward equity and social change. Students will conduct
independent research projects and will learn appropriate research methods.
Student supports will include mentoring, networking, peer relationships,
research communications practice, and seminar participation. These professional
development offerings will incorporate social justice approaches. Student
research results may potentially contribute to the knowledge base of broadening
participation in informal STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through their
independent research projects, graduated supports, and culturally responsive
mentoring, the project has potential to impact participants abilities to make
gains in the development of independent research skills, especially social
justice–informed research methods, and gain awareness of ethics and related
careers while developing an identity as an educational researcher. Students who
are rising juniors and seniors majoring in STEM, STEM education, or a social
science discipline will be recruited nationally. To specifically reach students
underrepresented in STEM, recruitment will leverage TERC’s network of national
STEM organizations that support these populations as well as local educational
institutions. The annual application deadline will be in mid-January, and
participants will be selected based on their limited opportunities for similar
research at their home institutions and aspirations to enter the STEM education
field. Outcomes of the three cohorts will be evaluated based on self-assessment
and observed growth as emergent researchers in response to mentoring and
professional development. Students will be tracked after the project in order to
determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting https://www.terc.edu/work-with-us/terc-scholars-intership-program/
or by contacting Stephen D. Alkins, PhD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) and the Discovery Research
PreK-12 (DRK-12) programs. It supports the AISL program goals to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. It supports the DRK-12 program goal
of enhancing the learning and teaching of STEM by preK-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.