* 2150625
* Collaborative Research: Long Term Accommodation to Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jonathan Haws, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2025
* USD 197,165.00

Neanderthals continue to spark the imagination of scientists and the general
public, as they have since their discovery over 150 years ago. Researchers from
across the natural and social sciences have made great progress in understanding
their life ways, how they successfully adapted to the extreme climates of the
last ice age, and why they ultimately disappeared millenia ago. Archaeologists
and geoscientists, with their common interests in deep time and human-
environment interactions, are particularly well equipped to contribute to the
study of Neanderthals. Within this broad context, researchers will lead a three-
year study of Neanderthal adaptation to extreme climate variation during the
last ice age. The project will contribute to theories about human evolution and
the fate of Neanderthal populations, informing on the roles that environmental
change, technology, and diet choice played in human evolution. Additional
benefits include field and laboratory training, scientific engagement, and
cultural enrichment for student participants who will join an interdisciplinary
research team in an international setting. Many of the students involved in this
project will be first-generation college students from under-represented,
working poor, and rural demographic groups in Kentucky and eastern North
Carolina who may not otherwise have opportunities for international travel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to address the fundamental
question: do temporal variations in Neanderthal land use, demography,
technology, and diet represent responses to extreme climate shifts during the
last ice age? The project team will address this question by developing
complementary archaeological, chronological, and paleoenvironmental datasets
from the ongoing excavation at a Neanderthal archaeological site) and
integrating them with local and regional climate records. Previous work at the
site has established that the cave preserves rich cultural deposits and non-
cultural faunal remains, including biomolecular compounds such as ancient DNA.
Lithic artifact and animal bone assemblages will provide a robust record of
changes in Neanderthal technology and raw material selection that can be
directly synchronized with paleoclimate records, and with seasonality indicators
from stable isotope analyses of associated faunal remains from the same
stratigraphic position. The proposed methodology uses radiocarbon and uranium-
series dating to establish age control, stone tool analyses to understand the
decision-making of Paleolithic humans, animal bone assemblages to reconstruct
paleoenvironments and understand Neanderthal diets, and sedimentological
analyses to infer site formation processes and environmental context of human
occupation. Taken together, the work will establish a complete
paleoenvironmental and geoarchaeological chronology for Neanderthal site
adaptations, providing critical context that is missing from many other sites in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.