* 2150464
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: First year approaches to enhance science identity and STEM persistence
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Andrew Conner, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 05/31/2026
* USD 499,834.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to enhance the persistence
and success of students from groups historically underrepresented in the STEM
fields, particularly in their first year of STEM courses, within the context of
a primarily undergraduate institution with a liberal arts and sciences based
curriculum. This kind of institution is under-studied, and this project will
serve both as a proof-of-concept and prototype for other primarily undergraduate
institutions. Saint Mary's College of California will implement a broad approach
that includes: (1) designing a science-motivated and contextualized calculus
readiness course; (2) integrating research-oriented modules in introductory labs
for chemistry and physics; (3) introducing a multidisciplinary science bridge
midway through the year; and (4) redeveloping existing advising cohorts and
developing peer mentoring for first year STEM students. The investigators will
also (5) establish an educator learning community to foster a climate conducive
to learning and inclusion, and to support equitable and excellent STEM
education. The expected outcomes of this work are to increase the retention rate
of STEM-interested students, reduce observed gaps in retention and success rates
for students from historically underrepresented groups and effect positive
changes in the science identity of first year STEM-interested students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accompanying STEM education research has two areas of
focus: the effectiveness of the science contextualized math course compared to a
traditional calculus readiness course; and characterizing the nature of the peer
mentor-mentee relationship and how its aspects affect science identity and
student retention in STEM. To assess the effectiveness of the science
contextualized math course, the investigators will compare retention rates,
success rates, and course grades in STEM courses of students who participate in
the new science contextualized course to those who participated in the existing
model of remediation. They will also collect qualitative data to address the
related question of how well the science contextualized math course supports the
development of science identity. To assess the peer mentor-mentee relationship
and its impacts, the investigators will analyze qualitative data from post
mentor-mentee meeting reports, as well as compare first year retention and
success rates of students with peer mentors compared to those without peer
mentors. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.