* 2150907
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced electrochemical degradation of PFAS in water
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Ljiljana Rajic, ELATEQ, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 236,645.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
are to create a method for the degradation of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) – often called “forever” chemicals - in water. PFAS
contamination is a significant global problem, and it is estimated that 97% of
US citizens have PFAS in their blood. The resultant human and animal health
implications include immunological, reproductive, developmental, hepatic,
hormonal, and carcinogenic diseases. Currently, the removal of PFAS in drinking
water resources is a major focus of the federal government and among many state
governments. However, the cost, intensive maintenance, and complexity of
available advanced water treatment technologies have often made their adoption
out of reach. While these harmful PFAS are difficult to destroy, the proposed
novel process transforms them into harmless byproducts. This project has the
potential to treat PFAS-contaminated water with lower energy costs and faster
removal rates, which could be broadly useful to affected communities throughout
the country. The approach integrates advanced processes without extensive energy
requirements and without the need for chemical use and post-processing. This
technology is expected to be affordable, scalable, and easy to operate and
maintain on-site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
design and implement a novel cathodic treatment system for the removal of per-
and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from groundwater. The unique design
proposes to employ both reductive and oxidative cathodes for PFAS removal. The
project aims to research, design, and test an electrochemical cell prototype
with novel electrode materials that support electrochemically-induced reduction
and oxidation processes. Tasks include testing the electrode substrates and
catalyst-coating materials and optimizing the operational parameters relative to
rapid breaking of C-F bonds and low-energy consumption. The project will develop
a robust electrochemical device that operates under environmentally relevant
concentrations of PFAS and other co-contaminants, such as natural organic matter
and chlorinated volatile organics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.