* 2150027
* REU Site: Gravitational-Wave Science in the LIGO Project
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Alan Weinstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2025
* USD 485,617.00

This award supports the renewal of the existing Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site program associated with the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) project at California Institute of
Technology. The project will support fifteen undergraduate students for ten
weeks of summer research each summer for three years. LIGO provides a unique and
exciting opportunity for undergraduate students to participate in the opening of
an entirely new observational window on the Universe using and developing
detectors with unprecedented precision. REU participants work closely with
individual LIGO scientists on projects involving many aspects of detector
technology, data analysis, and source modeling. Every student develops skills in
scientific writing and communication, through preparation of a project proposal
prior to the summer, progress reports, and a professional-quality presentation
and report at the end of the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO REU program
provides undergraduate students with a rewarding research experience at the
frontiers of precision metrology, strong-field gravity, and observational
astrophysics in which they make real and lasting contributions to a major
scientific effort. Students work with and are mentored by professional
scientists from LIGO Laboratory, Caltech theoretical astrophysics, and the
global LIGO Scientific Collaboration and learn first-hand how large projects are
organized and operate. They acquire new skills that are applicable in a broad
range of technical careers, involving optics, lasers, electronics, servo
controls, mechanical systems, data analysis, numerical relativity, astrophysical
source modeling, software development, high throughput computing, and related
technologies. They benefit from a well-established laboratory infrastructure,
the availability of high-throughput computing, document control, safety and
security procedures, and administrative support. The program further places
special emphasis on providing these experiences to women, underrepresented
minorities, and students from institutions with limited research opportunities,
in order to increase diversity in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.