* 2150365
* REU Site: Unmanned Aerial Systems with Real-World Applications in Oklahoma
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Wilson Merchan-Merchan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2025
* USD 411,335.00

Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) are becoming a fast-growing field with a wide
range of applications in industry, military, meteorology, business, and
recreational use, to name just a few. Advanced UAS with the capacity to navigate
in clustered and adverse environments are essential for future generations and
are expected to have a critical impact in the U.S. economy. This REU Site aims
to advance knowledge of UAS through a series of fundamental research topics that
focus on design and application of UAS. Furthermore, this Site aims to develop a
new generation of researchers and engineers who will become leaders in this
rapidly growing field. To achieve this goal the REU site provides mentoring and
training to student participants in a positive, engaging, and challenging
learning environment where they will be able to develop the technical and soft
skills needed to become successful engineers and researchers. To encourage a
workforce filled with new and innovative ideas, they will recruit a diverse
group of students and place a concerted effort on recruiting students from
underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site will provide
a 10-week summer research experience for a diverse group of ten students each
year, over a 3-year period, with a series of research activities. Students will
actively participate in research with real world applications that focus on
sensors for navigation and controls to accurately assess vehicle position,
employ UAS to fight climate change by gas leak hunting and detection of
particulate matter, developing deployable structures based on novel materials
for UAS, testing drone battery performance in harsh conditions, and developing
computational tools to identify the most vulnerable failure spots. The primary
goals of this NSF REU Site are: (1) To advance knowledge of drone technology
that could have an impact for further development of UAS for various
applications including in harsh and adverse environments; (2) To help students
expand their knowledge on drone technology and develop research skills and
strategies to aid their success in an engineering field; and (3) To recruit and
mentor students from underrepresented groups and first-generation college
students in STEM education to increase their sense of belonging and identity in
the greater university and academic community. The school of Aerospace and
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Oklahoma is in an excellent position
to host this REU Site. This REU site will take advantage of unique existing
natural open labs including the nearby Kessler Atmospheric and Ecological Field-
Testing Station, the Choctaw Nation Unmanned Aircraft System Integration Pilot
Program (UASIPP) test site, and the Full-size Test Loop Station for methane
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.