* 2150686
* Forces, Kinetics, and the Thermodynamics of Crowded Cell Surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2025
* Sho Takatori, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2025
* USD 919,841.00

The mammalian cell membrane is covered with a protective “shield” of proteins
and sugars that enables cells to interact with their local environment.
Important cell functions mediated by the cell membrane, like the delivery of
growth factors and antibodies to cell surface receptors, requires these soluble
species to penetrate through and interact within this thick shield that covers
and protects the cell surface. The goal of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the physical organization of the proteins and
sugars that make up the shield, and to identify the mechanisms of molecular
transport and binding on the cell membrane. This will be achieved by studying
the binding of one particular soluble species, a monoclonal antibody, on both
live cells and on engineered synthetic surfaces. In addition to advancing a
basic biophysical understanding of the cell membrane, this project may have
significant broader impacts in biopharmaceutical drug discovery of antibody
therapeutics that target diseased cell surfaces. The investigator’s research
group will broaden STEM participation by integrating the proposed research with
a two-part outreach program. First, the group will engage underrepresented
groups with academic research, targeting junior transfer students to ease their
transition to a four-year university and broaden their professional development.
Second, the PI will teach effective science communication skills to students,
which is an important skill that is largely missing in the traditional STEM
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine
how the molecular organization of the cell surface glycocalyx modulates the
biophysical interactions of proteins, polysaccharides, and macromolecules on the
cell membrane. The project will combine coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations, in-vitro reconstitution of engineered cell surfaces, and live cell
experiments to provide a spatial and temporal description of the molecular-to-
mesoscale surface interactions that govern plasma membrane organization. By
quantifying the transport and binding of monoclonal antibodies to engineered
antigen receptors with various chemical and physical properties, the project
will determine the cooperative dynamics of multibody surface protein
interactions. The project seeks to advance a quantitative framework to isolate
the effects of protein glycosylation, density, charge, stiffness, and other
biophysical properties on live plasma membranes. This project will determine
surface protein interactions that cannot be obtained from studying purified
proteins in isolation. Through the development of new tools and concepts, this
project will advance the fundamental understanding of the cell membrane dynamics
that govern a variety of surface-mediated cellular
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.