* 2150178
* REU Site: Center for power Optimization of Electro-Thermal Systems (POETS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Philip Krein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,494.00

This three-year REU Site Renewal at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign seeks to develop and support diverse STEM leaders in the area of power
optimization of electrified mobile systems. In order to maintain the nation’s
global competitiveness in science and engineering, the U.S. needs to diversify
its STEM workforce, particularly with diverse STEM leaders. The mega-trend of
electrification in the vehicle, construction, and aircraft sectors is driving up
demand for students trained in the high-powered, electrified mobility space.
This REU Site will offer a 10-week summer research experience with integrated
personal and professional development opportunities to prepare students for
entering top-tier STEM graduate programs. Participating students will be
recruited from minority serving institutions, community colleges, as well as
populations that are underrepresented in STEM. The long-term outcome will be a
diverse scientific workforce impacting how mobile, high-powered, electrified
products are designed and manufactured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
REU Site Renewal at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign seeks to
develop and support diverse STEM leaders in the area of power optimization of
electrified mobile systems. The REU Site will recruit 14 undergraduate students
per year from schools with limited research opportunities. Students will be
trained in interdisciplinary research through team-based projects around the
research themes of the Engineering Research Center for the Power Optimization of
Electro-Thermal Systems. Mentored by experienced faculty and trained graduate
students, the POETS REUs will gain an authentic research experience that is
customized to students’ interest and skill level. Technical, professional, and
personal development training will be integrated with the goal of increasing
students’ higher-order engineering skills, scientific identity, and self-
efficacy. The development of STEM leaders will utilize a T-shaped training
approach with two aims: building, strengthening and supporting students’ depth
of expertise in engineering practices and broadening students’ skill set and
experiences through activities focused on graduate school preparedness. Students
will also lead a K-12 outreach activity to practice their leadership skills and
attend conferences to a build their STEM network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site
is supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the
NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.