* 2150145
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates - Emerging Issues in Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Jun Zheng, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 404,999.00

This funding renews a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at New
Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology (New Mexico Tech) with a focus on
emerging issues in cybersecurity. This renewal will bring ten undergraduate
students to New Mexico Tech for a ten-week research experience each summer.
Recruiting efforts of this REU site will primarily focus on students from
regional institutions with limited research resources, especially female and
minority students who are traditionally under-represented in the computing
field. The program will expose the REU students to exciting cutting-edge
research problems in cybersecurity and empower them with an understanding of
general research methods, working knowledge of cybersecurity, technical writing
and presentation skills, and an exposure to entrepreneurship
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects of this site address a
range of important and emerging cybersecurity topics including document format
malware detection, wireless security, web security, automated threat report
generation, location privacy of mobile users, zero-day attack detection, and
cybersecurity risk assessment and management for precision agriculture. Led by
experienced researchers, students will use state-of-the-art facilities to
develop new methods, algorithms, protocols, and software tools to advance the
knowledge and practices in the cybersecurity area. The goals of this site
include: providing students experiences on cutting edge research in
cybersecurity; broadening participation in computing; motivating students to
pursue graduate studies in computer science; and preparing a future workforce in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.