* 2150875
* Collaborative Research: An archaeological examination of the cultural and ecological consequences of colonialism
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Douglas Armstrong, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,524.00

An enduring question for archaeologists is the nature of colonial encounters,
specifically the small-scale dynamics between Indigenous groups and European
settlers in the Americas. These questions are of particular salience where the
overarching historical narrative portrays the interactions as controlled and
dominated by Europeans, and emphasizes stereotyped depictions of the Indigenous
groups living on the islands at contact. Scientists will conduct research to
examine early colonial European-Indigenous interactions. A site, exposed by
storm surge from Hurricane Maria in 2017, was an informal European trading
complex established by colonial European settlers. It is situated along a
protected bay on the Atlantic coastline and was one of the first sheltered
anchorages for vessels voyaging from Africa and Europe. It was was one of few
territories which continued for a significant time after contact to be
controlled by Indigenous inhabitants. To ensure this work has broader impact
beyond academia, the team will work collaboratively with the contemporary local
community. Community members and residents will participate in excavations, and
engage in frequent meetings on the interpretation of findings. To build local
capacity for heritage protection, the team will hold a one-week archaeology
“camp" and hire local research assistants to learn archaeological methods. In
addition, with the support of local collaborator the project will contribute to
the development of a museum and exhibits on the local colonial
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to characterize the
nature of the relationship between the indigenous inhabitants and European
settlers, and examine the political, economic, and socioecological realities of
an informal trading encampment at a colonial frontier. The project team will
conduct remote sensing, geophysical and sub-surface survey coring for
environmental and geomorphological data, and excavation of archaeological and
geological features. Through the application of these methods, this project
investigates the development of the trading complex and surrounding enclave.
This research connects with questions of how European settlers and Indigenous
groups were entangled within the broader processes of colonialism and ecological
transformations, exploring themes of Indigenous resilience and agency in the
face of conquest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.