* 2150259
* REU site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Environmental Science and Engineering
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Brian St Clair,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 11/30/2024
* USD 237,567.00

The REU site at Montana Tech connects students interested in a career
characterizing and improving environmental quality with multi- and
interdisciplinary projects focused on solving problems sustainably with emerging
technologies. Montana Technological University, located in the heart of the
Rocky Mountains in Butte, MT, is uniquely situated near a wide range of natural
and anthropogenic environmental problems, most notably issues resulting from
more than 100 years of underground and open-pit hard rock mining. This ten-week
annual summer program provides students with an overview of possible careers in
the environmental field by visiting several nearby field locations with diverse
problems and explores the research and engineering solutions being applied to
solve these issues. The ten selected student participants are matched with
faculty mentors for a guided research project using the latest methods and
techniques in each respective field. Students participate and gain experience in
each phase of the scientific process. This intensive approach gives students a
broad view of the scientific process while allowing them to make progress on
their own projects and learning to document and communicate their work. The
program aims to enhance and enable the careers of student participants, lead to
increased participation of underrepresented groups in STEM, and advance
environmental quality in the near and long term. Upon completion of the program,
students have first-hand experience with a variety of cutting-edge methods to
characterize and solve environmental problems, which will serve students well
for a related career or continuing graduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 10-week undergraduate summer research program gives
students a complete picture of the scientific or engineering approach in an
environmental field closest to their interests. The program can be broken down
into three phases: field investigation, mentored laboratory project, and
reporting. During the first phase (~2 weeks), students learn sampling strategies
for water chemistry, sediment and soil composition, index and engineering
properties, and related methods from participating faculty. Students and program
faculty visit and sample nearby field sites including mining-impacted streams,
alpine ecosystems affected by climate change, modern and historical mining
operations and remediation sites, and an eolian deposit being stabilized with
microbially focused engineering methods. Students will have a complementary
safety and ethics classroom component. The resulting samples and data are used
for professional development for students throughout the program as a whole as
they move into phase 2 (~8 weeks), undergraduate laboratory investigations. The
participants work on projects ranging from geochemistry, to restoration ecology,
to geological and environmental engineering will be supervised by participating
faculty mentors. During the final reporting phase (~1 week), students present
their results to a symposium for all summer undergraduate research taking place
at Montana Tech. Students also compose a written summary of their results in a
format appropriate to the discipline of their guided research. The goal of the
last phase is to guide students through the preparation of a professional work
product and build strong science communication skills. Recruitment efforts focus
on predominantly undergraduate institutions and tribal colleges from Montana and
nearby states where analogous environmental and geotechnical challenges are
prevalent. Recruitment efforts are expected to yield a diverse applicant pool,
with Native American and low-income students particularly well represented. The
success of this program will be evaluated by an experienced external evaluator
and provide a logic diagram from resources to outcomes. The trainings hosted by
the external evaluator allow this knowledge to be retained on campus and used in
subsequent research involving undergraduates. The sum of these components helps
students transition to being professionals in a rewarding STEM field that
benefits local communities and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the EAR-REU program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.