* 2150652
* Collaborative Research: Building Capacity for Cross-site Research on Promoting Noticing for Equity and Equitable Science Teaching Practice through Video Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Anna Maria Arias, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2023
* USD 14,119.00

The project will serve the national need to develop equitable and effective
science teaching practice by building capacity to investigate the use of video
analysis tasks in teacher preparation. Through a cross-site collaboration, a
plan for a longitudinal study focused on STEM teacher effectiveness and
retention in high-need schools will be developed. The COVID-19 pandemic gives
new urgency to video analysis as large numbers of teacher preparation programs
have had to use digital libraries of classroom video cases in lieu of
traditional field experiences in schools. In addition, the importance of how
teachers are prepared to enact equitable, justice-oriented, culturally
responsive, and linguistically sustaining pedagogies in support of the success
of K-12 students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education
cannot be underestimated. This project builds upon five years of prior work of
the seven institutions involved in which the partners discussed, designed, and
studied video analysis within science teacher preparation and developed the
Framework for Analyzing Video in Science Teacher Education
(FAVSTE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a collaboration of science
teacher educators from partnering universities (the Collaborative) including
Vanderbilt University, Texas State University—San Marcos, Teachers
College—Columbia University, West Chester University of Pennsylvania, the
University of Northern Iowa, Florida International University, and Kennesaw
State University who will work with partner high-need school districts. The
project has three main intents regarding capacity building intended to situate
the Collaborative to be well-positioned to submit a Track 4 Research proposal.
One is to continue to analyze and modify the FAVSTE framework and associated
tools to ensure that they explicitly support noticing for equity. A second is to
identify, modify, and pilot research instruments to analyze teachers’
professional vision, its link to equitable science teaching practice, and how
this vision changes over time in relation to teacher effectiveness and
retention. And the third is to develop a cross-site, longitudinal research study
that incorporates practical instructional tools for video analysis and research
tools for studying effectiveness and retention of STEM teachers in high-need
school districts. Data collection and analysis consistent with a design-based
research approach will be used. The work will allow the Collaborative to deepen
its theoretical and methodological understanding of how to use video in teacher
preparation to support equitable science teaching practice. The project intends
to disseminate insights and best practices emanating from this project through
the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS), a partner of the
Collaborative, as well as professional organizations including the Association
for Science Teacher Education (ASTE). This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce Program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.