* 2150489
* REU Site in Interdisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 421,536.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site at Southern
Illinois University Carbondale provides research opportunities for an average of
14 undergraduates per year (including 2 supported internally) for a 9 week
period each summer. Students are involved in interdisciplinary projects in the
broadly defined area of materials research. Inclusion of faculty mentors from
various disciplines (Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, Biology, and the Materials
Technology Center) enables the REU students to develop skills needed to excel in
both academic and industrial research environments, where interdisciplinary
teams are standard and researchers must communicate effectively across
disciplines. Students are also required to think about the application of their
research to new technologies and the manufacturing of new devices, and have
opportunities to present their results to a diverse audience. The Site recruits
primarily from 2-/4-year institutions residing in neighboring states or the
Mississippi Delta region, as well as those with traditionally high enrollment of
students from underrepresented groups. Students participating in this Site learn
to network with other scientists and engineers through various social activities
including weekly lunches with faculty mentors and weekend trips to cultural,
industrial, and recreational locations. Primary goals of the site include: (1)
creating a positive image of science and engineering as a career choice:
students will leave the program with a greater sense of the trials,
tribulations, and rewards that await them; (2) providing a nurturing environment
and instilling a sense of confidence in the art of discussing and practicing
science; (3) improving the participantsâ€™ oral and written communication skills;
(4) teaching of basic research tools, including literature searches and the
operation of modern instrumentation; (5) fostering a collaborative teamwork
approach to research; and (6) increasing the number of domestic students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, who choose to pursue STEM
careers. A detailed assessment plan is followed to enable evaluation of efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mentored research projects associated with this Site are designed to be
excellent training grounds for working in materials and related fields. Students
are exposed to a variety of transformative projects at the forefront of
materials science and engineering, such as: studies related to the synthesis of
advanced functional materials (metal organic frameworks, optically active
inorganic crystals, 2D heterostructures, thin films, nanocomposites, spin-
polarized films; nanoscale/microscale heterogeneous catalysts, etc.); materials
characterization (via electron microscopies, solid- and solution-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, low-temperature
electronic, optical, magnetic transport, UV/Vis, infrared (IR), 2D-IR, and Raman
spectroscopies, etc.); theoretical/computational studies (wherein students learn
how to study materials via density functional theory (DFT) calculations,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, Data driven Machine Learning (ML) etc.);
and materials applications varying from energy storage and photovoltaics, to
biosensors and spintronics devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.