* 2150206
* REU Site: The Application of Data Science to Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Seyhan Salman, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2025
* USD 331,239.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) award to Clark Atlanta
University, located in Atlanta, Georgia, supports the training of a total of 9
students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. This REU site, supported
by the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Human Resource Development
HBCU-UP program, provides undergraduate students with a challenging research
experience in applying data science methods to problems in materials chemistry.
In addition to research, the REU program includes a two-week data science
bootcamp, scientific seminars, professional development workshops, oral
presentations, an end of program symposium, and multiple social activities.
Student recruitment focuses on African American and other underrepresented
students, students from Minority Serving Institutions, and students from
institutions with limited research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training
the next generation of material scientists at the intersection of materials
chemistry and data science is a key to accelerating materials materials
innovation . The REU program: (1) provides undergraduates with an early research
experience in applying data science to problems in chemistry with the focus on
publishing the results, (2) prepares undergraduates for graduate studies in STEM
and the STEM professional workforce, and (3) contributes to the diversification
of the STEM workforce. The project will achieve these objectives through the
following key elements. The two-week data science bootcamp upskills students in
data science and its role in chemistry. The research projects investigate
applications of data science techniques to accelerate materials innovation and
the identification of structure-property relationships. Research topics include
applying data science methods to the development of crystalline porous
materials, perovskites for 2-dimensional layered oxide materials, graphene and
graphene nanoribbons for nanoscale functional interfaces, and non-sustainable
petroleum-based composites. Professional development opportunities engage
students in a series of workshops on topics necessary for future success in
STEM. Scientific seminars highlight the work of underrepresented minority
researchers who are active in the application of data science to problems in
chemistry. The end-of-program symposium provides participants an opportunity to
present their work to the broader community. The project activities will
position students to acquire valuable professional skills while making
significant contributions to chemistry through data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.