* 2150523
* REU Site:Interdisciplinary Research Experience on Decarbonization: Path to 2035
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* BIHTER PADAK, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 444,124.00

This REU Site offers a nine-week interdisciplinary summer program related to
sustainable energy pathways in the Schools of Engineering and Physical Sciences
at the University of California, Irvine (UCI). The REU students will be exposed
to comprehensive decarbonization research topics and learn interdisciplinary
approaches to tackle the science and engineering challenges of achieving net-
zero carbon emissions. The program will support ten non-UCI undergraduate
students each year for the three-year program. Students will mainly be recruited
from underrepresented groups and diverse backgrounds. They will participate in
workshops, i.e., Strength Finder Workshop, Career Development Workshops,
Research Methodologies Workshop, to develop research, leadership, career
development, and team-building skills. Through the proposed experimental and
modeling studies in this program, the students will impact society by
contributing to research conducted to achieve zero-net carbon emissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The three-year REU program at the University of
California, Irvine (UCI) will expose the students to research and training
opportunities in highly challenging decarbonization technologies. The ten
students per year students will address fundamental questions across a broad
range of disciplines and applications related to decarbonization routes,
including sustainable hydrogen production, energy storage, use of efficient fuel
cells, electrochemical and thermochemical production of high-value chemicals,
advanced nuclear fuel cycle, and waste management; novel functionalized
nanomaterials and complex oxides for carbon dioxide and proton reduction,
efficient radiofrequency heat delivery, advanced combustion technologies and use
of renewable hydrogen in gas turbines and internal combustion engines. This REU
site will provide a collaborative research platform for undergraduate students,
graduate students, and faculty to address challenges associated with
decarbonization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.