* 2150424
* REU Site: Plastic Recycling and Advanced Chemical-physical Transformations for Improved Circular Economy (PRACTICE-REU)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* Marina Tsianou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2025
* USD 395,188.00

Only 5% of the 44 million tons of plastic waste was recycled in the US in 2019,
with 86% ending up in landfills. Opportunities abound in recovering useful
plastic from waste however, great challenges remain. With a focus on plastic
recycling, the REU Site: Plastic Recycling and Advanced Chemical-physical
Transformations for Improved Circular Economy (PRACTICE-REU) at SUNY Buffalo
will engage undergraduate researchers to tackle the global plastic pollution
problem. PRACTICE-REU participants will carry out research that advances plastic
waste identification, facilitates plastic recycling and upcycling, and addresses
environment and health impacts of plastic waste. The PRACTICE-REU program is
structured to introduce undergraduate students to research and prepare them for
fulfilling careers in science and engineering. The research experience will be
complemented by training workshops and professional networking opportunities. A
community service project will provide concrete evidence of societal impact. The
PRACTICE-REU program will make a concerted effort to recruit non-traditional
research students, including underrepresented minorities, students from
universities with limited research opportunities, and female students. In
addition to the development of human resources, the PRACTICE-REU program pursues
fundamental research that promotes the reduction and valorization of plastic
waste. These are topics important to the United States and the globe. Inherent
with the main theme of plastic waste reduction is the potential for societal
benefits through improvements to the environment, health, and economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site: Plastic Recycling and Advanced Chemical-
physical Transformations for Improved Circular Economy (PRACTICE-REU) at SUNY
Buffalo will train undergraduate researchers to address global plastic pollution
concerns within three themes: plastic waste identification, plastic recycling
and upcycling, and environment and health impacts of plastic waste. Laboratory-
focused projects will provide students with confidence, creativity, and
independence. Weekly group meetings of the REU cohort will foster student-
student communication in conjunction with training workshops and professional or
social networking opportunities. A concluding Research Symposium, as well as
support for post-REU conference presentations and publications, will help
students hone their communication skills. A portfolio of assessment activities
will support the continuous improvement of the PRACTICE-REU site. The PRACTICE-
REU program is structured to both introduce students to research and prepare
them for careers in science and engineering fields. PRACTICE-REU students will
be paired with experienced researcher mentors to conduct transformative plastic
recycling research. Research projects in the highly interdisciplinary PRACTICE-
REU integrate engineering and science to solve plastic recycling issues such as
the identification of various types of plastic to facilitate their sortation,
recovery of specific types of plastic from a heterogeneous mixture, or
quantification of human exposure and health risks of microplastics. Students and
faculty participants will disseminate research results through conference
presentations and peer-reviewed publications, expanding opportunities for
knowledge advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.