* 2150955
* Understanding the Career Trajectories, Effectiveness, and Retention of Noyce Scholars in High-Need Schools in Oregon
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Kevin Johnson, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2027
* USD 999,370.00

The project aims to serve the national need to provide every child with high-
quality STEM teachers. To meet this need, schools must retain effective STEM
teachers for long-term service. This project will conduct surveys and interviews
with STEM teachers who participated in Noyce programs in Oregon. These research
activities will produce evidence and insights about STEM teacher experiences
that support effectiveness and persistence in high-need schools. The project
will also engage a subset of effective, persistent STEM teachers to write about
their teaching careers. The project will disseminate the key experiences of
effective STEM teachers who have demonstrated effectiveness and persisted in
high-need schools. These findings could provide insights to guide teacher
education programs broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Pacific
University includes partnerships with the University of Oregon, the University
of Portland, and the regional nonprofit research organization Education
Northwest. The goal of the research is to understand the reasons behind the
observed retention and cultural effectiveness of Noyce-prepared STEM teachers in
high-need schools in Oregon. The project will first engage 100 STEM teachers in
a 30-minute Career Overview Survey. The project will then engage 40 selected
STEM teachers in a 90-minute Career Trajectory Interview. Data collection
methods will include measures of cultural effectiveness coupled with in-depth
teacher interviews to identify teachers who both demonstrate cultural
effectiveness and have been retained in high-need schools. Finally, the project
will engage 18 selected STEM teachers in a year-long Narrative Inquiry
professional development program, in which each will create their own STEM
Teacher Autoethnography, reflecting in depth on their career trajectory as an
effective STEM teacher in high-need schools. Project activities will be
evaluated by an advisory board of external stakeholders, including both Oregon
Noyce program stakeholders and teacher education experts from out of the state.
Project findings will be disseminated through conference presentations and
academic publications, as well as through publication of a collection of STEM
teacher narratives. Further, project findings may inform STEM teacher
preparation programs nationally in efforts to recruit, prepare, and support
teacher candidates likely to succeed and persist in high-need schools. This
Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.