* 2150979
* Magnetotelluric Investigation of Subduction Zone Hydrology and Megathrust Slip Behavior at the Nicoya Peninsula
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Samer Naif, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 263,572.00

The west coast of Central America is a convergent plate boundary that regularly
experiences large subduction zone earthquakes. In Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica,
both large damaging earthquakes with significant ground shaking as well aseismic
slow-slip events (SSEs) with little to no ground shaking have been observed.
Determining why some parts of the plate boundary experience megathrust rupture,
while others experience SSEs is important in seismic hazard assessment. It is
hypothesized that the style of fault slip may be driven by variations in
subsurface fluid content, since fluid-rich zones can lubricate faults while
fluid-poor zones promote stick-slip behavior. However, it is unclear precisely
what combination of factors dictate the fault slip behavior or whether the
hydrology and fluid content are alone responsible. To address these critical
unknowns, this project will collect electromagnetic imaging data to constrain
the subsurface hydrology and the distribution of fluids beneath the Nicoya
Peninsula. The new data will be collected in collaboration with Costa Rican
partners at the National University of Costa Rica and the Instituto
Costarricense de Electricidad. The data will help distinguish the conditions
that enable damaging earthquakes from conditions which promote aseismic slip.
This project will support an early-career investigator and a postdoctoral
researcher, who will lead the field work and data analysis. Several student
volunteers from the U.S. and Costa Rica will be recruited for the fieldwork.
Student participants will attend a short-course during the fieldwork where they
will: review subduction zone processes and the geology of Nicoya Peninsula
specifically, learn about the goals of the project, and receive training to
process and analyze the data they helped to collect with freely available open-
source software packages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical
control(s) on the style of fault rupture is fundamental for evaluating seismic
hazards, particularly at subduction zones. The Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica, is
ideal for studying how fluids modulate earthquake behavior due to well-
documented variations in seismicity, style of megathrust slip, and plate
coupling, in addition to the relatively shallow depth to the plate interface
given the survey area’s proximity to the trench. This project will deploy an
array of magnetotelluric (MT) instruments at approximately 80 sites to image the
three-dimensional electrical resistivity structure beneath the peninsula and
constrain the distribution of fluids and thus the geohydrology of the
seismogenic zone. The data from this project will be integrated with seismicity
and fault slip observations, which are well-resolved by long-term seismic and
geodetic instrument networks. The combined data will determine, for example, if
electrically conductive regions correlate with zones of SSEs and resistive
regions correlate with geodetically-locked zones prone to damaging earthquakes.
The MT results will also be combined with geochemical data from surface seeps
previously sampled in the survey area in order to determine the sources and
migration pathways of fluids emitted at the seeps and how this may impact long
term volatile cycling in subduction zone forearcs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.