* 2150487
* REU Site: The Plasticity of Cells, Organisms, and Communities
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Betsy Read, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2025
* USD 141,470.00

This REU Site award to California State University San Marcos, located in San
Marcos, CA, supports the training of 10 students/year for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained to conduct and
present independent research. With a strong commitment to supporting
underrepresented groups, including veterans, and first-generation college
students, the CSUSM NSF REU program contributes to building a diverse and
talented population of next generation scientists. The summer experience will
increase participation, retention, persistence, and success in the classroom and
instill confidence, and encourage innovation and leadership in research. Upon
program completion, students are well poised to apply to doctoral/Masters
programs and/or positions in the Life Science Industry. A common web-based
assessment tool will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training, and
students will be tracked after the program to determine career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying theme of this hands-on research program is
‘The Plasticity of Cells, Organisms, and Communities’. Students select a
research mentor from a diverse team of scientists who are using cutting edge
tools and techniques to uncover the molecular and cellular mechanisms of how
cells, organisms, and communities adapt to stochastic environmental conditions
by coordinating growth with morphological, physiological, and behavioral traits
to maximize fitness. Research projects range from probing the genetics of
phenotype, to investigating simple sequence repeats and genomic fluidity,
microbiota and microbiome-mediated plasticity, to physiological adaptations to
climate change. The residential program fosters a community of scholars who
transition from being students to research scientists and move from learning to
discovery. Weekly enrichment activities include seminars, field trips, and
workshops highlighting the remarkable plasticity of cells, organisms, and
communities. Students work together to write a scientific manuscript, attend
graduate school application, and career workshops, and participate in a Poster
Showcase to celebrate research accomplishments. For more information about the
program visit: https://www.csusm.edu/bioreu/index.html, or contact the PI (Dr.
Betsy Read at bread@csusm.edu) or co-PI (Dr. Carols Luna-Lopez at
clunalopez@csusm.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.