* 2150347
* REU Site: Research experiences in marine and estuarine disturbance ecology in the northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Ruth Carmichael, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2025
* USD 210,960.00

The Division of Ocean Sciences will continue funding for a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Dauphin Island Sea Laboratory (DISL)
located on Dauphin Island, AL. The program will bring eight undergraduates to
DISL each summer for three years. Students will participate in a 10-week guided
research project and a professional development program. The main objective of
the DISL REU Program is to provide research experiences in the marine sciences
for undergraduate students from 2-year and 4-year primarily undergraduate
institutions, with a special focus on students from the northern Gulf of Mexico
coast (nGOM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DISL REU program seeks to enhance
understanding of how marine and estuarine ecosystems and living resources of the
Gulf of Mexico respond to disturbance. Students will conduct semi-independent
research experiences across disciplines in coastal ecology (plant, invertebrate,
fish, mammal), toxicology, microbiology and biological, chemical, physical and
geological oceanography. Students will participate in seminars, field trips,
group discussions, and a formal poster symposium to develop critical
professional skills. Networking is encouraged, and mentors facilitate
publication of a peer-reviewed paper and presentations at scientific meetings
following the internship. By providing basic research skills and career
development to underserved and underrepresented students, this REU will increase
the likelihood of enduring participation in sciences among these students and
build capacity for their future success in any field. These efforts, in turn,
will increase the diversity of Ocean Science professionals and role models for
future students in STEM. By targeting students along the nGOM coast, the program
additionally supports local communities and economies by enhancing the education
and intellectual capital of the next generation in technical fields in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.