* 2150205
* REU Site: Algebra, Combinatorics, and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Yong Yang, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 02/28/2025
* USD 305,417.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Mathematics at
the Texas State University at San Marcos will host an eight-week REU Site in the
summers of 2022, 2023, and 2024, involving nine students per year working in
teams of three under the supervision of a faculty mentor. The selected
participants will come from a diverse pool of applicants, and the faculty
mentors will supervise the participants in research projects. Beyond successful
research outcomes, the objectives of the program are to introduce students to
aspects of mathematical research and the broader mathematical community. At the
same time, the students will build mentoring relationships with faculty as they
consider pursuing graduate degrees and a career in mathematics. Students will be
part of an active community at the hosting institution. In addition to the REU,
the participants will have various activities, participating in several summer
programs and interacting with established mathematicians who visit the campus. A
diverse body of participants is strongly desired, and priority will be given to
applicants from groups that are underrepresented in the mathematical community.
This includes minority students, women, as well as those students coming from
institutions with limited resources to support independent research projects for
their undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research projects include a
diverse collection of topics based on the research interests of the faculty
mentors. Specific projects include commutative algebra arising from graphs and
matroids, shellability of simplicial complexes, algebraic and combinatorial
aspects of higher dimensional tiling, graph theoretic problems arising from
group theory, prime graphs of special classes of groups, arithmetical properties
of group invariants, linear and permutational representations of groups,
statistical analysis on DNA sequencing data, and survival analysis in data
science. Participants will regularly meet with their research team and their
mentors and spend some of the time learning the necessary background before and
while pursuing original research. Students will be asked to present their
findings in oral presentations and will be guided in summarizing their work in a
mathematical research paper. In the course of the program, students will be
trained in various skills, including literature review, using software such as
GAP, Macaulay2, Sage, and R to make and check examples, oral presentation
skills, and written mathematical communication using LaTeX. Communication with
the participants will continue after the program ends, and students will be
encouraged to present their work at local, regional, and national conferences in
the subsequent academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.