* 2150117
* REU SITE: Mapping Freedom in Civil War &amp; Reconstruction-era Mississippi
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Beddhu Murali, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2025
* USD 352,596.00

The research and education in this Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
site will focus on the use of mapping technology, including geographic
information systems, to understand better the transformation of society during
periods of historical change. Student researchers will work with faculty mentors
in computer science and digital humanities to map the granular process of
emancipation in Mississippi during the Civil War and through the period of
Reconstruction to visualize freed-people's paths to citizenship. This project
was inspired by three factors: (1) the need for more individuals from
economically underprivileged backgrounds in computer science and digital
humanities; (2) evidence that underprivileged students are more likely to enter
and stay in science and engineering fields if their first interaction is with
material they recognize and find socially significant; and, (3) the need for
sophisticated, but user-friendly mapping technology in digital humanities and
comparable fields of scholarship. The historical focus on emancipation is
somewhat familiar to most students, but how that process evolved for the nearly
half-million enslaved Mississippians in the 1860s and 1870s is largely unknown
to them. This project will help REU students develop a deeper understanding of
historical change over time, and demonstrate how similar computer-based methods
can be applied to analyze and visualize complex periods of
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together humanities
students from diverse backgrounds, especially those underrepresented in science,
engineering, and digital humanities, to enable them to make significant
contributions to collaborative research and to learn to work effectively as an
individual and part of this REU community. They will include African Americans,
women, first-generation college students, other minorities, and military
veterans. The experience will increase students' familiarity and comfort with
computer science and digital humanities topics and research, including commonly
used methods, software, and analytical tools. To enhance their active
participation in research, students will receive training in the fundamentals of
each field, including systematic geography and geographic information systems. A
fundamental goal is to increase student interest in pursuing graduate studies
toward a career in research and provide them with the experience and training
needed to improve the likelihood of their success. In addition, this work will
demonstrate the research potential of accessible yet sophisticated mapping
technology for STEM and non-STEM fields through the students' presentation of
their research in academic settings and its use outside the REU program. This
project is jointly funded by Research Experiences for Undergraduates Sites, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Human-
Centered Computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.