* 2150642
* SBIR Phase I:  A Game-Theoretic Technology for Protecting ICS against Cyber-Attacks
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Noah Dunstatter, BLOCMOUNT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,973.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to advance the state of cyber defense in Industrial Control
Systems (ICS) that are widely deployed in various sectors such as manufacturing,
healthcare, and utilities. This project will develop security cloud services
that provide early detection of cyber-attacks and anomalous behaviors. Securing
ICS will help guarantee their proper operation and consequently protect human
life and equipment as well as conserve resources and materials. This directly
benefits society and ensures economic competitiveness of the US through the
development of trustworthy and resilient control systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop a technology solution that provides early detection of
cyber-attacks that aim to take over Industrial Control Systems (ICS). The rise
of cyber-attacks that use Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML)
techniques poses significant threats to such systems. The solution is composed
of (1) an extensible and comprehensive library of check blocks that inspect
signals at run-time using state-of-the-art methods from machine learning,
statistics, control theory, and time-series analysis; (2) an AI-based defense
agent that dynamically applies well-chosen subsets of checks to various signals
at run-time; and (3) a cloud service that implements the defense agent. The
expected results include game-theoretic models, approximation methods, and
reinforcement learning algorithms incorporated in a cloud service that results
in effective cyber defense strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.