* 2150461
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Paradigm for Sustainability and Resilience Engineering: A Transdisciplinary, Learner-Centered, and Diversity-Focused Approach
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Ivonne Diaz, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,381.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to create a new Minor of
Sustainability Engineering at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, as a
precursor to the creation of a full Bachelor’s degree program in this field.
Clearly, addressing “Sustainability” is an overarching challenge for the 21st
century at local, national, and international levels. Having a cadre of
engineers who are broadly trained in sustainability is vital to ensure the
quality of life for current and future generations. Today in the United States,
undergraduate degree programs in “Sustainability” are of two types:
interdisciplinary programs that do not grant engineering degrees, and
Environmental Engineering programs that do not broadly address sustainability.
However, there are no undergraduate engineering degree programs in the US that
are comprehensively oriented around sustainability. Therefore, a new type of
engineering program is needed – to complement, not substitute – the existing
approaches to sustainability education and engineering education. Toward this
end, this project will work collaboratively with stakeholders to create a new
Minor program that will feature active recruitment, an immersive summer camp,
new courses, a community of practice, and cooperative learning experiences that
will promote workforce development in Puerto Rico with local partners. The Minor
will take a socio-technical approach that mingles engineering with the
humanities, and will challenge students to work with diverse members of
vulnerable communities as co-designers, culminating with the aspiration “to
develop professionals to work under the People, Prosperity, Planet, Partnership
and Peace paradigm that strives to foster human well-being in balance with the
biosphere”. This positive, social responsibility framework will be instrumental
for recruiting women and students from other underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate mindsets and
competencies that relate to sustainable engineering, using a Delphi study with a
broad pool of stakeholders to identify and rank what is essential for
“sustainable engineering”. In parallel to this, using existing survey
instruments as a basis, the evolution of student mindset in four domains — self-
efficacy, engineering and technology, the conception of sustainability, and
diversity, equity and inclusion — will be studied qualitatively and
longitudinally as students progress through the program; this will occur through
interviews, reflective activities embedded in course activities and assignments,
and observation in program activities. A parallel program evaluation will be led
by an external evaluator to measure the impact of the project on student
profiles, particularly on the recruitment of women. The strategies of the
project are anticipated to lead to measurable increases in female enrollment in
the engineering programs in which women are least represented, particularly in
fields related to Computing and Electrical Engineering. In aggregate, this work
will result in new instruments for gauging a next-generation “sustainability
engineering mindset”, and a corresponding model for recruitment and curricular
design. As an extension of the mindset research, the project will serve to
normalize diversity, equity, and inclusion practices at the University,
including informing new practices for collecting and maintaining demographic
data. A new cadre of bilingual, Hispanic students, with increased representation
of women, will be broadly trained for meaningful, sustainability-focused
employment in Puerto Rico, particularly through partnerships with key
stakeholders. Through direct budget support, as well as interaction with a pool
of highly-trained, sustainability-focused engineers, these partners will be able
to strengthen and expand their enterprises, feeding into the emerging circular
economy and ecosystem in Puerto Rico. In summary, the project will support the
objectives of the HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.