* 2150505
* REU Site: Using Data Science Tools to Improve Neighborhoods
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Lynne Stokes, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 349,095.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic (SBE)
Sciences. This program will engage students in exploration of economic,
environmental, and infrastructure challenges in Dallas, Texas, using publicly
available data sources. The eight-week program will begin with a three-week
period of lectures in social science theory and research methods, including
place-based economics, data collection methodologies and sources, and data
ethics. Simultaneous technical workshops will equip students with skills in
coding, data wrangling, and use of mapping software. Each participant will then
join a research team focused on measuring variability or mitigating disparities
across urban neighborhoods. The objectives of the REU site are to provide
students with expertise in data science methods and tools for studying problems
affecting small geographies; to increase interest in data science and the
likelihood that participating students will pursue graduate studies in a related
field, especially for students underrepresented in these fields; to engage
students in research that requires interdisciplinary skills and knowledge; and
to increase collaboration across disciplinary boundaries for both faculty and
students, and between university researchers and community
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of research team topics are: (a)
assessing the fairness of county polling place locations; (b) describing the
change in urban heat island locations and intensity over time, as well as its
proximity to neighborhoods; (c) evaluating economic development, workforce
development, and affordable housing interventions in small urban areas; and (d)
educating and empowering neighborhoods near toxic chemical waste sites using
data-driven findings. To address its questions, each team will use specialized
methodologies and tools, which the students will be exposed to under the
supervision of their mentoring faculty and graduate student team. The
methodologies will vary by problem, but collectively include causal inference,
complex survey design and analysis, clustering and prediction, data
visualization and storytelling, and human-centered design. The research findings
will be shared in a university-wide three-minute thesis contest for all summer
undergraduate researchers, and an opportunity to publish a paper in the
universities Journal of Undergraduate Research. Besides the participantsâ€™ direct
contribution to these studies, the data products they produce by retrieving,
wrangling, and curating the public data will make a valuable contribution to a
collective data resource about Dallas, which can be shared with local
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.