* 2150601
* General Cognitive Diagnosis Models: Development, Estimation, and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Gongjun Xu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

This research project will advance the frontiers of modern statistical theory
and methodology in cognitive diagnosis modeling. Cognitive diagnosis models
(CDMs) are psychometric tools designed to infer respondents' unobserved
psychological attributes from their manifest responses to a set of items in a
test or questionnaire. CDMs have been used in educational assessments and
successfully applied in psychology and the social sciences. However, existing
CDMs have limited utility because they often assume binary attributes. This
project will further extend the applicability of CDMs by developing a general
family of models that offer a unified framework for CDM analyses, and that also
can be used as a basis for the development of new CDMs. The scientific products
of this project will be disseminated via workshops, conference presentations,
and publications in peer-reviewed journals. The project will develop open-source
software to make advanced CDMs accessible to a broader audience. The outcomes of
this project will be useful for applied researchers in education, psychology,
and the social sciences. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in the conduct of this research, and the investigators will make every
effort to include students of underrepresented groups in their research
teams.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop, estimate, and
apply a novel family of cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) to simultaneously
accommodate polytomous response data and multi-categorical psychological
attributes. In particular, the project will (1) examine the theoretical
properties of the proposed models, including model identifiability and model
equivalence to ensure the principled use of CDMs in practice, (2) develop
computationally efficient parameter estimation methods to make it possible to
estimate parameters of CDMs of high dimensions in big data, (3) develop valid
statistical inference methods for handling models of high dimensions and data of
large sizes, and (4) conduct interdisciplinary collaborations to apply the new
methods to representative datasets in various scientific fields to address
substantive research questions of interest. To boost the impact of the proposed
work, the investigators will create a free software program to make the
methodological innovations accessible to applied
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.