* 2150328
* REU Site: Biology of Animal Movement and Performance
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Matthew Fuxjager, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 260,836.00

This REU Site award to Brown University, located in Providence, RI, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and minority-serving institutions (MSIs) will
be trained in the program. Recruitment will occur in partnership with The
Leadership Alliance, a consortium of approximately 35 academic institutions and
partners across the US that seeks to both train and mentor underrepresented
minority students in summer research programs, while providing continuous
support for careers in academia and research. Students will learn how research
is conducted and present the results of their work at the Leadership Alliance
National Symposium, as well as at scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be done through online surveys. Students will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this
REU program centers on the biology of animal movement and performance. Mentors
are scientists at Brown University who are closely affiliated with the
Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, and who study the
causes and consequences of movement in a wide range of animal taxa. Students
will therefore engage in projects that explore the biophysics of movement,
physiological control of movement, function of movement, and significance of
movement for evolution. Training in these areas of research will emphasize
computational approaches to data analysis, whether through bioinformatics,
modeling, or other forms of large-scale data analytics. Students will also
engage in outreach efforts by working in local preschools to teach young
children about animal diversity. Recruitment will occur in partnership with The
Leadership Alliance, and applications will be evaluated by a small selection
committee of Brown faculty who are also mentors in the program. Preference will
be given to applicants who show a strong desire for training in integrative
biology. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://fuxjagerlab/reu.com or by contacting the PI (Dr. Matthew Fuxjager at
matterhew_fuxjager@brown.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Taiese Bingham-Hickman at
taiese_bingham@brown.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.