* 2150413
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Olaseni Sode, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 01/31/2025
* USD 386,522.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program at California State University, Los Angeles (Cal
State LA) in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry supports 10 students,
mainly from local community colleges in the Los Angeles basin area and primarily
from groups underrepresented in the sciences, for 10 weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. The students will engage in a wide-range of guided independent
research projects in the fields of chemistry and biochemistry, while also
participating in professional development activities, including workshops on
ethics and responsible research topics, and overcoming stereotype threat and
imposter syndrome. Together, the research and professional development
activities prepare and motivate students to matriculate into four-year degree
programs and for future careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student participants will conduct
individualized research projects across a wide-range of chemistry and
biochemistry topics, including exploring the molecular effects on the freezing
point in hydrocarbon mixtures; studying the mechanisms of antifreeze proteins;
examining structural and morphological effects of nanoparticles; and employing
computer simulations to understand the vibrational properties of weakly bound
molecules. Along with the research, the students will participate in a weekly
series of professional development workshops and social activities aimed at
preparing them for future careers in chemistry and
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.