* 2150405
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Basic and Applied Science of Psychology
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jaihyun Park, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2025
* USD 347,895.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits in addition to integrating
research and education. The REU site at Baruch College offers advanced research
training in psychological science to undergraduate students who attend Baruch
College, Colleges within the City University of New York, or other educational
institutions in the New York metropolitan area. Baruch College and CUNY in
general boast a diverse student body. Although the recruitment is open to any
NSF eligible undergraduate students, this program is designed to increase the
representation of minority, low-income, first-generation college students, and
disabled students in scientific psychology. Specifically, the program plans to
(a) identify early promising minority, disabled, and economically disadvantaged
students in the New York metropolitan area, (b) prepare REU students for
advanced graduate training in psychology and ultimately for careers in academic
settings, (c) develop a pipeline to provide a pool of talented and diverse
undergraduate students to become the research scientists of the future, and (d)
increase psychological scientists exposure to cultural and minority issues in
psychological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU Students in the program
conduct independent research under the supervision of their respective REU
faculty member in one of the four areas of psychology (i.e., clinical,
developmental, industrial/organizational, and social). Each student focuses on
planning and executing studies with the intention of presenting papers at
professional conferences and submitting manuscripts to peer-reviewed journals.
Specifically, REU students develop research questions and hypotheses that are
grounded in the literature. In order to answer these newly developed research
questions and hypotheses, REU students design research protocols and plan data
collection. REU students learn via hands-on experience the value of statistical
analysis, use of statistical software to draw inferences about the data, and
presentation skills to disseminate the findings gained in their research.
Alongside with the conduct of their research projects, REU students complete a
series of structured activities aimed at preparing them to apply to graduate
school. These activities, such as attending professional development seminars
and workshops, participating at colloquium in the field of psychology, listening
to invited guest speakers from graduate program admission officers, are
coordinated by the Baruch College REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.