* 2150896
* Rock Slope Instability Characterization and Progressive Failure Monitoring from in situ Ambient Resonance Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 332,205.00

Landslides cause significant damage to infrastructure and loss of life
worldwide, and thus improved approaches are needed to better mitigate landslide
hazards and risk. Slope stability characterization and monitoring form the core
of hazard analysis, yet many commonly used techniques are costly and invasive,
or only provide information at a single point. The investigators will use
ambient vibration measurements at rock slope instability sites to create new
conceptual and practical approaches for landslide structural characterization
and progressive failure monitoring. These approaches are based on concepts of
structural dynamics, where the resonance properties of slope instabilities are
computed and monitored over time, revealing unique information on landslide
structural composition and providing new metrics to anticipate the time of
failure. The investigators will also use numerical simulations to test the role
of landslide failure type on the predicted resonance response, generating new
theoretical understanding aiding interpretation of field data and providing
guidance for future application of the technique at other
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resonance properties of an unstable rock slope
vary with geometry, material properties, and boundary conditions, creating the
foundation for non-invasive slope stability characterization and monitoring
based on in situ ambient vibration measurements. The investigators will conduct
a suite of experiments designed to explore how in situ ambient vibration data
can be used to interpret the structural conditions of rock slope instabilities,
including boundary conditions at depth, and monitor and interpret progressive
failure over time. They hypothesize that in situ ambient vibration data
interpreted together with 3D eigenfrequency models allows improved
characterization of the material, dynamic and structural properties of rock
slope instabilities, and that ambient resonance monitoring provide unique
information aiding slope stability hazard assessment and time-of-failure
prediction. The investigators will test these hypotheses using a combination of
field experiments and numerical models. Field measurements from ambient
vibration array deployments, interpreted together with numerical simulations,
are used to develop a new approach for characterizing the structural properties
and boundary conditions of rock slope instabilities, supporting improved hazard
assessment. Meanwhile, ambient vibration monitoring data generated at two field
sites are analyzed to develop refined analyses able to distinguish subtle
frequency changes associated with progressive failure amidst environmentally-
driven drifts. Finally, a series of numerical experiments are used to develop
new conceptual understanding of how slope kinematics influence resonant
frequency evolution during progressive failure, and interpret failure metrics in
tandem with resonance monitoring to demonstrate how ambient vibration data may
be used for time-of-failure forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.