* 2150769
* Collaborative Research: Aerosol Properties and Autoconversion during Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region (CAESAR)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Markus Petters, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 186,954.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to provide observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used in an effort to better
understand the characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic
climate system more broadly, in order to inform climate models and projections.
The project will also help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with
significant relevance to naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal
communities. The broader field effort includes significant opportunities for
students and early-career scientists, international collaboration, and public
outreach. One specific goal of this award is the development of interactive
worksheets/notebooks for courses, based on the CAESAR project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute to the CAESAR goal of examining
the impact of varying aerosol conditions in the upstream Arctic boundary layer
on ice initiation, cloud liquid water, and snow growth mechanisms in a range of
wind and temperature regimes. In particular, the measurements provided through
this project will target two critical knowledge gaps: 1) understanding the
budget of marine boundary layer (MBL) cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) sources,
and 2) providing observational constraints on CCN-limited aerosol indirect
effect. The project will support the deployment of two CCN counters, a scanning
mobility particle sizer (SMPS), an ultra-high sensitivity aerosol spectrometer
(UHSAS), and a single particle soot photometer (SP2). The research team will
contribute two value-added products to support the overall CAESAR objectives:
quality-controlled cloud condensation nuclei activation spectra to support
aerosol-cloud-precipitation modeling investigators and derived cloud droplet
number probability distribution functions to support observational and modeling
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary funding for this project comes from the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program with partial funding from the Arctic
Natural Sciences program. The deployment of observational assets for CAESAR is
being funded by the Facilities for Atmospheric Research and Education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.