* 2150269
* REU Site: Synthetic Biology at Northwestern: From Molecules to Society (SynBREU2.0)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Gabriel Rocklin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2025
* USD 425,844.00

This REU Site award to Northwestern University, located in Evanston, IL, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of
the program will be done using an online instrument. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Additional standard
and tailored assessments will be used to refine activities continuously to meet
program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide mentored research
experiences in the rapidly growing field of synthetic biology, in which new
biological systems are constructed to enable biological solutions to important
problems. A strong cohort of faculty from departments including Molecular
Biosciences, Chemical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, Pharmacology, Chemistry, Engineering Science and Applied
Mathematics, and Civil and Environmental Engineering will serve as mentors in
the program. Students will carry out independent laboratory and/or computational
synthetic biology projects such as the development of new biosensors for
contaminants in water, self-healing materials, new gene therapy delivery
mechanisms, and more. Concurrently, students will participate in a carefully
designed curriculum to expose them to a variety of laboratory techniques as well
as the skills necessary for success in their future STEM careers, including
ethics, responsible conduct of research, communication and networking.
Activities include seminars, workshops, teas with faculty, and field trips to
local synthetic biology companies. At the end of the program, students will
present their projects and results at a research symposium. A stipend will be
provided, along with housing, funds to cover some meals, and a travel allowance.
Applications will be accepted at the REU website each year, and reviewed by
participating faculty and an admissions committee. More information about the
program is available by visiting http://synbreu.northwestern.edu, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Tullman-Ercek at ercek@northwestern.edu), co-PI (Dr.
Rocklin at grocklin@gmail.com), or the program staff (synbreu@northwestern.edu).
This award is supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE Program in
partnership with the NSF REU Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.