* 2150118
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Nuclear and Particle Physics at TUNL/Duke University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Ayana Arce, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 506,310.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). It supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site in physics at the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL) and
Duke University. TUNL is a research consortium consisting of four major
universities in the North Carolina Triangle Area: Duke University, North
Carolina Central University, North Carolina State University, and the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The award will support twelve undergraduates
for ten weeks of summer research on topics in nuclear and particle physics.
Eight students will conduct research at TUNL, and the other four will spend part
of their summer at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland working with the Duke high-energy
physics group. Each student is assigned a faculty mentor and is integrated into
a research group consisting of faculty, postdocs, graduate students, and other
undergraduate students. In addition, the students have opportunities to visit
the physics departments at the consortium universities to learn about the
graduate programs at these institutions and to see the scope of research pursued
in each department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the implementation of active
research, seminars, lab tours, and discussion groups, the students are exposed
to various aspects of nuclear and particle physics research and their
connections to broader science areas. Lecture and seminar topics are chosen to
emphasize the nuclear and particle physics research activities at TUNL and CERN,
respectively. The students will have opportunities to interact with world-
renowned physicists, learn about the most advanced theoretical concepts in the
fields, and work with state-of-the-art technologies used in these research
areas. Also, professional development activities in scientific writing and oral
presentations constitute an important component of the REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.