* 2150396
* REU Site: A Summer Research Experience in Structural and Computational Biology and Biophysics
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Nicholas Noinaj, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2026
* USD 138,788.00

This REU Site award to Purdue University, located in West Lafayette, IN, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-
2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will participate in career and professional
development events and workshops to prepare them for careers within the
structural biology field in academia, industry, and government. Students will
learn how research is conducted, the ethical and responsible conduct of
research, how to disseminate their results to a general audience, and will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be performed using the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program is designed to establish a
framework that integrates research projects aimed at studying the structure and
function of macromolecules with in-depth workshops designed to provide
theoretical and practical training in contemporary structural biology techniques
and biophysical methods. Students will gain training in methods such as
computational biology, X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, and cryo-electron microscopy. Each trainee will leave the program
with a solid foundation and understanding of the various structural biology
methods regardless of the expertise within their host lab. These discovery-
driven studies provide the molecular blueprint for the atomic structures of
biomolecules which fuels subsequent hypothesis-based research. Projects included
in this proposal focus on the structure and function of membrane protein
machineries involved in signaling and nutrient import, viral enzymes, cancer-
related proteins, CRISPR-Cas machinery, transporter proteins, and whole viruses.
This REU program is hosted by the Department of Biological Sciences. Students
that are in their sophomore or junior year are encouraged to apply. Applications
will be reviewed using a rubric that values academics, creativity, hard-work,
perseverance, and diversity. More information about the program and the
application process are available by visiting
http://scbb.bio.purdue.edu/reu.html, or by contacting the PI (Nicholas Noinaj at
nnoinaj@purdue.edu) or the administrative assistant (Becky Harding at
rharding@purdue.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.