* 2150380
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: The Great Lakes Wind Energy Challenges (REU-GLWind)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 208,801.00

Wind energy, an affordable renewable energy source, has great potential to meet
the growing energy demand, mitigate climate change causes and contribute to a
cleaner, sustainable, domestic energy generation portfolio. Despite the demand
for wind energy research and development nationally and globally, many
undergraduate students of non-R1 universities have limited opportunities to
participate in active wind energy research. To tap the nation's diverse student
talent pool and broaden participation in science and engineering, there is a
critical need to provide these students access to wind energy research early in
their career and motivate them to pursue graduate education or research-oriented
jobs in the wind energy sector. The Great Lakes (GL) Wind REU site aims to
provide a diverse group of undergraduate students with an authentic, engaging
learning and research training experience and professional growth opportunities
in the broad areas of wind energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great Lakes Wind REU
site will support ten undergraduate students for ten-week summer research co-
hosted by the Cleveland State University, a public urban university, and Case
Western Reserve University, an R1 private university. It will leverage
Icebreaker Wind, the first freshwater offshore wind farm in Cleveland, Ohio in
Lake Erie and the Great Lakes region as the testbed. REU students will be
exposed to a summer research experience that consists of (i) participation in
ongoing wind energy research in inclusive learning and research communities,
(ii) weekly seminars of research frontier and professional development, (iii)
field visit of a utility-scale wind turbine site at the Great Lakes Energy
Institute, and (iv) research communication/dissemination in workshops and
conferences. The GL Wind REU project particularly emphasizes recruiting women,
underrepresented minorities, and students from community colleges and
universities without research programs in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), Division of
Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the Department of Energy (DOE),
National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.