* 2150848
* Arctic Cold-Air Outbreak Mixed-Phase Cloud Characteristics, Processes and Impacts in Observations and Models
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Paquita Zuidema, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 327,797.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to provide observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used in an effort to better
understand the characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic
climate system more broadly, in order to inform climate models and projections.
The project will also help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with
significant relevance to naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal
communities. The broader field effort includes significant opportunities for
students and early-career scientists, international collaboration, and public
outreach. This award will contribute to the main broader impact goals of the
CAESAR campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make use of remote
sensing observations of mixed-phase clouds to characterize their partitioning
between liquid and ice as a function of the cloud evolution, with an additional
step of using CAESAR-constrained large-eddy-scale simulations to understand the
processes that determine this partitioning. The primary addition to the CAESAR
campaign from this award is the measurement of cloud liquid water path from a
G-band Vapor Radiometer. The researchers hypothesize that the cold air outbreak
clouds produced near the sea ice edge are fully liquid, and transition to liquid
cloud overlying ice precipitation further downstream, through interactions with
the large-scale environmental parameters (aerosol and dynamical) that are
reflected in the cloud morphology. A counter-hypothesis is that much of the
precipitation can also occur as super-cooled drizzle, potentially due to a lack
of ice nucleating particles (INPs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary funding for
this project comes from the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program with
partial funding from the Arctic Natural Sciences program. The deployment of
observational assets for CAESAR is being funded by the Facilities for
Atmospheric Research and Education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.