* 2150344
* REU Site: Digital Legal Research Lab
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* William Thomas, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2025
* USD 221,180.00

This project is funded through the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits and integrates research with
education. Mastering concepts central to the study of law and science enables a
deeper exploration of the historically contingent and ongoing relationships
between law and society; however, few undergraduates are trained to engage in
rigorous analysis of the law. The overall goal of the Digital Legal Research Lab
REU Site is to equip a diverse cohort of undergraduate researchers with the
analytical and technical skills needed to engage in digital legal inquiry and
generate new insights in the study of law and science. This foundational
training will prepare students to develop their own analytical questions,
disseminate research findings, establish distinct research identities, and craft
competitive applications for funding opportunities and graduate programs. This
REU Site will engage a diverse group of students who contribute unique
perspectives to digital legal research. This program will diversify the fields
of law and science and train talented undergraduates to advance critical inquiry
into past and present trends in crime, violence, and policing; legal decision
making; legal mobilization and conceptions of justice; and litigation and the
legal profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intensive ten-week program will
support eight undergraduate students per year and will include an orientation to
the varied methodologies and tools needed to effectively analyze historical and
ongoing legal practices and structures, an introduction to mixed-methods
research design, and analysis of primary source materials from digital and
physical repositories. Specifically, students will analyze freedom suits and
habeas petitions comprising a vital case study of freedom-making between 1770
and 1924 to demonstrate the widespread legal mobilization of marginalized
petitioners who challenged exploitation during the long nineteenth century, and
whose largely unexamined and unpublished stories are central to the American
legal canon. In addition to assessing trends in marginalized peopleâ€™s legal
mobilization against various forms of institutional and interpersonal
confinement, researchers will participate in the innovative restructuring of
archival legal data that shifts away from traditional forms of indexing focused
on case party names and dates to a system that prioritizes demographic and
relational data across parties and petition types. Using a mixed methods
approach, researchers will offer novel insights relevant to family law, federal
Indian law, immigration law, labor law, morals policing, and
slavery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.