* 2150130
* REU Site: Environmental Focus in Food, Energy and Water Security
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Debra Mlsna, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2025
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Sites award to
Mississippi State University (MSU), located in Starkville, MS, will support ten
students for ten weeks of research over the summers of 2023-2025. This site will
introduce undergraduate scientists to the multidisciplinary areas found at the
intersection of bio-products for water, energy and soil systems. Instrumentation
exposure and training will engage students in the excitement of science, train
students with practical skills that can translate toward employment or graduate
school, and aid students in developing analysis and critical thinking skills.
Seminars and educational activities will offer students support for developing
writing and presentation skills, individual career analysis and possible career
opportunities within STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
fields. The research environment and career planning offered within this
experience will support and develop participants, encouraging students to pursue
careers within chemical fields and to self-identify as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative research projects at the
nexus of Engineering, Chemistry and Environmental Science will support student
engagement in Food, Energy, and Water security and encourage entrepreneurial
thinking for future careers. Undergraduate students will join labs of MSU
faculty who are actively engaged and publish in related research areas,
including: (1) the conversion of both biomass and energy crops into biofuels,
(2) the utilization of biochar (a biofuel production byproduct) for the
purification of water, and (3) the enhancement of food security through soil
amendment. Outside of the lab, training in entrepreneurship and other
professional skills will help to develop well rounded students experienced in
interdisciplinary chemical research. This site will also recruit a highly
diverse cohort of students, diversifying the STEM pipeline and future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.