* 2150781
* Examining the Role of District Science Coordinator Professional Learning in Supporting and Retaining Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Karen High, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 688,987.00

The project aims to serve the national need of supporting and retaining science
teachers by exploring how the professional learning (PL) of District Science
Coordinators (DSCs) impacts, if at all, the effectiveness and retention of new
science teachers in high-need schools. There are a variety of factors
influencing why new teachers stay or leave teaching; one factor not investigated
is the role of DSCs in supporting teachers. With well-prepared DSCs, new science
teachers could be better supported to teach and stay in high-need settings with
students who often do not have positive or rigorous experiences in science.
Thus, in time, this project could contribute to improved success of students in
science which could translate into an increase in the STEM talent pool. This
study is designed to generate new knowledge about how DSCs provide support for
and aid in the effectiveness and retention of new teachers in high-need schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Clemson University and the University of
Georgia partners with the National Science Education Leadership Association
(NSELA) and districts across the nation. The project’s goal is to determine how
different levels of PL among DSCs impacts new teachers in their first five years
of teaching. The study aims to examine the PL of DSCs in terms of both required
professional development and free-choice learning. The latter refers to PL that
is chosen by DSCs, such as reading journal articles, watching educational
videos, visiting museums and parks, and attending professional conferences. The
project intends to gather and analyze qualitative and quantitative data to
understand how the PL of a DSC contributes to the effectiveness and retention of
new science teachers. Among the analytic approaches to be used are a two-cycle
coding process to examine the impact of PL on DSCs and the subsequent impact on
teachers, with the first cycle using holistic coding and the second using
organization or hierarchical outlining. Another analytic approach to be used is
multiple linear regression modeling regarding the relationship between variables
and to support explanation of observed variance. These are just two of sixteen
analytic approaches to be used to examine the two project research questions.
The findings from this project are expected to contribute to the understanding
of the selection, quantity, and quality of PL of DSCs as well as if there is any
impact on new teachers associated with the PL of the DSCs. This project builds
upon current synergies across the country to cultivate teacher leadership - but
with a focus on DSCs – and could suggest what additional studies are needed in
this area. The results are to be shared with a wide audience, through
traditional and novel formats, including usage of well-established social media
outlets used by the PIs and presentation of findings at state and regional
levels targeted to reach administrators with responsibility for the hiring and
support to DSCs. This will provide the opportunity for others to benefit from
and build upon this project’s findings to further improve K-12 STEM education.
This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.