* 2150720
* Growing Educators of Mathematics and Science: Cultivating Mathematics and Science Teachers Who Serve in High-need Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Sarah Ferguson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2027
* USD 683,452.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high quality STEM
teachers to serve in high-need school districts. To meet the needs of such
districts, teachers must be prepared in the use of best practices in support of
student success in science and mathematics. This includes culturally relevant
pedagogy. This project seeks to recruit STEM majors to become teachers in high-
need school districts. It intends to provide scholarships to junior and senior
level university students pursuing baccalaureate degrees in STEM disciplines,
along with teacher certification at the secondary or middle grade level. As part
of the projectâ€™s recruitment strategy of STEM majors to the teaching profession,
this project intends to support student service internship opportunities for
freshmen through junior year university students. These service internships are
intended to provide university STEM students with opportunities to spend time in
high-need school district classrooms. This is to allow the interns to observe
high-quality teachers in grades 6-12, to engage with students, and to become
aware of productive teaching and learning strategies. The quality grades 6-12
STEM educators resulting from this project are expected to enhance the student
learning experiences and success of students in mathematics and science in the
Hampton Roads community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Old Dominion
University includes partnerships with the Chesapeake Public Schools, Norfolk
Public Schools, Suffolk Public Schools, and Virginia Beach City Public Schools,
as well as Thomas Nelson Community College (name changing to Virginia Peninsula
Community College). The primary goal of the project is to recruit and provide
financial support to 27 high-achieving STEM students who complete STEM
baccalaureate degrees while also obtaining teaching credentials and solidify
agreements to teach in the Hampton Roads districts (divisions). In addition to a
solid STEM baccalaureate degree program and certification path, the project
intends to use internships, workshops, seminars, and both university faculty and
district teacher mentors to grow the understanding of culturally relevant
pedagogies among the Noyce Scholars. As project participants, students will be
provided opportunities to engage with local schools, build relationships with
school partners, learn best-practices for teaching in high-need environments,
and return to teach in the surrounding and school partner districts. As project
participants transition into project alumni and return to partnership districts
to teach, students at partnership schools will have the opportunity to interact
with and grow from the project alumni, which will serve as a recruitment
opportunity for continual perpetuation of project applicants. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Project (Noyce). The Noyce project supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.