* 2150879
* Building Capacity to Enhance Rural Illinois STEM Teacher Education Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Jaime Klein, Illinois College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 74,995.00

The project aims to meet the national need for more secondary STEM teachers in
rural areas. Specifically, the effort responds to new Illinois state legislation
that adds a year of computer science and two years of laboratory science to the
high school graduation requirements. To address the resulting teacher workforce
demands, Illinois College will revise and streamline pathways to STEM teacher
licensure for STEM majors. These efforts will be guided by data collection to
reveal barriers for STEM major recruitment to secondary STEM teaching careers.
Additionally, the leadership team will apply insights from data collected, along
with input from a STEM Advisory Committee, to streamline and revise the current
STEM major curricula, so that students could double major in Education and
finish their undergraduate degrees within 4 years. The 10-person STEM Advisory
Committee will be majority school district stakeholders, including an Illinois
College STEM alumnus now teaching secondary science, along with multiple
Illinois College STEM and Education faculty. These changes could make
preparation for STEM teaching careers more affordable and accessible, thereby
increasing and diversifying the regional STEM teacher
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Illinois College includes
partnerships with four high-need local school districts – A-C Central,
Beardstown, Jacksonville, and Virginia – as well as among STEM and Education
faculty. The project has multiple goals, all of which aim to create a pipeline
of high-quality STEM teachers to serve rural schools in west-central Illinois.
The project will survey STEM majors to understand drivers and barriers to
pursuing secondary STEM teacher licensure. Additionally, the project will
streamline STEM and Education major programs to enable students to complete both
majors and teaching licensure in four years. Further, the project will design a
new computer science endorsement for STEM teachers to address new state
legislation that adds computer science to high school graduation requirements.
The project will be guided by input from a STEM Advisory Committee with members
representing high-need schools, current STEM students, and alumni who are now
STEM teachers, as well as STEM and Education faculty. Through these activities,
Illinois College will strengthen its partnerships and recruitment efforts with
local high-need schools. Outcomes of the effort could produce insights about
making STEM teaching careers more accessible and affordable for STEM majors at
other institutions and in rural contexts. This Capacity Building Project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.