* 2150363
* REU Site: BioSensor Materials for Advanced Research and Technology (BioSMART) at the Environment/Biotechnology Nexus
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Kevin Belfield, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 403,732.00

This REU Site award to the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark,
NJ, will support the training of 10 students for ten weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. The program will establish an interdisciplinary
biosensor research opportunity for undergraduates. The transformative
opportunity for sensor research lies in discovering and applying novel
materials. A significant development is needed to enable performance in the
complex environments where sensors will be deployed. This REU will enhance
students' ability to conceptualize and think through research problems in a
collaborative setting. Participants will learn how to conduct independent
scientific research, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. The program will broaden the participation of women,
students with disabilities, LGBTQ+, underrepresented minorities, and non-
traditional students. Assessment of the program will be carried out through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site for
BioSensor Materials for Advanced Research &amp; Technology (BioSMART) at the
environment/biotechnology nexus will provide a unique learning experience for
undergraduates interested in biosensors. This REU takes advantage of the
biosensor research opportunities at NJIT in the Departments of Biological
Sciences (Federated with Rutgers), Chemistry &amp; Environmental Science,
Chemical Engineering and Material Science. The intellectual focus emphasizes:(i)
biosensor materials, (ii) biorecognition and protein engineering, (iii) sensor
designs and characterization, and (iv) field applications. Planned activities
include one week of science boot camp, career development workshops with
interactive workshops on equity and inclusion awareness, team building, science
communication, extracurricular events, and responsible conduct of scientific
research. The PIs will organize broad-based recruitment efforts, targeting
students at the local, regional, and national levels. Two or more mentees will
be co-mentored by an interdisciplinary faculty team. More information about the
program is available by visiting https://centers.njit.edu/smart/about-biosmart-
center/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Omowunmi Sadik at sadik@njit.edu) or the
co-PI (Dr. Kevin Belfield at belfield@njit.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.