* 2150958
* Advancing Language Literacy with Relevant Investigations in Science Education Emergent Bilinguals
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,822,711.00

The project aims to serve the national need to support practicing middle school
teachers’ beliefs, knowledge, and practices to effectively teach science to
emergent bilinguals (EBs) who are developing their home language while learning
another new language. These students often experience science instruction
curricula and methods that are not responsive to their interests, science and
language learning needs which is evidenced by the fact that EBs have lower
science achievement scores when compared to their non-EB counterparts. This
disparity is a significant obstacle to developing a scientifically literate
society and is critical because the learning gap in science obstructs the
pipeline of linguistically and culturally diverse students that pursue STEM
fields and STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Houston (UH) includes partnerships with the UH Colleges of Education and Natural
Sciences and Mathematics, the UH STEM Center, and Aldine, Alief and Houston
Independent School Districts. Nonprofit organizations, Achieving Student Success
through Excellence in Teaching (ASSET), and the New Teacher Center, are also
project partners. Project goals include preparing 21 experienced and exemplary
middle level science teachers over the 5-year period to be teacher leaders for
teaching EB students at high needs schools in the Houston area. These Noyce
Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs) will earn a master’s degree focused on conceptual
and pedagogical education for integrating disciplinary language literacy with
contextualized science lessons. The project evaluation is designed to analyze
both quantitative and qualitative data. It focuses on understanding how the
specialized courses designed to provide culturally and socially relevant
conceptual and pedagogical content for science and language literacy instruction
for EBs, coupled with professional development, can lead to new insights and
opportunities for addressing the challenges teachers and teacher educators
encounter in their efforts to enhance EBs’ engagement and success in science.
This is expected to empower the MTFs to become science instructional leaders in
their districts with a focus on reducing instructional disparities, especially
among EB students. Approximately 18,900 EBs being taught by MTFs in the partner
school districts are expected to be impacted. This Track 3: Master Teaching
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.