* 2150446
* REU Site: Summer Research Program at PARADIM
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 619,214.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Platform for the Accelerated
Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM) REU site
offers a 10-week summer program at one of the platform sites: Cornell University
facilities for thin film growth, theory and simulation or electron microscopy
and the Johns Hopkins University facility for bulk crystal growth. The program
provides a diverse group of undergraduate students a research opportunity in one
of two state-of-the-art facilities for materials innovation and discovery.
Participants will be offered access to one of two (Cornell and Johns Hopkins
University) National Materials Innovation Platform (MIP). This program also
includes professional development and skills-based instructional workshops.
Workshops include topics on presenting a professional paper, science
communication, ethics in research and collaboration and literature research
skills. Simultaneous to the REU program, PARADIM offers two professional summer
schools for the MIP user community. The REU students are encouraged to
participate in these schools to learn from leading experts in materials research
and participate in a professional community experience to further enhance the
connection to the broader materials research network of users. PARADIM is
advancing a broader goal of increasing diversity in the sciences, being a
springboard for STEM career paths, and fostering a community of materials
researchers. The overarching goal of this program is promoting progress of
science to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare to secure the
national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PARADIM will select 14 REU interns annually. Participants
in the REU program have the opportunity to work at one of two sites, depending
on their research interests. Interns may choose from eight general projects in
areas in thin film growth (MBE and ARPES), electron microscopy, and theory &amp;
simulation—hosted by Cornell—or bulk crystal growth—hosted by Johns Hopkins
University (JHU). Each intern will work on an individually designed research
project. Each research project will progress under the guidance of an
experienced and highly vetted graduate students, postdoctoral scholars or
faculty mentor. The REU projects are supported by a series of professional
development activities, including workshops on science communications skills,
scientific poster creation, formal presentation skills, and ethics in research,
and a series of ‘Hot Materials’ talks from top researchers. All REU projects are
designed to have a positive impact on the Platform either by enhancing Platform
capabilities or by advancing Platform research. At the conclusion of the
program, the REU interns present a formal presentation on their research, create
a research poster, and write a formal paper describing their research. PARADIM
operates under the proposition that supplying students with an authentic
research experience that is supported by professional development which is
embedded in a well-established community of research practitioners, will
encourage career paths in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.