* 2150854
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing an Early Urban Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Edward Henry, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 156,613.00

This research focuses on one of the United State’s earliest cities which even
after decades of professional fieldwork and analysis some of the most
fundamental facts of its growth and organization remain unclear. Current models
suggest that in little more than a century it attracted large numbers of
immigrants from elsewhere in the Midcontinent and became the preeminent center
in all North America. Drawing on theoretical approaches the project seeks to
explore its trajectory of growth as the making of an urban landscape. Yet
understanding urbanism requires large-scale spatial data on the growth of such
centers in the early years of their development. To address this problem, the
research team will perform high-resolution magnetometry over the site. This
massive subsurface survey will cover more than 5.5 km2 of urban landscape,
making it the largest such survey ever conducted in the Americas of an
archaeological site. This project will provide the first near-total geophysical
survey of the subsurface. Data from the magnetometer survey, combined with
rigorous GIS and geospatial analyses, will allow us to finally “see” beneath the
surface from a birds-eye view, thus affording an unparalleled opportunity to
compare growth with other early cases of urban formation around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will include not only the first site-wide map
of the buried landscape but will also provide insights into the ways that
Indigenous peoples coalesced to form the largest precolonial community in the
US. The investigation will also provide a dataset of incalculable value for
future planning at the site which is visited by a quarter-million visitors each
year. After the project, these data will be made available to other scholars and
students via the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR) and a web portal hosted by
the University of Michigan. The digital atlas will become the basis for future
investigations within the site’s central core, forming a foundation for multi-
year research projects, Ph.D. dissertations and M.A. theses, and even projects
through which middle and high school students learn GIS techniques while
exploring America’s first city. Through consultation with the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency (SHPO), and across Tribal Historic Preservation Officers
(THPOs), the project also promises sustained collaboration with Indigenous
tribes who claim the site as an ancestral homeland. This will ensure that the
opportunity and responsibility to serve as stakeholders in stewardship of these
sensitive data are widely shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.