* 2150511
* REU Site: Tiling Theory, Knot Theory, Optimization, Matrix Analysis, and Image Reconstruction
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Casey Mann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 05/31/2025
* USD 291,792.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This REU Site program will host nine undergraduate
students for eight weeks in summers 2022, 2023, and 2024 at the University of
Washington Bothell (UWB) for research experiences. Students will provide their
research preferences and work closely with a faculty mentor in groups of three.
The research projects to be pursued at this REU site are chosen to be of
interest to the greater mathematical research community while being accessible
to students with minimal background preparation required. The research groups
will be strongly encouraged to publish their results in journals and present
them at professional meetings. This REU site will prepare its student
participants for research careers and graduate training, contribute to
increasing diversity in the mathematical sciences, and encourage and prepare its
participants to pursue graduate school. The research experience will be
complemented by several outings and social activities to build team cohesiveness
and networking. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will focus on research
problems in the areas of knot theory, tiling theory, matrix analysis,
optimization, and image reconstruction. In the tiling theory group, the
participants will experiment with known infinite families of tiles and use basic
combinatorial methods to analyze patterns. They will also perform computer-aided
explorations of potential minimal aperiodic protosets to determine aperiodicity
and potential structure of associated Markov partitions. In the non-smooth
optimization group, students will work to improve the numerical performance of
the emerging non-smooth spectral gradient methods. This project will also help
develop students' scientific computing skills using MATLAB. In the knot theory
group, students will explore various open questions, for example, identifying
types of knots that arise as components of hexagonal mosaic links created from
saturated diagrams and understanding splittable links from specific sizes of
saturated hexagonal or parallelogram diagrams. In the medical imaging and
optimization group, students will study the algorithmic framework, generate
simulated data, and modify existing code to train the deep-learning-based prior
and incorporate it into the reconstruction algorithm. This project will offer
students the opportunity to gain exposure to cutting-edge concepts in imaging
science and machine learning and develop mathematical programming skills. The
matrix analysis group will explore open questions on nonnegative matrices, the
field of values, the geometry of polynomials, discrete geometry, and number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.