* 2150281
* REU Site: Electronic Materials Evaluation Research for Greater Exposure to Future Technology Careers (EMERGE)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Rashaunda Henderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 389,870.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global pandemic and dwindling computer chip
manufacturing here in the United States has impacted the production of chips.
This has national security and economic implications that could impact US
citizens’ livelihood. There is bipartisan support through pending legislation to
bring back and reinvigorate computer chip manufacturing here in the United
States to ensure a global competitive advantage and further enhance national
security. To keep pace with this growth, an increase in a diverse, innovative,
and globally competitive workforce is a necessity. Meanwhile, there has always
been a need to increase the representation of underserved groups in the science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. Therefore, this Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Texas at Dallas
will establish an engaging exploration into the research methods for the
evaluation and fundamental understanding of electronic materials and devices for
use in energy, electronics, nanotechnology and sensing/detecting. Ten
undergraduate Fellows will engage in an immersive 10-week summer research
program focused on technologically relevant materials and analytical techniques
for future innovations that will spark the next generation of talent for the
high-tech industry. The program will also provide exposure to and guidance on
graduate education, research methods, and research careers. This REU program
will serve the state and surrounding region through undergraduate research
opportunities to first-generation, underrepresented minorities and women
scholars that attend Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) in Texas and surrounding states, and DFW
community colleges. The desire is for these students to pursue graduate studies
and careers in advanced computer chip manufacturing and technology fields as the
US works to re-establish this critical area in
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
site at the University of Texas at Dallas will establish engaging fundamental
research exploration in modeling, fabrication, and characterization of materials
and devices. This research has implications on materials understanding for use
in neuromorphic, nanophotonic, optoelectronic, ferroelectric, perovskites,
carbon nanotubes, and quantum transport at the nanoscale for use in energy,
electronics, nanotechnology, microfluidics, low-temperature device fabrication,
and sensing/detecting fields. Ten undergraduate Fellows will engage in an
immersive 10-week summer research program that will spark the next generation of
talent for the high-tech industry. This Program includes: material from the PI’s
undergraduate research methods course (e.g., research fundamentals, design of
experiments, publishing, etc.), preparing for and applying to graduate school,
specific training for the Fellow’s summer research, informal research seminars
from faculty and outside experts, visits to local high tech industries, and
seminars on ethics. This REU program will serve the state and surrounding region
through undergraduate research opportunities to first-generation,
underrepresented minorities and women scholars that attend HBCUs, MSIs in Texas
and surrounding states, and Dallas Fort Worth community colleges. The desire is
for these students to pursue graduate studies and careers in advanced
semiconductor manufacturing and technology fields as the US works to re-
establish this critical area in America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.