* 2150984
* Building Up and Removing the Barriers to STEM Teaching in Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Anne Fernando, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 73,835.00

The project aims to serve the national need of recruiting, retaining, preparing,
and graduating high-quality STEM teachers, especially in urban public school
districts in Virginia. Norfolk State University (NSU) is a public midsize
Historically Black College/University (HBCU) founded in 1935. Guided by a report
that having a Black teacher in a classroom increases Black K-12 studentsâ€™
interest in attending college, the project aims to put more Black teachers in
STEM classrooms. NSU has a long tradition of preparing K-12 teachers to work and
serve in the Hampton Roads community in Virginia. In this project, the
Department of Mathematics and the Department of Secondary Education of NSU will
strengthen this tradition by building capacity towards the goal of securing a
Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
NSU deepens a partnership with the Norfolk Public Schools and aims to build up,
and remove barriers to, STEM teaching through (1) developing recruitment and
retention strategies, (2) enhancing existing infrastructure for the path towards
teacher licensure, (3) engaging STEM faculty in promoting K-12 teaching as a
career and supporting prospective teachers, (4) strengthening its existing
partnerships with local school districts, and overall, (5) building capacity for
a Noyce Track 1 program. These goals will be achieved through developing
training for teaching exams, performing needs assessments of NSU STEM students
and local school districts, and instituting an innovative Involve-the-Professor
program that informs and engages STEM faculty. Lessons learned from this project
will serve to inform not only the STEM and education communities, but other
institutions striving to provide effective contributions to the educational
enterprise of urban K-12 teaching. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the national Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program which supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts, and supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.