* 2150172
* REU Site: Nanoscale Science Undergraduate Research Experience (NanoSURE) at UNC Charlotte
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Banita Brown, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 341,673.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in nanoscale science and engineering provide the
opportunity to study, design, and manipulate matter at the sub-microscopic
level. These advances have enabled breakthroughs in medicine and drug delivery,
electronic and solar devices, catalysis and the energy sector, and many other
fields. Often these advances are at the intersection of traditional science and
engineering disciplines, and interdisciplinary training at the undergraduate
level is increasingly important to prepare students for careers in nanoscale
science and engineering fields. The NanoSURE REU site at UNC Charlotte will
provide an innovative and interdisciplinary nanoscale science research
experience for a diverse pool of talented undergraduates. The students will
participate in research teams exploring nanoscience solutions to various
challenges including drug-delivery, catalysis, manufacturing, and renewable
energy. Many of the students will belong to minority groups underrepresented in
STEM fields, and many of the students will come from institutions in which
access to research training is limited (HBCUs, PUIs, and community colleges).
The site will also recruit military veteran students considering STEM careers to
participate in the program. The NanoSURE REU site will also partner with a
science museum in Charlotte to provide training in scientific outreach and an
opportunity for the REU students to disseminate science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities of this REU site are focused on
interdisciplinary training in nanoscale science and engineering. Students chosen
to participate in the program will be assigned to ongoing interdisciplinary
nanoscale science research projects, including for example: (1) Dynamic RNA
Nanoparticles and Reconfigurable Nanoassemblies, (2) Multifunctional Silica-
Based Nanoparticles to Improve PDT for Cancer, (3) Enhanced Photocatalysis using
Non-metallic Plasmonic Nanomaterials, and (4) Metal Chalcogenide Cluster
Frameworks. The site will advance the national need for developing a generation
of workers prepared for the interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary challenges
of nanoscale science and engineering fields through the following objectives:
(1) actively recruit a diverse population of undergraduate students to
participate in on-going research experiences in nanoscale science and
engineering with faculty members committed to undergraduate mentoring; (2)
introduce students to a variety of nanoscale science research methods,
breakthroughs, and challenges early in their college experience to direct their
career paths into nanoscale science related fields of study; (3) engage students
in interdisciplinary research opportunities that encourage communication and
cooperation across traditional discipline boundaries; (4) enhance the student
experience by providing workshops, seminars, and social activities that will
positively impact their professional development and encourage their
participation in graduate studies; and (5) develop scientific communication
skills by providing many opportunities to disseminate results to each other in
team meetings, to the public through a collaboration with a local science
museum, and ultimately by submitting a summary paper in a peer-reviewed journal
format and participating in an annual undergraduate research
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.