* 2150404
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Community College Students in Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Todd Holden, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2025
* USD 212,659.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
at Queensborough Community College in New York City has a number of broader
impacts that focus on providing research opportunities to undergraduates to help
prepare them for future science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
careers. The site focuses on providing research opportunities to students from
community colleges who have had no prior research experience. The site has a
strong plan to recruit students from groups underrepresented in physics. The
research projects proposed for the students to engage in are varied and reach
across different physics and astronomy topics including black holes, biophysics,
cosmic ray detection, X-ray spectroscopy, acoustics, and climate change. Due to
the diversity of the research topics offered the students have an opportunity to
engage in research that excites them while mastering skills that can be applied
to the academic journey in a number of ways. Participants will have the
opportunity to access and analyze big data using large national databases which
will give them skills in understanding and applying large amounts of data. They
will learn computational methods to create applications that can collect and
manipulate data as well as run large simulations from basic equations that will
predict physical outcomes. They will have the opportunity to physically build
detectors and assist in collecting and analyzing data from experiments with
partners all over New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site at Queensborough
Community College provides opportunities to twelve undergraduate students at
community colleges per year. One of the goals of the REU site is to prepare the
students to be competitive for transfer to a four-year college in a STEM
discipline. In addition to participating in research with an experienced mentor,
the students will engage in activities to ensure not only that their research
stays on track but that they have an engaging collegial and scholarly
experience. The skills of data handling and analysis, building and controlling
equipment and computation methods can be applied to their academic path and many
of their careers. A focus on scientific communication and collaboration will
also be emphasized which is an essential skill for any STEM student in all
aspects of their journey. By the end of the program, every student will present
the results of their work in a seminar talk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.