* 2150417
* REU Site: REU-PATHWAYS: Pathways for community college students to  enrich their education and careers
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Ibrahim Zeid, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 404,391.00

The three-year REU Site at Northeastern University will host 10 students each
year from community colleges to participate in research projects focusing on the
field of Smart Engineering with four subfields: AI/Machine Learning; Smart
infrastructures; Smart materials; and Smart health. The REU site is guided by
two of the grand challenges of the National Academy of Engineering: personalized
learning and scientific discovery. Specifically, this project trains students
about how to conduct cutting-edge research as well as how to communicate their
research findings to the broader community. The project focuses on recruiting
URM and students who are currently underrepresented in the STEM workforce. The
outcome will be a better-trained, diverse scientific workforce, which will help
deliver solutions that both benefit the society and maintain the competitive
edge of the United States in the global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the new three-year REU site at Northeastern University focuses on the field
of Smart Engineering with four subfields: AI/Machine Learning; Smart
infrastructures; Smart materials; and Smart health. The REU site is guided by
two of the grand challenges of the National Academy of Engineering: personalized
learning and scientific discovery. Community college (CC) students, graduate
students, and research faculty will engage in team-based research projects
focused on Smart Engineering. The REU site will provide a 10-week summer
research experience for 10 CC students each year. REU students will be paired
with faculty and graduate studentsâ€™ teams. In addition to gaining research
experience, they will also receive training on teamwork and communication best
practices through a suite of professional development opportunities. Field trips
to local industry will provide students first-hand exposure to the STEM
workforce in action. These efforts are expected to yield two major outcomes: (1)
a cohort of CC young researchers, many from underrepresented groups, who have
strong understanding of interdisciplinary team-based research, and (2)
publications showcasing the work of these students to the broader research
community, and communication best practices through a suite of professional
development opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.