* 2150352
* REU Site: Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer Research Program REU
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nathan Hammer, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2025
* USD 351,798.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Mississippi, located in Oxford,
MS, supports the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. Managed by principal investigators Nathan Hammer and Eden Tanner, the
site offers original research projects in experimental and theoretical physical
chemistry. These research projects foster communication and collaboration
between members of physical and computational chemistry groups, which increases
literacy in high performance computing and its applicability to chemistry. In
addition to participating in research, students develop a deeper knowledge in
physical chemistry through faculty-led lectures on topics like quantum
chemistry, molecular spectroscopy, and medicinal chemistry. Students engage in a
summer-long schedule of organized professional development and social activities
with University of Mississippi undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and
staff. These activities are expected to prepare students for chemistry careers
and help to build a network of peers and faculty. To broaden participation and
develop a diverse chemistry workforce, this site recruits students from
throughout the U.S., particularly those from underrepresented groups in
chemistry and from institutions with limited research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants will perform original
research in the laboratories of faculty members and using the Mississippi Center
for Supercomputing Research (MCSR). Centered around experimental and theoretical
physical chemistry, the research projects include synthetic design of light-
harvesting, photoemissive, and catalytic materials; characterizing the
photophysical properties of newly-developed materials; the spectroscopic study
and computational modeling of important biologically relevant interactions; and
the synthesis and computational modeling of newly-developed materials with
important energy or drug development and delivery applications. Senior personnel
mentor students in original research, present lectures on physical chemistry-
related topics, administer mini-courses, and organize social activities.
Students in the program gain practical experience in the physical sciences,
while also applying knowledge in chemistry to real world problems and co-
authoring scholarly publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.