* 2150094
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in the Mathematical Sciences and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* J Maurice Rojas, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 04/30/2025
* USD 257,887.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in the Mathematics Department at Texas A&amp;M
University will host a group of twelve talented undergraduates for research
training for eight weeks each summer. The REU faculty will specifically seek
talented students who have been isolated from research opportunities at their
home institution, from prior hardships, or lack of resources. Students will have
the opportunity to learn cutting-edge mathematical ideas from scratch and
contribute to solving challenging problems underlying many real-world problems
from biochemistry, engineering, and cryptography. Students will receive free
housing, reimbursement for travel, and a stipend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
program will have three research tracks per summer. These are chosen on a
rotating basis from five choices: (1) Algebraic Methods in Mathematical Biology,
(2) Algorithmic Algebraic Geometry, (3) Number Theory, (4) Probability and
Algebra, and (5) High-Dimensional Probability. The first track involves neural
codes and parameter identifiability. The second track includes topics such as
A-discriminants, tropical approximation of algebraic sets, and applications to
optimization. The third track investigates questions on Dedekind sums,
L-functions, modular forms, and class numbers. The fourth track involves random
interacting particle systems and Casimir elements. The new fifth track will
investigate objects of high complexity, for example, large matrices, tensors,
and graphs, using probabilistic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.