* 2150283
* REU Site: Broadening Access to Text Analytics for Social Scientists
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeffrey Stanton, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 437,796.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.
It has both scientific and societal benefits, and integrates research and
education. This summer residential experience provides mentorship, research
methods training, and data sets for groups of undergraduates from diverse
academic and social backgrounds and from a range of U.S colleges and
universities. The site educates students on computerized methods for analyzing
large data sets of text obtained from the internet and other sources. The site
provides opportunities for students to test their new skills on active research
projects. The site activities occur at Syracuse University's School of
Information Studies which has excelled for more than 25 years at providing
education for students interested in technology and its impacts on industry,
education, and other sectors. Learning activities for the students in this REU
site include research methods workshops, data ethics seminars, training on
several software applications, and professional development opportunities.
Students ask and answer impactful research questions using data sets provided by
their faculty mentors. Students present their own research results in the final
week. Every student is encouraged to submit their research to an appropriate
research conference after completion of the experience. Students from prior
summers continue their involvement through participation in a supportive online
community to obtain peer and mentor support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
achieve their learning goals in this REU site by affiliating themselves with
active research projects being conducted by Syracuse University faculty members
and their doctoral mentees. School of Information Studies faculty members
conduct research on human language technologies, computational social science,
social media, disinformation, human-centered computing, and a variety of related
topics. These research projects typically offer voluminous data sets that REU
students can explore as they develop their technical skills with programming
languages, data mining methods, statistics, linguistics, and deep learning. A
key goal of the REU site lies in encouraging students to sustain their research
interests in the context of their subsequent educational activities upon return
to their home institutions. The project contributes to the development of a
capable STEM workforce for the U.S., insofar as the ability to analyze natural
language text with computers has become a mission-critical skill in many
sectors. Some students may also progress to research careers where they develop
insights into internet-related social phenomena that impact many people’s lives.
Upon return to their home institutions, students can demonstrate the new methods
and tools they have learned and inspire others to try them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE
Program in partnership with the NSF REU Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.