* 2150125
* REU Site: Accelerator Physics and Synchrotron Radiation Science
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* James Alexander, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 442,630.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics at Cornell University. The site will support twelve undergraduate
students per year in research projects in accelerator physics and synchrotron
radiation science. The student participants have full access to the resources of
the Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education (CLASSE) and
the University, and will work closely with experienced researchers. Although the
research scope of this REU program is focused on understanding the fundamental
physics of beams and accelerators and the uses of the radiation they produce,
the techniques and technologies utilized are applicable to a much wider range of
scientific careers. In addition, each student is asked to participate in one of
the outreach programs at the Laboratory, teaching them to communicate the
scientific ideas with the public and exposing them to the outreach prospects at
their home institutions, through the Society of Physics Students (SPS) chapters
and other outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CLASSE has an international
reputation for research, with an array of programs including accelerator
physics, synchrotron radiation research, and microwave superconductivity. The
students will work on a range of projects that advance the Laboratory's
scientific mission, further their education and training, and heighten their
interest in pursuing careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Students will also attend lectures on broad
topics in the accelerator physics and X-ray sciences as well as take part in
special seminars and hands-on activities that introduce various frontiers of
physics research. Students will further attend events addressing social and
ethical issues in scientific research and conduct with the larger cohort of REU
groups at Cornell University. These joint activities will provide an environment
that fosters networking of the future scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.