* 2150379
* REU Site: Imaging and Molecular Approaches to Biological Problems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Vincent Hilser, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 407,491.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Johns
Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022- 2024. It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is conducted, how the results are dissemintated, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. This
program will provide a vital stepping stone to place disadvantaged students on
scientific career paths in both the academic and commercial sectors. Assessment
of the program will be facilitated through the online SALG URSSA tool, and
students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site program focuses on the use of
molecular and imaging techniques in obtaining important biological information.
These techniques include a wide range of fluorescence and light microscopies,
transmission electron microscopy, NMR spectroscopy, single molecule spectroscopy
and myriad techniques incorporating high-throughput sequencing. Faculty from the
Department of Biology, T.C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, the Krieger
Mind/Brain Institute and the Carnegie Institution Department of Embryology,
pursue answers to biological questions at the forefront of their fields.
Students are educated through direct involvement in laboratory experimentation
that utilizes one or more of the techniques, and learn other projects thru oral
and poster presentations by their fellow participants. Students also receive
instruction on lab safety training, notebook keeping, responsible conduct in
research, verbal and poster communication skills, and GRE preparation. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://bio.jhu.edu/undergraduate/undergraduate-research/jhu-bioreu/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr Vincent J Hilser at
hilser@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.