* 2150163
* REU Site: Resilience and Adaptation to Coastal Change Across Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Stephen Moysey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2025
* USD 389,062.00

This REU Site will contribute to developing an interdisciplinary, systems-level
understanding of the interplay between the environment and society in coastal
regions using a Team Science approach. The project will host REU students at
East Carolina University’s Coastal Studies Institute with additional remote
mentors from Clemson University and the University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo.
Research teams will investigate and document how human actions positively or
negatively influence coastal resilience in the face of extreme weather events,
sea level rise, and population growth. Undergraduate researchers will work with
faculty at these three institutions to address issues in coastal resilience,
which is a problem of societal urgency as these regions face critical challenges
to infrastructure, food and energy security, human health, and ecosystem
sustainability. The project includes important training elements in Team Science
that will prepare students to effectively address problems in interdisciplinary
work and graduate research settings, build their ability to communicate science
to the public, and take a systems perspective on solving societal challenges.
Targeted professional development activities, a diversity of participants, and
use of virtual collaboration tools to support Team Science with a range of
researchers from multiple fields and institutions will therefore also engage
students in working across disciplinary, geographic, and cultural boundaries.
These skills will prepare the students to participate in research when direct
contact between research team members is not possible, including situations such
as the current pandemic where isolation is due to health and safety concern and
not just geographic or cultural factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will
pursue research projects across a range of interdisciplinary areas that drive
the evolution of environmental and social systems. Systems science concepts will
integrate projects across the REU, enabling students to identify and understand
how dependencies between earth science and other disciplines impact society.
Team Science and virtualization of collaboration efforts will engage REU
participants in an intensive week-long training bootcamp at ECU’s Coastal
Studies Institute in the Outer Banks of North Carolina followed by nine weeks of
intensive research. Professional development activities will be structured to
enable the students to overcome geographic and cultural barriers to
collaboration, thereby providing them a unique skill set to pursue global change
research as an effective interdisciplinary team member. Examples of training
activities include enhancing the students’ knowledge base in global change, data
science, and resilience; use of technologies such as GIS, systems dynamics
models, and professional communication tools; and professional development in
the conduct and presentation of individual and team-based research. Students
will be recruited from universities across the Carolinas and Puerto Rico through
the Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and
partnerships with HBCUs and two year colleges to reach a wide population with
varying demographic backgrounds and limited access to research opportunities.
The project will conclude with a student Symposium with poster presentations and
student research videos developed using science communication strategies to
engage the public in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.