* 2150946
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Experimental Analysis of Competitive and Predator-Prey Models: Conditional Dispersal on Patches to Landscapes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jerome Goddard, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Long-term survival and coexistence of species in the face of habitat loss and
fragmentation is among the most critical concerns faced by ecologists today.
This project is an integration of mathematical modeling and experimental
analysis of an insect herbivore and predator system to explore the effects of
habitat fragmentation, interspecific competition, and predation on the
population dynamics and coexistence of species from the patch to the landscape
level. Results from this project aim to answer two key ecological questions: (1)
For competing species, what effect does the density of the same or different
species have on dispersal-reproduction and dispersal competition tradeoffs
arising from the evolution of dispersal in fragmented habitats? (2) How does the
presence of a shared predator affect the relationship between density and
emigration, tradeoffs involving dispersal? The project will also provide
significant contributions towards the analysis of mathematical models created to
study this behavior via development of new mathematical tools to better
understand model dynamics. Finally, results from this study are expected to be
applicable to conservation programs and reserve design. This project will
involve the training of graduate and undergraduate students through PI-hosted
workshops and mentorship of independent research projects. Moreover, an app that
estimates key dispersal parameters from field data will be created and made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project comprises
integrated reaction-diffusion modeling, mathematical analysis, and experimental
research to explore the effects of habitat fragmentation, conditional dispersal,
interspecific competition, and predation on the population dynamics and species
coexistence from the patch to the landscape level. The Investigators will use
diffusive Lotka-Volterra competition and predator-prey systems with nonlinear
boundary conditions modeling density dependent emigration (DDE) at the patch and
landscape levels. Experiments will be performed using two Tribolium flour beetle
species to examine how the DDE relationship and life-history tradeoffs are
affected by a shared predator (Xylocoris flavipes). This project is expected to
be novel and significant by providing (1) experimental evidence that
interspecific competitors and predators affect boundary behavior, the strength
and form of DDE, and important life-history tradeoffs linked to species
coexistence; (2) the first theoretical framework for the effects of conditional
dispersal on the population dynamics and coexistence of competing species and a
shared predator in fragmented landscapes; and (3) a significant contribution
toward the analysis of systems of elliptic boundary value problems with
nonlinear boundary conditions, as new mathematical tools will be developed to
better understand the models’ dynamics. Knowledge of species’ life histories,
coupled with predictions regarding how competitors and predators can alter the
magnitude and form of DDE and life history tradeoffs, can help determine whether
existing reserves are adequate for species long-term
coexistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.