* 2150045
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Building STEM identity to improve persistence, graduation and progression into STEM careers for diverse students
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Hsiu-Ping Liu, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 999,167.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Implementation and Evaluation project aims to
build the STEM identity of minority students and positively impact their
recruitment, persistence, graduation, and progression into STEM careers and/or
graduate programs. Despite significant public and private investment, minority
students are underrepresented in STEM fields. Research shows a positive, strong,
and resilient STEM identity can translate into greater success for minority
students. This project, Building Identity Leading to Diversity (BUILD), will
strive to bolster minority students' STEM identity through reframing student
mathematics experiences to reduce math anxiety, increasing participation in
research by creating equitable opportunities, and creating a welcoming and
inclusive community. BUILD plans to demonstrate that its comprehensive approach
to building STEM identity will lead to persistence, achievement and attainment
in STEM classes and degrees as well as improve the overall culture for
underrepresented minority STEM students at Metropolitan State University of
Denver (MSU Denver), resulting in a more diverse and prepared STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims of the BUILD project are to build STEM
identity translating to readiness for STEM studies in college, graduate programs
and STEM careers; increase the number of underrepresented minority students in
STEM majors and improve their graduation rate; increase the number of
underrepresented minority students in STEM careers; and build wide-ranging
community, campus, and industry partnerships to ensure the sustainability of
this effort. A primary BUILD research question: Do activities and comprehensive
student services developing STEM identity correlate to broader participation and
improve educational metrics in underrepresented minority students as they pursue
careers and graduate programs in STEM? A mixed methodology evaluation process
will be used to study how BUILD activities and resources contribute to
underrepresented minority students’ STEM identity. Lessons learned will be
applied to existing projects, specifically middle and high school pathway
programs offered through MSU Denver and shared with STEM faculty, advisors
within MSU Denver as well as other institutions, expanding BUILD’s impact.
Project results that contribute to the knowledge base about math anxiety, high
impact practices and STEM identity will be disseminated through publications,
conference presentations, BUILD website, social media and other digital
platforms. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.