* 2150444
* Implementation and Evaluation of Curricular Undergraduate Research Experiences in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeremy Sanford, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI) program, this Track 2 project focuses on improving the
success of underrepresented students in the life sciences. Underrepresented and
first-generation college students face many structural impediments in higher
education such as a lack of awareness on how to become involved in high impact
practices like undergraduate research experiences and internships. Undergraduate
research has been shown to be a major contributor to student academic success,
helping to shape students' sense of belonging in STEM. A major goal of this
project is to increase the number of course-based undergraduate research (CURE)
laboratories so that more students, including those from underrepresented groups
have access to this transformative pedagogical intervention. Students who
complete CURE labs will be invited to meet with industry representatives to
explore potential internship opportunities. This project aims to determine how
experiential learning through CUREs influences student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand CUREs as an approach to
provide research opportunities for students interested in molecular, cellular,
and developmental biology. The plan has two components. First, the department
will establish four new faculty-led CURE labs that will engage up to 100
undergraduates. By bridging research and education, this program will create
opportunities for students to work with faculty on authentic research projects
in cutting edge fields in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology.
Through embedding research into the curriculum, the project will empower
students from groups underrepresented in STEM to become members of the research
community. The second part of this project will focus on developing partnerships
with biotechnology companies in Silicon Valley to provide student internships.
These partnerships will increase the college’s capacity for providing research
experiences for undergraduates as well as providing students with important
networking opportunities for post-graduation careers. The project will assess
student learning in the CURES by examining a student’s understanding of
experimental design and their self-reported gains in scientific skills. Finally,
the project will examine the impact CUREs have on student achievement by
comparing the retention and graduation rates of students enrolled in the CURES
to those of students who do not enroll in a CURE. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.