* 2150337
* REU Site:  A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* James Hilt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2025
* USD 404,997.00

The three-year REU Site: A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Engineered
Bioactive Interfaces and Devices at the University of Kentucky will provide
research and education experience for rising sophomore, junior and senior
undergraduates in the area of Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices. This
area focuses on the novel design of architectures that interact with biological
systems and promote a desired response. These advanced architectures have
numerous applications including tissue engineering, sensing systems, and drug
delivery. Students will be recruited from various undergraduate disciplines
including engineering, biology, chemistry, physics and mathematics from numerous
regional colleges and universities that have no graduate programs in these
disciplines. Special efforts will be made to recruit at minority institutions
and national meetings of minority and women organizations such as the Society of
Women Engineers and the National Society of Black Engineers. Students will work
closely with faculty and graduate students. Specific objectives include 1)
providing the students with true interdisciplinary mentoring and research
training through their participation in a research project related to Engineered
Bioactive Interfaces and Devices 2) stimulating the students’ interests in Ph.D.
careers in science and engineering through seminars, field trips, and
interactions with both graduate students and faculty, and 3) developing the
students’ independence and confidence through participation in research, journal
clubs, in house presentations and scientific meetings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The three-year REU Site: A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in
Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices at the University of Kentucky will
provide research and education experience for rising sophomore, junior and
senior undergraduates in the area of Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and
Devices. The need for this cross-disciplinary interaction between investigators
working on biological systems and those creating novel engineered synthetic
architectures has long been recognized and emphasized as an important area of
research. These advanced architectures have numerous applications ranging from
tissue engineering, to sensing systems, to drug delivery and successful
development of these systems will depend on expertise not only in developing
novel synthetic architectures through nanotechnology, self-assembly and hybrid
systems but also on the interactions of these interfaces with biological systems
such as cells and proteins. This program introduces students to this exciting
multidisciplinary area where they will have the opportunity to learn about three
cross-disciplinary research themes that form the foundation of the research 1)
“Novel Bioactive Architectures”, 2) “Cell/Protein Interactions at Interfaces”,
and 3) “Integration into Devices”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.