* 2150726
* SaTC: CORE: Small: New Approaches for Fuzzy Private Set Intersection
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Michael Rosulek, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

In private set intersection (PSI), two parties each have a set of items and wish
to learn which items they have in common, without revealing anything else about
their sets. Current techniques for PSI are practical and scalable, but they
require exact matches between the parties' items. This project introduces new
techniques for "fuzzy PSI", where the parties learn which of their items are
"close" according to some distance metric and threshold distance. Fuzzy PSI
enables new privacy-enhancing applications on noisy real-world data
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop practical fuzzy PSI
protocols using two new approaches. The first involves novel connections to
function secret sharing (FSS). Different distance metrics will be supported by
developing new FSS constructions in the relevant geometry. Other newly
identified properties of FSS schemes relate to performance and security
properties of the fuzzy PSI protocol. The second fuzzy PSI approach involves
locality sensitive hashing and a method of embedding protocol messages into
polynomials. Taken together, the new techniques should significantly expand the
kinds of privacy-enhancing analytics that can be done on noisy data, like
biometric or geographical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.