* 2150944
* Building Capacity to Develop Elementary STEM Teacher Leaders in New Jersey
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Lauren Madden, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 73,540.00

The project aims to serve the national need to develop highly qualified
elementary STEM teacher leaders within high-need schools. The project will
address the need to prepare elementary teachers to effectively teach in
alignment with new climate change education standards adopted by the State of
New Jersey. To address this need, the project will partner with teachers from
local high-need elementary schools to gather information about their STEM
knowledge related to climate change and their interests in future professional
development workshops and graduate program opportunities in this area. Based on
these interactions and gathered evidence, The College of New Jersey will modify
its STEM education graduate courses and Environmental Sustainability Education
certificate program to serve future elementary STEM teacher leaders. The project
could contribute to developing elementary STEM teacher leaders in the region,
preparing them to support implementation of the new climate change standards and
to promote high-quality STEM education for students more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at The College of New Jersey
includes a partnership with the Hunterdon, Somerset, and Mercer County STEM
Ecosystem (HSMC STEM Ecosystem), a partnership between schools, communities,
businesses, and nonprofits dedicated to providing equitable access to STEM. The
goal of the proposed project is to spend one year building capacity for a
program to develop K-8 Master level teachersâ€™ expertise in implementing STEM
curriculum, with a specific focus on climate change. The project will build
relationships with elementary STEM stakeholders from partner schools through
introductory workshops and meetings exploring the new state K-12 climate change
education standards. Additionally, the project will collect input from these
stakeholders through surveys, site visits, and workshops. Evidence gathered will
guide the revision of an existing 4-course graduate certificate program in
Environmental Sustainability Education to address the new state standards for
climate change content and to align with emerging elementary STEM teacher needs.
Two leaders of a current Noyce Capacity Building effort in another state, also
focused on elementary STEM teacher professional development, will serve as
critical friends and mentors, providing feedback to the project. Additionally,
an advisory board, which includes a STEM faculty member, an education faculty
member, and a local elementary STEM teacher leader, will evaluate evidence
gathered and progress towards project outcomes. The outcomes of this Noyce
Capacity Building effort could produce a model for developing highly qualified
elementary STEM teacher leaders generally, as well as elementary teacher leaders
in climate change education more specifically. The involvement of stakeholders
from local high-need elementary schools suggests that the resulting professional
development and certificate program designs would effectively serve teachers in
these contexts. The grounding of all efforts in the recently adopted New Jersey
K-12 State climate education standards is likely to produce insights that could
be a model for other campuses and teacher education programs across the state
and beyond. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.