* 2150951
* SBIR Phase I:  A Natural Product Drug Discovery Platform Based on High-Throughput Elicitor Screening (HiTES)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Maryam Elfeki, CRYPTYX BIOSCIENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a novel, small-
molecule drug discovery platform that triggers the production of cryptic
microbial metabolites for use as new pharmaceuticals with the potential to
target a range of diseases. This technology will address pain points associated
with the development of new drugs, such as long timelines and high costs. By
using a proprietary process and established collection of elicitor molecules,
microorganisms can be compelled to generate natural products that offer
biological activities that may be impossible with synthetic molecules. The
proposed technology is the only screening platform that is free of genetics and
cloning, focusing on bioactivity first, and enabling rapid and efficient
biomolecule discovery. Initially the platform will be used to target the
antibiotic/antiviral market, with future applications for anti-tumor and
immunosuppressant drugs. This project has the potential to improve the health of
the American public by providing a steady stream of novel drug candidates to
address a range of unmet medical needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a novel,
small-molecule drug discovery platform based on High-Throughput Elicitor
Screening (HiTES), a rapid, simple method for triggering production of microbial
cryptic metabolites and interrogating their activities without the need for
genome sequencing, cloning, or genetics. There is a large untapped store of
natural products in the form of ‘cryptic’ biosynthetic gene clusters encoded in
microbial genomes that are not expressed under laboratory conditions. The
technical objectives are to increase output/throughput of the platform, assess
and optimize chemical diversity, and expand the platform to new antibiotic-
resistant pathogens of public health concern. Silent genes across multiple
bacterial species will be activated to generate cryptic metabolites with the
goal of producing 5,000 induced metabolomes, which will be characterized using
mass spectrometry. A workflow will be created that integrates bioactivity assays
against multiple pathogens with HiTES screening. Finally, in-house software will
be updated to include prioritization in terms of novel chemistry, desired
bioactivity, and lack of cytotoxicity. Successful Phase I completion will
demonstrate the ability to implement and use HiTES multiplexed with bioactivity
studies and software to identify chemically-novel and unique compounds with
promising bioactivities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.