* 2150871
* Singlet O2 from van der Waals Complexes and the Competition Between Product Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Bradley Parsons, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 268,839.00

This project, jointly funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) program in the Chemistry Division and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), provides support for
Professor Bradley Parsons and his research group at Creighton University to
investigate the production of excited oxygen species from molecular clusters
that are irradiated with light. The research team creates isolated clusters
consisting of an oxygen molecule and an organic or biologically relevant
molecule. Exciting the clusters using visible or ultraviolet laser light
produces oxygen species that are detected using mass spectrometry and a
technique called velocity map imaging (VMI) in order to measure the energy
released during the reaction. By analyzing the experimental data, the team seeks
to understand how the organic molecule influences the ratio of different oxygen
species formed from the irradiated complexes, with a particular emphasis on
clusters leading to highly reactive oxygen molecules formed in the lowest
excited state, called singlet oxygen. Singlet oxygen is a potent oxidizing
species that has applications in the treatment of cancer using photodynamic
therapy (PDT) and in the disinfection of water. The broader impacts of the work
include potential implications for these applications based on new developments
made possible through a better understanding of singlet oxygen production using
visible light. Additionally, the project prepares undergraduate research
students for careers in science by giving them hands-on training in advanced
research methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Parsons research team will use
supersonic expansion to form weakly bound complexes between molecular oxygen and
high molecular-weight organic chromophores. The resulting supramolecular
complexes will be excited with light ranging between 213 and 680 nm in order to
probe the wavelength-dependent photochemical decomposition mechanism. Depending
on the energy of the triplet state in the chromophore and the excitation energy,
the photoexcited complex may dissociate directly to form singlet oxygen
molecules, singlet O2, or through competing product channels that result in the
formation of either triplet oxygen atoms, O(3P), or singlet O2 due to an avoided
crossing between two excited states. The team will probe either the singlet O2
or O(3P) products using resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI)
coupled with mass spectrometry and velocity map ion imaging (VMI). The
combination of REMPI spectroscopy and VMI identifies the internal state of the
oxygen product. By analyzing changes in branching between product channels due
to the chromophore triplet-state energy and the excitation energy, the team will
examine the singlet O2 formation mechanism and the role played by a hypothesized
avoided crossing. The scientific broader impact of the work is expected to
include a better understanding of fundamental reaction dynamics, as well as
implications for understanding the mechanisms responsible for the production of
singlet oxygen using visible light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.