* 2150934
* Conference: 2022 Thalamocortical Interactions: Thalamic Architecture, Dynamics, and Function in Health and Disease GRC and GRS
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Frances Cho, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,750.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2022 Gordon Research Conference and Research
seminar on Thalamocortical Interactions. This five-day meeting is the premier
meeting that brings together researchers to present results and enagage in
discussions on the cell and circuit properties of thalamocortical interactions,
and build on these to explore their roles in cognition and behavior. This
conference represents a rare opportunity for neuroscientists interested in
thalamocortical interactions to exchange new results, hypotheses, and ideas at
many levels, from cellular through systems to cognitive and clinical. This is
especially timely because this field has been expanding significantly with the
recent appreciation that the thalamus plays an ongoing and critical role in
cortical functioning. With respect to broader impacts, this meeting will benefit
the larger community in multiple ways. First, it will help train and inspire the
next generation of scientists by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to
exciting science and scientists. Second, special emphasis will be given to
junior faculty. Finally, a concerted effort will be made to recruit scientists
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes interactions between
participants, and the assembly of many top scientists whose research spans
thalamocortical interactions across multiple sensory modalities, emphasizing the
commonalities. This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses, raises
new questions about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new collaborations.
By maximizing both formal discussion and informal interactions, the Gordon
Conference will highlight exciting new developments that have implications both
for a basic understanding of the emergent properties of neural circuits as well
as pathologies that involve thalamocortical
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.