* 2150248
* REU Site: Security of Smart Things
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 351,973.00

This REU Site will host a diverse group of students from universities across the
nation who will spend their summer working on research related to the security
and privacy of smart things. Such devices include smart thermostats, voice-
activated speakers, smart cameras, smart locks, watches and plugs, and so on.
Indeed, the pandemic conditions with COVID-19 have just fueled the use of these
devices due to increased work-from-home settings. For instance, an average
American home now has 25 smart devices in addition to phones, laptops, PCs, etc.
Similarly, smart devices have also increased in work and social environments to
be used from parking, exercising to making touchless digital payments even with
cryptocurrencies. Since these devices communicate and process a lot of data,
they are vulnerable to various cyber attacks such as malware, unauthorized
access, impersonation, data modification, and denial-of-service. Another
potential threat involves the privacy violation of users who may provide their
personal data via their smart devices. Examples include location tracking,
activity monitoring, and leakage of sensitive information. This REU Site will
offer practical mitigation approaches to the security and privacy challenges
stemming from the use of smart devices within our homes and work environments
while contributing to the development of a diverse, technologically-skilled, and
cyber-savvy workforce, who can help protect our smart devices, homes, and
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will introduce practical
innovations and mechanisms for maintaining the security, availability, and
privacy of 1) smart devices such as phones, appliances, and wearable devices,
and 2) smart homes and buildings that increasingly deploy these devices. The
proposed projects will help in reaping the full benefits of secure technologies
through capturing the interactions and associated data between the smart devices
and environments. The intellectual merit includes designing defense mechanisms
against intrusions customized for these devices; blockchain and cryptocurrency
support to enable touchless digital payments; applying various resource-aware
machine learning and data analytics techniques for security; and utilizing
hardware-based techniques for firmware updates. These approaches will contribute
to overall safety of the users as well as the larger networks such as home or
ISP networks that interact with these devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.