* 2150926
* Gaining Retention and Effectiveness though Advancing Teacher-Centered STEM Professional Learning for STEM Elementary Teachers in Rural Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* James Beeler, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 632,696.00

The Gaining Retention and Effectiveness though Advancing Teacher-Centered STEM
Professional Learning for STEM Elementary Teachers in Rural Communities project
aims to serve the national need of improving retention and effectiveness of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts by providing teachers with a
professional learning (PL) program that includes four main components: (a)
teacher-identified PL needs and goals, (b) competency-based, online micro-
credentials, (c) micro-credential coaching support, and (d) teacher compensation
and recognition for their achievements. There is a need to provide K-12 STEM
teachers with PL that can improve instruction and retain them in classrooms.
This project addresses this need by providing STEM teachers the autonomy to
decide which pedagogical skills to focus and the flexibility to determine when
and where to complete the PL. The personalization in PL, coupled with coaching
support, recognizes teachers as professionals, capable of directing their
professional growth. The autonomy, flexibility, and recognition afforded by this
intervention aims to support teachers in a way that could have positive outcomes
for teachers and the students that they serve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce
Track 4 project at Appalachian State University (Appalachian) in partnership
with North Carolina State University (NCSU) and Ashe County Schools in North
Carolina is positioned to research and test a new model to promote the retention
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts by
providing teachers a professional PL program. The four main components of this
PL include: (a) teacher-identified needs assessments and learning contracts, (b)
competency-based, online micro-credentials, (c) micro-credential coaching
support for teachers, and (d) teacher compensation and recognition for their
achievements. Key to this professional learning initiative is the autonomy for
teachers to personalize professional learning coupled with coaching support and
other diversity, equity, and inclusion practices. Phase I focuses on the
selection of STEM-focused micro-credentials to create a repository of
professional learning experiences. Phase II tests the impacts of a professional
learning model that uses STEM micro-credentials on teacher retention and
effectiveness. This unique model of professional learning shifts the currency by
which teachers maintain their teaching license credentials from a time-based to
a competency-based model. This project has the potential to support teachers’
priorities, goals, and interests in STEM and enhance teachers’ competencies
through professional growth. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.