* 2150814
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Classic Genetic and Social Kinship Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Douglas Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 34,779.00

Family and familial relations form the underlying basis of social interaction in
all human societies around the world. Anthropological reconstructions of
contemporary kinship systems have revealed how insightful the study of families
are to understanding broader socio-political relationships. Yet to date, there
is very little understanding of past kinship practices. Ancient historical texts
to focus on elite social members. While these sources clearly show that royal
marriages were vitally important political unions, it is necessary to move below
the tip of the iceberg and begin to understand kinship at a societal scale to
truly understand political relationships and interaction at a broader level.
Recent advances in archaeological genetics offer enormous potential to
understand such relationships in the ancient world. This project focuses on
reconstructing the entirety of social kinship practices at a broad social scale.
The project will provide a nuanced understanding of how a kinship system
operated at different levels of social and political hierarchy, and it will open
the door to societal-scale reconstructions of kinship practices in the past.
This project provides training for a postdoctoral researcher in analytical
techniques that bridge the social and natural sciences, as well as collaborative
training opportunities for early career researchers. The project has flagship
outreach and engagement components that will build international bridges between
students and researchers, and directly involve stakeholders and descendant
communities. Dissemination of results will be achieved through a multiplicity of
scientific and popular publications, as well as interactive
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines: (1) how marriage
alliances were employed by different members of a hierarchical social hierarchy;
(2) how marriage patterns varied between polities; and (3) how marriage patterns
changed over time, through a societyâ€™s rise to its decline and political
collapse. These questions will be approached by systematically analyzing
extensive archaeological data collected over the past 30 years, in combination
with new radiocarbon dating and archaeogenetics analysis. Genome-wide ancient
DNA analysis will be used to reconstruct the genetic history of 21 elite and
commoner households in order to provide a societal scale understanding of
kinship practices and marriage alliances at three different sites during periods
of centralization and decline in political power and authority. The framework
developed in this study will serve as a model that can be employed in multiple
regions of the world to better understand the emergence and perpetuation of
systems of power and inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.