* 2150083
* REU Site:  Molecules Meet Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* James Hoefelmeyer, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2025
* USD 349,990.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Molecules Meet Materials (M3)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University of
South Dakota, located in Vermillion, SD, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. In this program,
participants pursue collaborative research projects, with a focus on chemistry
at interfaces. The site will train students to use spectroscopy, electron
microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and computational methods to study materials and
molecules at interfaces. All students will also take part in a professional
development and ethics training program, with a focus on science communication
and preparation for graduate school or industrial careers. Through independent
research projects and workshop and seminar series, this site aims to broaden
participation in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), with a
focus on recruiting and supporting students from Tribal Colleges and Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with
their peers and faculty mentors, the undergraduate students will undertake
individual projects, including themes related to the use of core-shell plasmonic
nanoparticles for applications in anti-counterfeiting, metal-organic
supercontainers for biomass conversion, computational methods to improve f-block
element separations, organic semiconductor materials from perfluoroalkylated
aromatic molecules, nanoparticles with tailored surfaces for specific cellular
surface targets such as plant cells, cancer cells, or bacterial cells in
biofilms. Research projects such as these will be coupled with training on a
variety of characterization methods relevant to interfacial chemistry and with
workshops focused on skill and career development. This site will emphasize the
recruitment of underserved students from Tribal Colleges and PUIs; combined,
these efforts aim to broaden participation in STEM and to diversify the future
chemical sciences workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.