* 2150123
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: ERADICATOR: Techniques for Laser Assisted Side-Channel Attack Monitor &amp; Response
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Shahin Tajik, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2025
* USD 263,484.00

The security of modern electronic systems relies on secret keys and assets
stored on secure integrated circuits (ICs). Extracting such information using
side-channel attacks would break the security of the entire system. One class of
side-channel attacks relies on known laser techniques from the field of IC
failure analysis, which makes the contactless probing of on-chip data possible.
These optical probing attacks are so powerful in extracting secrets from
computer chips that conventional countermeasures are ineffective against them.
It has been demonstrated that these attacks can be accomplished in a matter of
days (from initial analysis of IC activity to full data extraction), even with
limited knowledge of the chip under attack. This leaves some of our most
critical commercial, industrial, and defense systems vulnerable to intellectual
property piracy and sensitive data breaches. Hence, the threats of laser-
assisted side-channel attacks warrant an effective response to protect assets
stored in ICs. Unfortunately, few countermeasures have been proposed in the
academic literature, and none are available commercially. Those that do exist
are not only expensive but are incompatible with current IC manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates ERADICATOR, a multi-
layer suite of sensors, randomization, and tamper response mechanisms, to avert
laser-assisted side-channel attacks. The project's novelties are that ERADICATOR
not only revisits traditional design philosophies to build comprehensive and
unbreakable protection mechanisms but also draws upon solutions from multiple
disciplines, such as physics, IC design, and cryptography. All layers of the
countermeasures will be suitable for application-specific integrated circuits
(ASICs), but some will also apply to field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs).
Moreover, this project explores the feasibility of having an open-source
simulator for laser-assisted side-channel attacks that all researchers and
practitioners can use to assess the security of their designs in the pre-silicon
phase, and hence, choose the proper countermeasures. The project's broader
significance and importance are the systematization of knowledge and exploration
of novel laser attack countermeasures for electronic systems used in various
applications, such as critical infrastructure, autonomous vehicles, aerospace,
and defense equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.