* 2150262
* REU Site: Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Cryospheric Sciences at the University of Colorado Boulder
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julie Lundquist, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,512.00

"REU Site: Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Cryospheric Sciences at the University of
Colorado Boulder" aims to provide a diverse group of undergraduate students an
authentic, engaging learning, and research training experience and professional
growth opportunities in the broad areas of atmospheric, oceanic, and cryospheric
science. The program will target recruiting women, underrepresented minorities,
and first-generation college students building on existing relationships with
minority-serving institutions. The REU program supports intellectual merit in
that a diverse group of undergraduate students will be prepared to embark on
their careers as future leading researchers, scientists, and ambassadors for
atmospheric, oceanic, and cryospheric sciences. They will work one-on-one with
faculty members in the Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences who are
leaders in their fields and will benefit from a network of mentors. A
professional program evaluator will collect data to quantify the effects of
engaging underrepresented students in research experiences and subsequent
pursuit of STEM careers. From a broader impact perspective, the educational
outcome is a diverse group of talented U.S. students motivated and prepared to
use the research and communication skills developed in this REU program to
address important challenges in atmospheric, oceanic, and cryospheric sciences.
Beyond the REU students, this program will advance the mentoring skills of
early-career researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder who are likely to
move into leadership positions at other universities and national laboratories.
Therefore, this REU site will (i) contribute to sustaining the U.S. STEM
workforce's competitiveness and diversity, (ii) enhance STEM education
infrastructure at the University of Colorado Boulder, and (iii) train early
career researchers (graduate student and postdoctoral mentors) in effectively
supporting a diverse group of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
REU site will utilize recruitment materials in Spanish and English. The research
projects represent some of the most pressing scientific topics within
atmospheric, oceanic and cryospheric science, such as renewable energy, rapid
ice loss events, ocean surface temperature variability impacts on biological
processes, water clarity off the Alaska coast, role of asteroid impact emissions
on the climate system, interaction between ice sheets and the jet stream, and
understanding how the retreat of sea ice affects the upper ocean. The REU site
will support twelve undergraduate students for ten-week summer research
consisting of: (i) a two-week python boot camp to provide and enhance student
skills in data analytics, (ii) the formation of research cohorts to enhance
student professional networks, (iii) weekly seminars for professional
development, (iv) research communication/dissemination in a poster session and
(v) the opportunity to present their research results at a professional
conference. The goals of the REU site are 1) to support students
underrepresented in the atmospheric, oceanic and cryospheric sciences to develop
a toolkit for success in a STEM program and beyond, 2) inspire and support
student participants to choose a graduate school program or a professional
career in a STEM field, and 3) engage faculty from the Atmospheric and Oceanic
Science Department in REU mentoring and provide training to faculty around
inclusive mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.