* 2150060
* REU Site: Molecular Basis of Cellular Phenotypes (MBCP) at The Wistar Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* David Zuzga, Wistar Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2026
* USD 137,018.00

This REU Site award to Wistar Institute located in Philadelphia, PA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The program
will provide students with research experience, mentorship, and professional
support to help them embark on successful graduate careers in the life sciences
and will support a diverse pipeline of future life scientists. Assessment of the
program will be done through an online system. Students will be tracked after
the program to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Molecular
Basis of Cellular Phenotypes REU Program is organized around one of the NSF’s 10
Big Ideas, “Understanding the Rules of Life,” and is aligned with its aim to
elucidate the sets of rules that predict an organism's observable
characteristics, its phenotype. Projects explore molecular function to
understand cell behavior. Faculty mentors from each of Wistar’s research
programs: Gene Expression &amp; Regulation; Immunology, Microenvironment &amp;
Metastasis; Molecular &amp; Cellular Oncogenesis; and Vaccine &amp;
Immunotherapy will offer exciting projects for undergraduates. The program
consists of a 2-week lab orientation designed to increase student confidence and
productivity, followed by an 8-week internship. During orientation, students
participate in hands-on training in molecular and cellular biology techniques
and investigate how genetic variation in the human TP53 gene affect cellular
outcomes (for example, apoptosis). Based on their scientific interests, students
are then assigned an internship project and a predoctoral trainee to serve as a
peer mentor to enhance their sense of belonging within Wistar’s research
community. Professional and personal growth is supported by cohort-building
activities and weekly group workshops with topics covering science
communication, responsible conduct of research training, and graduate school
application. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://wistar.org/education-training or by contacting the PI (Dr. David Zuzga
at dzuzga@wistar.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Kristy Shuda McGuire at
kshudamcguire@wistar.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.