* 2150716
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding how visual features of misinformation influence credibility perceptions
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Cuihua Shen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 285,000.00

Today’s misinformation posts have increasingly been presented in visual formats,
such as images, memes, and videos. Compared to text, visuals are processed
faster, remembered better, and are more likely to be shared on social media. As
technology makes image and video manipulation accessible to the masses, visual
misinformation can be a significant threat to national security, social
cohesion, and public health. Yet we need to know more about how specific visual
features, such as color and face presence, may influence how people evaluate the
credibility of such visual posts. This project offers a comprehensive
understanding of how different visual elements may influence users’ perceived
credibility of images and videos. The results help platforms and fact-checking
agencies to detect visual misinformation, curb its diffusion, identify
vulnerable user groups, and develop corrective
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing broadly from literature in computer
science, advertising, marketing, cognitive science, and communication, and using
computer vision analysis, qualitative interviews, large-scale human annotation,
and experiments, this research project aims to: 1) identify the specific visual
features and mechanisms which may influence people’s credibility perceptions, 2)
examine how these visual features interact with non-visual features (source,
virality, etc) and user characteristics (partisanship, digital media literacy,
etc), and 3) examine how these visual features can be effectively leveraged in
misinformation correction efforts. The research team is compiling a large-scale
open dataset of visual posts with human annotations. While existing
misinformation datasets have largely focused on the veracity of messages, this
dataset provides credibility perceptions along with other relevant outcomes such
as attention, emotional reactions and aesthetic appeal. In addition, the
research team is creating a website with accessible information to educate the
general public about misinformation presented in images and videos, so that the
public can be aware of their vulnerabilities and be more vigilant towards
certain types of visual information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.