* 2150158
* Nanofabricated Model Systems for Investigations of Plasmon Enhanced Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Brian Willis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 422,630.00

Energy efficiency, sustainability, and climate change are critical issues for
our society to ensure prosperity and welfare through economic growth that does
not harm the environment. There is growing interest to use solar energy for
sustainable chemical manufacturing processes to replace the use of fossil fuels
that currently contribute to carbon dioxide emissions and climate change. New
catalysts, energy and feedstock sources, and chemical processing engineering
strategies are necessary to meet these objectives. For example, fundamental
scientific research is required to develop new materials that can capture and
convert sunlight into fuels and useful chemical products. This research project
addresses this challenge through a systematic study of nanostructured materials
that efficiently capture light by a quantum-mechanical phenomenon known as
plasmon resonances, wherein the light falling on the nanostructures causes some
of the electrons to oscillate in unison. The intense electrical field generated
in this manner then can be used to break the strong chemical bonds of carbon
dioxide, nitrogen, and water vapor to initiate the chain of chemical reactions
required to convert these common atmospheric species into valuable chemical
products in a completely decarbonized manner. Little is known, however, about
the interplay between these plasmonic resonances and the chemical reactions as
well as the roles nanodevice materials and geometry play in maximizing the
efficiency of these systems – this is the knowledge gap to be addressed by this
research project, one that will train undergraduate and graduate-level
engineering students in developing the engineering technology needed to create
solar-powered chemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimental research
program is proposed to investigate plasmon-enhanced photochemistry using a
unique surface chemistry approach combined with nanofabrication. Surface plasmon
resonances concentrate electromagnetic energy at the nanoscale and have numerous
potential applications in solar energy, photocatalysis, and nanoscale sensing.
Plasmons are collective charge oscillations of the electron gas that are
stimulated by light, and modes can be made resonant at specific frequencies by
the choice of materials and nanostructure design. Localized surface plasmon
resonances greatly enhance the interaction of light with matter and lead to
intense electric fields, generation of hot carriers, and localized heating, all
of which can be useful for driving chemical reactions. Non-thermal contributions
to reactive processes via hot carriers and enhanced electric fields are
especially of interest since they may lead to reactivity at lower temperatures
and offer a means of controlling reaction selectivity towards desired chemical
product distributions. In this project, model chemical reactions will
investigated using nanofabricated structures with tunable resonances and
engineered hot spots to learn how to design efficient plasmonic photocatalysts.
The intellectual merits of this project are to design experiments that combine
features of nanofabrication and surface science to measure reaction rates under
well-defined conditions, including integrated optical and temperature
measurements. Project goals include measurement of non-thermal contributions to
rates of reaction for different nanostructure designs and materials to improve
the understanding of hot carrier chemistry. The overall hypothesis to be
evaluated by the proposed work is that hot carrier chemistry can be made more
efficient by engineering nanostructures with electromagnetic “hot spots” to
increase rates of hot carrier generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.