* 2150385
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Chemistry for Community College Students at Old Dominion University
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Pinky McCoy, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2024
* USD 383,637.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Sites award to Old
Dominion University, located in Norfolk, VA, will support ten students for ten
weeks of research training and professional development over the summers of
2022-2024. This site focuses on providing opportunities for community college
students to explore real-world projects in the chemical sciences. Community
college students are recognized as an untapped resource for a diverse STEM
workforce. Participation is open to students from two-year institutions across
the nation and through a close collaboration with Tidewater Community College
and Thomas Nelson Community College, local institutions with high populations of
underrepresented minority students and veterans. Access to early research
opportunities, career training, and one-on-one mentoring will facilitate
successful transfer to four-year programs, enhance retention of these student
groups in STEM careers, and introduce the potential for graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students will gain hands-on experience in
the laboratory under the close mentorship of more experienced researchers and
participate as a cohort in professional development activities to include field
trips, panel discussions and workshops. These are designed to equip participants
with the tools for success in a chemistry/STEM career. Research topics include
computational modeling, organic synthesis, and applied spectroscopy, with themes
ranging from natural products to sustainable fuels to materials development for
biomedical applications. Professional development programming will include
seminars or workshops on transferring to a 4-year STEM major; career pathways in
the chemical sciences; life experiences of career chemists through panel
discussions and field trips; networking and job searching; and responsible
conduct of research. Participants will present their research projects at on-
site and regional meetings and co-author peer-reviewed articles where
appropriate. Faculty and the leadership team will provide mentoring and
individualized career advice to establish a support network that continues after
the summer research experience has concluded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.