* 2150400
* HSI Pilot Project: Building Bridges into Math and STEM at San Diego State University-Imperial Valley
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Huan Qin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,998.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this pilot project aims to build math capacity at
San Diego State University-Imperial Valley (SDSU-IV) and enhance undergraduate
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education by developing
and analyzing a Summer Bridge Math Experience (SBME) to newly admitted students
who have math/statistics course requirements. The format of the SBME will be a
four-day summer bridge program with two major components: 1) math workshops and
2) campus-life orientation/career introductory field trips. The mission of the
program is to assist students with their math preparation and adjustment of both
academic and student life at SDSU-IV through workshops, activities, resources,
and various experiences which prepare them for their successful academic and
social transition to the University. Assessments will be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the program in increasing students’ math confidence level and
for program improvement. Enrollment information and future course success will
be used to evaluate program impact. The SBME at SDSU-IV will 1) bridge the
community STEM workforce shortfalls and equity gaps, 2) maximize students' STEM
and mathematics confidence, and 3) align STEM program outcomes with workforce
needs. In addition, it will benefit society by improving the STEM education
quality for underrepresented groups, at SDSU-IV directly, and bridge the gap
between their desire for more diversified career choices and local community
needs at Imperial Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this project
are to 1) provide an effective math learning experience, 2) facilitate a smooth
first-year transition to the university environment, 3) connect newly admitted
students to the SDSU-IV community by helping them build their support network
(e.g. academic and student support services) to ultimately increase retention
and college completion, 4) spark general STEM interest, and 5) attract minority
students to enroll into the new B.A. in Mathematics. In addition, the program
will help students: assume responsibility for their learning both in and out of
the classroom; acquire academic, personal, and social skills essential to
success in college and beyond; develop effective communication skills; establish
a supportive cohort with fellow students; and gain campus knowledge to readily
identify faculty, staff, and campus resources. Through targeted recruitment
activities, the program will seek to increase STEM enrollments of
underrepresented populations including women and students of color. Results from
the project will inform activities at the University, but also improve STEM
recruitment and retention activities across similar institutions that are rural
HSIs and attend to economically disadvantaged, and geographically marginalized
populations, particularly the US-Mexico border states. This HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.