* 2150197
* REU Site: Ecology in Human-Dominated Landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* David Berg, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 472,257.00

This REU Site award to Miami University, located in Oxford, OH, will support the
training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022- 2024. It is
anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research in ecology, evolution, and
environmental science is conducted in landscapes altered by human activity, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences and
publish results in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Students will be equipped
to generate creative and integrative approaches toward understanding global
environmental issues, while also engaging in service that enhances environmental
quality in their local communities. Assessment of the program will be done
through the use of online surveys. Students, a significant proportion of whom
will pursue graduate training in ecology and environmental science or will enter
the environmental science workforce, will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will create
collaborative clusters of student-mentor pairs addressing environmentally
relevant research questions related to Urban-to-Rural Gradients, Population
Connectivity, and Ecosystem Services. Students will be empowered to conduct
their own research projects, to integrate their research with the work of
others, and to consider the larger implications of human domination of
landscapes and the role of science in solving environmental problems. Enrichment
activities will focus on professional development; environmental ethics and
responsible conduct of research; service to the community, and interactions with
diverse scientists from other institutions. Student applications are accepted
from December-March and a diverse cohort of participants will be selected based
on their academic record and interests in ecology, evolution, and environmental
science process. Example research projects can be viewed at the program website.
More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.miamioh.edu/ecoreu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. David J. Berg at
bergdj@miamioh.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Michelle D. Boone at
boonemd@miamioh.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.