* 2150748
* SBIR Phase II:  Edible, water soluble corn zein films for shelf life extension and improved safety of perishable foods
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Antonios Zografos, AKORN TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 995,590.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is in the reduction of food waste and improved nutrition. Each year,
more than 30% of fresh produce is wasted. The value of this wasted produce is
estimated at more than $60 billion globally. This projectâ€™s main goal is to
extend the shelf life of perishable foods with an edible coating that regulates
the rate of both transpiration to slow moisture loss and respiration to delay
ripening. The project aims to enable produce growers and distributors to
preserve the freshness and quality of fruits and vegetables. Consumers could
benefit by having access to fresher, tastier, and more appealing produce. This
technology may also promote healthier food choices, especially in currently
underserved food deserts. Packers would benefit by being able to offer a high-
quality product that will last longer and that can better withstand the rigors
of various types of transport. Extended shelf life also extends the market reach
of U.S. exports in global markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core innovation
underlying this project is the creation of stable Zein colloids that employ only
edible, plant-based ingredients, are non-flammable, non-corrosive, and meet most
global food regulations. These colloids will be initially developed as coatings
for fresh whole or minimally processed foods, root crops, vegetables, nuts, and
seeds. The coating will not impede the delivery of nutrients, flavors, and other
functional ingredients that make foods appealing, improve their quality, and
encourage consumption. The technology will also reduce food spoilage and
improving food safety. Experimental work will be focused on further improving
the stability of Zein dispersions and demonstrating the ability to adjust the
film properties (water vapor, oxygen, and carbon dioxide permeances) to respond
to the physiology of a broad range of crops. This technology will also be
piloted at various packing plants to evaluate its operational fitness with
existing operations. This research will also enable related applications, such
as for compostable coatings on food packaging and pharmaceutical and
nutraceutical coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.