* 2150154
* REU Site for Oregon Marine Science: From Upper Estuaries to the Deep Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Itchung Cheung, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2025
* USD 538,714.00

Oregon State University’s (OSU) will host the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site called “From the Upper Estuaries to the Deep Sea” at
the Hatfield Marine Science Center (HMSC) campus in Newport, Oregon. The REU
program directly involves undergraduates in all aspects of marine science
research from project inception to data collection, analysis, and
interpretation, to presentation and publication of research results to both
scientific and general audiences. HMSC will support cohorts of 16 interns, 10
traditional onsite and 6 new positions for remote-hybrid interns during a ten-
week summer program that takes advantage of the wide range of marine science
research opportunities available at HMSC and the experience successfully
supporting remote and remote-hybrid interns during the Covid-19 pandemic. The
goal is to develop an active inclusive community of students engaged in the
interdisciplinary nature of marine science as a collective educational
experience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Major objectives of the REU program are to:
1) provide students an opportunity for the highest quality research experience
in marine science and an understanding of its interdisciplinary nature; 2)
provide students with a professional development training opportunity and
exposure to a wide range of marine science pathways leading to STEM careers; 3)
increase participation in and access to marine sciences for traditionally under-
represented students and nontraditional students through targeted recruitment
efforts at regional community colleges and non-research universities serving
underrepresented groups; and 4) adapt and learn from the successful support of a
virtual cohort research experience during COVID-19 in summer of 2020 and 2021.
Students will pursue research projects that fall within three major themes:
Theme 1: Biology and Ecology of Marine and Estuarine Organisms; Theme 2: Ocean
and Estuarine Ecology and Biogeochemistry; Theme 3: Physics of Estuarine and
Ocean Environments: including projects in physical oceanography and estuarine
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.