* 2150954
* Building Capacity to Improve Pathways for Students Pursuing Careers in Secondary STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Sepideh Yalda, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2023
* USD 74,965.00

This project aims to serve the national need for developing highly qualified
secondary STEM teachers for high-need schools. The project will identify
barriers to undergraduate STEM students pursuing secondary STEM teaching
careers, specifically in Pennsylvania. These barriers will be identified through
student interviews, focus groups, surveys, and institutional data. Additionally,
the project will bring together STEM and education faculty in working groups to
understand these barriers. Faculty will develop action plans to improve academic
pathways and increase numbers of STEM students pursuing secondary teaching
careers in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Millersville
University in Pennsylvania includes partnerships between STEM and education
faculty at the institution. The proposed efforts are in response to recent
declines in student completion of STEM education pathways. The project will
create a Faculty Advisory Council that will guide activities among faculty,
advisors, and other stakeholders to assess and address students' perceived
barriers to pursuing STEM teaching careers. The project will gather data from
university STEM students through interviews and focus groups. Additionally, the
project will convene a 2-day “All Hands-On” forum, which will engage faculty in
the analysis of gathered data and the design of action plans to improve STEM
education leading to teaching careers. Evaluation will be conducted by an
educational psychologist with local insight into the context. Outcomes from this
project could provide foundational groundwork for a future Noyce Track 1
proposal. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.