* 2150173
* REU Site: CAS: Cross Disciplinary Training in Sustainable Chemistry and Chemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Greg Swain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 01/31/2025
* USD 399,398.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site award to Michigan State University, located in East
Lansing, MI, will support 10 weeks of training for a total of 30 students over
the summers of 2022-2024. Participants in this REU program will engage in
faculty-mentored research projects aimed towards developing more sustainable
chemical products and processes to benefit society. Professional development
activities, such as faculty seminars on green chemistry topics, chemical and
laboratory safety training, responsible conduct of research discussion sessions,
effective mentoring, and discussions about the importance and value of
diversity, fair treatment of all, and inclusive ideas and environments will
position students well for their future careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At this
REU site, student participants are expected to be involved in all aspects of the
research enterprise, from project design, to conducting experiments and
analyzing data, to reading and discussing relevant scientific papers, and
finally to preparing text and graphs for eventual publication in a peer-reviewed
scientific journal. The available research projects span a wide range of green
chemistry, including green synthesis, polymer membranes for water purification,
water quality monitoring, environmentally friendly coating systems for corrosion
control, solar energy conversion, energy-related materials, advanced imaging and
spectroscopy of materials and surfaces, computational approaches for
understanding and predicting material properties, and assessing the fate of
environmental pollutants. Philosophically, this program is designed to teach one
about conducting scientific research and to help prepare one for postgraduate
education or to enter the workforce through development of problem-solving
skills, chemical literature and information skills, laboratory safety skills,
communication skills, team skills and ethics. To increase diversity in the STEM
pipeline, this site also actively recruits underrepresented students through a
variety of mechanisms and partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.