* 2150210
* REU Site: Research and Training Experience for Undergraduates in the Areas of Cybersecurity, Data Analytics and Blockchain for Securing Big Data and Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 03/31/2025
* USD 461,288.00

This award is to set a new site for Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) in the Computer Science Department at the Missouri University of Science
and Technology. Each summer a cohort of undergraduate students will visit
Missouri S &amp; T campus to work with faculty in small groups to design,
implement, and evaluate research projects involving Cybersecurity, Data
Analytics, and Blockchain for securing systems such as Cyber-physical Systems.
The site will focus on recruiting under-represented and women students from
diverse groups in computing fields from 2 to 4-year institutions. The students
will participate in professional development activities that make them more
aware of graduate school and professional aspects of a computing career. The
students will be able to use the state-of-the-art facilities available at the
university and interact with faculty mentors to conduct challenging and timely
research on emerging technologies to develop secure systems for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new REU Site at The Missouri University of
Science and Technology will focus on research projects involving Secure Data
Sharing Scheme for Cloud, IoT Access Control Using Permissioned Blockchain,
Security and Trustworthiness in Data-Driven CPS and IoT and Crowd-Audit in ML-
based Systems. The use of cybersecurity across different domains and technology
offers an effective means for establishing secure cyberinfrastructures across a
wide variety of applications thus, contributing toward a technology-based
society. REU students, postdocs, graduate students, and faculty will have the
opportunity to explore problems that are important and timely, and relevant to
our society. This project will also build human capacity in cybersecurity,
machine learning, CPS, and IoT research and knowledge. The program will provide
experiences to undergraduate students that may influence their choices about
further education and future careers and continue to give them the confidence to
pursue these choices and thus, increase the size and diversity of the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense ASSURE Program in partnership with the NSF REU
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.