* 2150195
* Collaborative Undergraduate Research Experiences in the Mathematical Sciences for Community College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jianzhong Su, Los Angeles Pierce College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 pilot project aims to engage community
college students and faculty in meaningful research experiences in mathematics,
statistics, and data science. A central goal of the project is to increase the
participation rate of underrepresented minority community college students in
research experiences for undergraduates (REU) programs. Many community college
students work full-time jobs or have family duties, presenting a challenge to
participate in a traditional research experience. Additionally, community
college faculty responsibilities are often centered on providing top quality
classroom instruction, leaving limited time to guide student research projects.
Additionally, early research experiences in the mathematical sciences are less
common than in some other disciplines, which may keep students from discovering
a passion for the discipline as they begin their academic careers. This project
addresses these challenges by adapting the proven Research Experiences in
Community Colleges (RE-C^2) model to an online community of practice. The
project will explore the effectiveness of the RE-C^2 format at multiple sites
nationwide by fostering collaboration between student researchers and faculty.
Specifically, each year, five teams consisting of two community college
students, one community college faculty, and one faculty member from a 4-year
institution will work together to explore open problems from across the
mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will give community
college students the opportunity to grow mathematically and gain technical and
communication skills by introducing them to the excitement of collaborative
research. Led by Los Angeles Pierce College, this effort includes collaborators
from George Mason University, Inter American University of Puerto Rico, UCLA,
and the University of Texas at Arlington. During their year-long research
project, students will enroll in coursework in linear algebra and differential
equations. Concurrently taking these courses and collaborating on an original
research project will provide a rich and engaging intellectual environment where
participating students will gain new perspectives on mathematics and their
future at STEM learners and professionals. Project evaluation will use surveys
and focus groups to assess students’ technical, communication, problem solving
and collaborative skills, awareness of mathematics, and impact of the program on
the desire to pursue additional mathematical coursework and, ultimately, a STEM
career. Project outcomes, including student research findings, will be
disseminated through presentations, publications, and direct contact with peer
institutions looking to build similar programs. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.