* 2150075
* REU Site: MURALS (Materials-focused Undergraduate Research Applied to the Life Sciences) at UMass Amherst
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Shelly Peyton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2025
* USD 391,761.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site offers research opportunities for 10
undergraduates each summer at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass
Amherst). This REU site is unique in that it will give students training in how
to create advanced materials and how to use these materials to tackle grand
challenges in biology. Students work in laboratories at the biology/materials
interface, take part in both professional development and technical training
provided by the REU site, and learn from near-peer and lab mentors to guide
student career development. The site has outstanding mentors from leaders in the
field from both Chemical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering at UMass
Amherst. All labs are physically and intellectually connected through the
Institute for Applied Life Sciences at UMass. Industry site visits and
entrepreneurial outreach activities help expose students to potential career
opportunities in biotechnology. Partnership with the other professional
development programs at UMass supports recruitment and mentoring of REU students
across all backgrounds to ensure everyone has an equal opportunity to research
opportunities at UMass. Recruiting efforts at several minority-serving national
conferences, as well as partnerships with minority-serving institutions via the
Diversity Office in the College of Engineering at UMass ensures opportunities
for students from traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM. Evaluation
efforts track the long-term outcomes for students from these groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a new REU
site (MURALS: Materials-focused Undergraduate Research Applied to the Life
Sciences) at UMass Amherst, developed to offer research opportunities for 10
undergraduates each summer, broadly in the area of materials for bioengineering
applications. The PI of this REU site, Prof. Shelly Peyton, is an expert in
bioengineering, with a focus on applying biomaterials development toward solving
complex problems in biology. This site has 10 host laboratories, with faculty
from the Chemical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering departments at UMass
Amherst, who are both physically and intellectually connected through the
Institute for Applied Life Sciences at UMass Amherst. The overarching objectives
of the MURALS REU Site are to: 1) Recruit and encourage students from
traditionally underrepresented groups in engineering to do research at the
interface of materials and the life sciences; 2) Inspire students from all
backgrounds to pursue graduate studies and/or professional careers at the
interface of materials and the life sciences; 3) Train students to be effective
scientific communicators, through carefully planned workshops on writing,
presentation skills, and working amongst diverse groups of scientists; 4)
Integrate REU students within the broader scientific community at UMass Amherst
by pairing students with peer mentors outside the lab; 5) Allow students to
explore their interests in entrepreneurship, through a partnership with the
technology development office within IALS, the Biotechnology Training Program
(BTP) at UMass, and industry Site visits; 6) Provide students with professional
development workshops and tools (e.g., career choices, ethics in research,
interviewing strategies, time management) to instill the techniques to succeed
in any industry long after they leave MURALS. Recruiting efforts at several
minority-serving national conferences, as well as partnerships with minority-
serving institutions via the Diversity Office in the College of Engineering
ensure opportunities for students from traditionally underrepresented groups in
STEM. Evaluation efforts track the long-term outcomes for students from these
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.