* 2150578
* Effects of State Steering Strategies on Development of â€¨Inter-Organizational Partnerships by Small Community Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Anita Milman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 03/31/2025
* USD 351,058.00

This research examines the effects of policies seeking to encourage partnership
formation among organizations. Partnerships between organizations may provide a
variety of benefits. Through partnerships, organizations can share expertise and
resources. Organizations can also take advantage of other gains made possible by
working together. To encourage formation of partnerships among organizations,
governments may implement policies that seek to increase awareness of the
potential benefits of partnerships; that facilitate partnership formation; that
remove barriers to partnership formation; and/or that incentivize partnerships.
The extent to which such policies lead to partnership formation will depend on
whether the policies address the primary factors inhibiting partnership
formation. As organizations differ in the barriers they face and the benefits
they might derive from partnerships, the effects of state policies may vary
across organizations. To improve understandings of how policies influence
partnership formation, this research evaluates a range of policy approaches for
encouraging partnership formation as well as how multiple concurrent policies
interact with one another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research
examines the response of small community water systems in the USA to policies
seeking to steer development of water system partnerships. Most states in the
USA have adopted one or more policies to encourage partnership formation by
water systems. Those policies vary in whether their approach is enabling,
authority-based, information-based, or incentive-based. The research analyzes
the effects of these state policies, as well as how those effects and the
critical barriers to partnership formation vary with the institutional
structures of small community water systems (e.g., municipal, special district,
community-owned, private) and with the forms of partnership that may be
developed (e.g., informal, contracting, joint powers, consolidation). A mixed-
methods approach is utilized: data collection entails both a survey of small
community water systems across the USA and interviews with water system
representatives and state-primacy agencies. Results from the research will
provide insights regarding the points of intervention that serve to catalyze
differing forms of partnerships and the impacts of linking multiple concurrent
policies. Results will also illuminate how the effects of policies vary across a
diversity of organizational structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.