* 2150831
* Dynamic Fragmentation and Earthquake Energy Partitioning
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 390,481.00

Strike-slip faults like the San Andreas Fault in California represent major
threats to life and property owing to the repeated generation of large
earthquakes. Less than 20% of the energy released during an earthquake radiates
away from the source as elastic waves that cause ground shaking. A large portion
of the energy is dissipated around the fault as frictional heat and through a
variety of processes. These processes control how the earthquake rupture
propagates. During each earthquake, the rocks surrounding the active fault are
fragmented by cracking of individual mineral grains. They form the so-called
damage zone. Over many earthquake cycles, damage increases in this zone causing
changes in seismic-wave direction and speed. Understanding these processes is
critical to evaluate the energy budget through the entire seismogenic zone. It
is also critical to assess seismic hazards. Here, the researchers combine field-
based results and modeling to improve the understanding of seismically active
faults. They quantify processes causing fragmentation in the deeper reaches of
the seismogenic zone. They develop wave speed models that can be used to better
predict ground shaking directions and intensities. The interdisciplinary project
supports a postdoctoral associate, as well as the training of undergraduate and
graduate students at University of Maine. The developed codes and analytical
protocols are made openly available through public portals. These outcomes can
be applied beyond Seismology in Material Sciences and Engineering, notably to
investigate brittle fragmentation in ceramics and advanced composite materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are: (1) to characterize
the microfracture density and fragment size distributions for fragmented
minerals in two deeply exhumed seismogenic faults/shear zones; (2) to use the
fragment size distributions to estimate the energy that was consumed by
fragmentation; (3) to apply physics-based fragmentation modeling to estimate
strain rates associated with the fragmentation; (4) to better constrain the
energy partitioning in the earthquake source volume; (5) to develop and
disseminate protocols for using electron backscatter diffraction techniques to
analyze mineral and rock fragmentation. Addressing the above objectives provides
an opportunity to test hypotheses related to the source energy budget, styles of
rupture propagation, and the relations between loading conditions and resulting
rock microstructures in the deeper seismogenic zone. The study also allows
evaluating whether intense fragmentation of brittle minerals can be used as a
seismogenic signature at depth, as it is at the surface. The chosen approach
applies models and concepts that originate largely in the physics and
engineering communities, and mostly constitutes novel research in the
geosciences. Recognition of the importance of microfracturing for macroscopic
behavior and the ability to treat it quantitatively is growing in both Earth
Sciences and Materials Engineering. Outcomes of this project will provide a
framework for future efforts in both fields, and for collaborations between
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.