* 2150061
* REU Site: Ka'ao: Telling the Stories of Hawaiian Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 387,134.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the
University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo (UH Hilo), located in Hilo, HI, will support the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. Place-
based research will be embedded in collaborations between UH Hilo and community-
based, Federal, State, and private organizations located on Hawaiʻi Island. It
is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from under-represented
groups, especially Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders, first-generation
college students, and students with little to no research experience, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted within a
biocultural context, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program places
primary emphasis on biocultural restoration research in terrestrial and marine
ecosystems on Hawai‘i Island. The REU program models a proactive, reciprocal,
and community-based research process while teaching students important science
communication skills. It is intentionally structured to provide participants
with research experience, quantitative tools, communication skills, and cultural
and community awareness, and at the same time deepen their environmental
stewardship. Students will participate in Māhuahua (professional development),
Huaka‘i (field trips), and Ho‘omohala (outreach) on Hawaiʻi Island, attend a
state conservation conference, and prepare an oral presentation and final paper.
Students interested in the program may apply online through our website
(hilo.hawaii.edu/uhintern). Short-listed students will be contacted by program
staff for an interview, and if selected, a second interview with a prospective
research mentor. Selected students will receive a stipend, housing and meal
allowance, and travel to and from Hilo. More information about the program and
the application process is available by visiting
http://hilo.hawaii.edu/uhintern, or by contacting the PI (Dr. R. Ostertag at
ostertag@hawaii.edu), co-PI (Dr. N. Puniwai at npuniwai@hawaii.edu), or project
coordinators at uhintern@hawaii.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.