* 2150058
* REU Site: Genes, Ecosystems, Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Elena Kramer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 321,024.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Harvard
University, located in Cambridge, MA, will support the training of 8 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of
24 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities and/or
from under-represented groups, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and all participants will present their results
at the Leadership Alliance National Symposium, as well as other scientific
conferences. In addition, students will engage in professional skill building
exercises that will encourage them to pursue a career in research science in
general and evolution/ecology in particular. Assessment of the program will be
done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects
and mentors will be drawn from a diverse set of labs based in the Departments of
Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, and Human Evolutionary Biology, which focus
on the study of evolution, ecology, genetics/genomics, physiology, biomechanics,
and biodiversity. In addition to an intensive, mentored laboratory experience,
the REU students will participate in several types of activities: 1)
professional development seminars, including on ethics/responsible conduct of
research, 2) the Leadership Alliance National Symposium research and mentoring
conference, and 3) diverse cohort-building social activities. By participating
in the REU program, undergraduate students will have cutting edge research
experiences within the context of a strong mentorship community made up of
faculty, graduate students, and peers. This experience will demystify the
graduate school application process and longterm career opportunities, with a
particular goal of building confidence and psychological resiliency. Applicants
are invited to apply through the Leadership Alliance Program and indicate their
interest in the Harvard E3 REU. Our goal is to reach students at undergraduate
institutions who demonstrate an interest in evolution and ecology but may have
limited access to this type of research on their home campuses. More information
about the program is available by visiting https://reu.oeb.harvard.edu/sroh, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Elena Kramer, ekramer@oeb.harvard.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Sheila Thomas, sthomas@fas.harvard.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.