* 2150794
* Building Capacity for Recruiting and Effectively Preparing Mathematics, Science, and Computer Science Teachers for Urban, High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Ricardo Rodriguez, Texas Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2023
* USD 125,000.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity for the purpose
of preparing high-quality teachers in mathematics, science, and computer
science. Through an educational partnership, the goal of this project is to
revise and develop curricula for preparing future teachers of mathematics,
science, and computer science. In addition, this project proposes to improve the
pathway for the recruitment, education, and retention of those future teachers
in urban public schools. This will be accomplished by understanding the local
needs for mathematics, science, and computer science teachers in urban settings,
including understanding how to improve teacher preparation programs to meet such
needs. This Capacity Building project is expected to lay the groundwork for the
future preparation and submission of a Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program
proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Texas Wesleyan University (TWU),
a private primarily undergraduate serving university, includes partnerships with
Tarrant County College District, an open-access community college district; the
Fort Worth Independent School District, a high-need school district; Leadership
Academy Network, a community-based organization; and the University of Texas at
Arlington, a public research university. Project goals are to (1) strengthen the
existing mathematics and science teacher certification tracks and develop a new
Grade 7-12 computer science teacher certification track at TWU; (2) strengthen
and expand partnerships with Fort Worth K-12 and postsecondary institutions,
with an intentional focus on the recruitment, preparation, and retention of STEM
teachers; and (3) establish, maintain, and expand Fort Worth community-based
STEM outreach partnerships. To accomplish these goals, this project will utilize
an extensive catalog of needs assessments to advance knowledge, increase STEM
teacher effectiveness, enhance infrastructure, and advocate for underrepresented
populations. This project will build an understanding of best practices for
building a pathway for recruiting future STEM teachers from urban school
districts into two-year and four-year institutions, with the goal of returning
these students to the urban school districts as highly qualified STEM teachers.
In this way, the project will create a positive feedback loop for teacher
preparation. Additionally, this project seeks to examine the Leadership Academy
Network model, a public charter school, as a teaching laboratory for early field
experiences with first- and second-year undergraduate students who have
interests in STEM education. This Capacity Building project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.