* 2150152
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Pervasive Computing for Smart Health, Safety, and Well-being
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2025
* USD 409,297.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the Department of
Computer and Information Sciences at Temple University will host a diverse group
of students from universities across the nation to engage in intensive summer
research experiences. Students will work closely with faculty and graduate
student mentors studying pervasive computing systems that can be used in
everyday objects to provide services that are reactive to conditions of the
changing environment, often with little or no interaction from a human user.
Through their research projects, REU Site students will design, implement, and
evaluate pervasive computing solutions that advance health, safety, and well-
being. The research is led by an experienced faculty team that will provide
research training and project-based experiences that balance computer science
theory, applications, and practical skills, and the program also provides
professional development opportunities for the students. The REU Site focuses on
recruiting students from historically excluded groups in computing and
emphasizes including students from undergraduate institutions where there are
limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project is a renewal
of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in the Department of
Computer and Information Sciences at Temple University. The REU Site will
recruit students from historically excluded groups in computing and create a
collaborative working environment where students work closely with each other
and with faculty and graduate student mentors. Research projects will focus on
the creation and study of pervasive computing systems that employ sensing,
actuation, and computation embedded in everyday objects, landscapes, and
wearable items to improve the health, safety, and well-being of the general
public. In collaboration with faculty and graduate students, students will have
the opportunity to conduct research that has the potential to advance knowledge
within the field of pervasive computing and its component areas of networking,
computer vision, and human-centered data science. Throughout the course of the
program, students will also have the opportunity to participate in professional
development activities hosted by the REU Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.