* 2150832
* CPS: Small: High-Impact Decision Making Using Cyber-Physical Systems: A Distortion-Based Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Hossein Pishro-Nik, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 05/31/2025
* USD 507,570.00

Many emerging cyber-physical systems (CPS) are composed of a network of
autonomous agents that make high-impact decisions, for example, a network of
robots or drones that are on a search and rescue (SAR) mission. Such systems are
referred to as high-impact decision making cyber-physical systems (HI-CPS). This
research aims at building a unified theoretical framework for HI-CPS and
validating this framework by fully implementing and testing a concrete example
of such systems, namely, a network of autonomous agents that search for a lost
person in dire conditions. This research brings together concepts from
probability theory, decision theory, information theory, wireless networks,
machine learning, and transportation engineering. By definition, this research
focuses on high-impact systems, and it can directly impact the design of
important emerging real-life systems. Educational and outreach activities are
well-integrated into the research and include developing an honors thesis
seminar course, workshops for underrepresented groups, and creating open
educational content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two thrusts: In
Thrust 1, a new general theory of decision making suitable for such high-impact
decision making is developed. This is based on the novel idea that the very
notion of probability is insufficient when we are making high-impact decisions.
It is shown that the approach is a multi-dimensional generalization of expected
utility. A universality result is proved showing that any other decision-making
operation can be framed as a special case of the proposed approach, emphasizing
the sufficiency of the approach. Thrust 2 focuses on extending the framework to
include two vital factors in HI-CPS: (1) timeliness and efficiency of
information transmission as well as (2) power management. Thus, HI-CPS is
designed and developed by incorporating all of these factors into a decision-
making framework. To validate the theory, a concrete example of HI-CPS, i.e., an
SAR system using a network of autonomous agents is built and tested. This
research directly addresses Science of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) by providing
new models and theories that unify HI-CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.