* 2150922
* Developing Digitally-rich Urban Teacher Leaders: Fostering and Sustaining a STEM Culture of Belonging, Access, Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Michael Daley, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,047,099.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective STEM
teacher leaders, referred to a Master Teaching Fellows, prepared to be agents of
change around issues of belonging, access, justice, equity, diversity and
inclusion in STEM teaching and learning. The disruptions in school operations
experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic have made even more visible serious
inequities that exist in K-12 schools, and even more so in schools serving high-
need students – calling for action to address these issues. The proposed project
addresses these issues by first expanding the knowledge and skills in inclusive
teaching practices of participating experienced and exemplary STEM teachers.
This is accomplished through graduate coursework and content-focused coaching
from professional mentors. To further broaden impact, the project supports the
development of participating teachers’ skills and dispositions as teacher
leaders and supports them in enacting their leadership. Their leadership is
intended to assist other STEM teachers in creating safe, inclusive, and
culturally responsive STEM learning environments. Coursework and mentored
leadership experiences will help teachers develop these skills. Through this
project, participating teachers are prepared to leverage digitally-rich
resources into their teaching and to posses increased expectations in STEM for
all students regardless of identity markers, including race, gender, sexual
orientation, language, ability, and economic background. Through an action
research project, participating teachers become more reflective practitioners
and identify opportunities for self-improvement that will impact student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in the Warner School of Education
&amp; Human Development at the University of Rochester includes partnerships
with the Rochester City School District, Elmira City School District, Jamestown
City School District, and the Rochester Museum &amp; Science Center. The project
aims to recruit a cadre of 19 grade 7-12 exemplary and experienced mathematics
and science teachers from across the three partner districts in Western New York
for a five-year program leading to an MS in Inclusion and Special Education,
along with advanced certificates in Teacher Leadership, Urban Teaching &amp;
Leadership, and Digitally-Rich Teaching and Learning in K-12 Schools. Fellows
selected to the program are engaged in a continuous leadership seminar series to
further develop their leadership skills and mentored in implementing a change
project in their home district. Fellows also receive focused mentoring on
coaching and professional learning. The external evaluation is designed to
examine in what ways the project develops participating teachers’ digitally-rich
teaching practices, culturally sustaining pedagogical practices, and teacher
leadership practices. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.