* 2150561
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: On-Chip High-Resolution Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy with a Single Tunable van der Waals Heterostructure Photodetector
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Fengnian Xia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 287,836.00

Spectrometers measure the spectral composition of light. Mid-infrared
spectrometers, operational in 2-9 Âµm spectral range, can be used in many
important applications such as gas sensing, thermal imaging, microbial
detection, and surveillance. Traditional spectrometers are bulky, expensive, and
usually consist of mechanically moving parts. Although significant progress has
been made in the miniaturization of spectrometers, currently, most compact
spectrometers still consist of an array of on-chip components to capture the
different spectral components of the light, leading to a footprint much larger
than the operational wavelength. Moreover, current research on developing
compact spectrometers focuses on visible and near-infrared wavelength range, and
the effort on developing integrated on-chip mid-infrared spectrometers is very
limited despite their technical significance. In this project, mid-infrared
spectrometers based on a single, on-chip, tunable sensor will be developed,
leveraging van der Waals heterostructures and advanced mathematical algorithms.
The proposed research involves investigations of the optical properties of
emerging materials, device fabrication, and numerical analysis. Scientifically,
this research will reveal the light-matter interaction properties in emerging
van der Waals heterostructures. The results will lead to ultracompact, on-chip
spectrometers in the critical, but less-explored, mid-infrared wavelength range.
In this project, postdoctoral researchers, and graduate and undergraduate
students will acquire knowledge in semiconductor device design and fabrication,
thus contributing to the development of next-generation workforce for
semiconductor industry. The outreach activities will improve the scientific
understanding of the general public and encourage underrepresented groups to
pursue careers in science, technology, engineering, and math.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a highly compact,
mid-infrared spectrometer based on a single, tunable van der Waals
heterostructure photodetector. First, the team will investigate the tunable
light-matter interactions in van der Waals heterostructures in the mid-infrared
wavelength range both theoretically and experimentally, laying the foundation
for the proposed program. Second, tunable van der Waals heterostructure
photodetectors will be demonstrated and their widely tunable photoresponse
matrices will be characterized under different biasing conditions. Finally, the
team will develop algorithms and measurement schemes to demonstrate spectroscopy
functions based on the known tunable photoresponse characteristics. The proposed
program aims to develop new paradigms for mid-infrared spectroscopy. Previous
on-chip spectrometers usually utilize multiple photodetection elements to detect
different spectral components of the light, and the spectrum is reconstructed
from measurements from these various elements. Once fabricated, these
photodetection elements can no longer be modified, thus limiting the resolution
and the operational wavelength range of these spectrometers. The proposed
heterostructure spectrometer will build upon a novel tunable single-element
photodetector scheme, and further leverage the promising physical properties of
emerging van der Waals heterostructures to advance the frontiers of on-chip
infrared spectroscopy. The proposed spectrometer overcomes the resolution
limitations of traditional on-chip spectrometers and enables spectroscopic
functionality within a footprint comparable to the wavelength of the operation.
The project is highly interdisciplinary and leverages latest developments in
material sciences, condensed matter physics, and electrical engineering to
deliver much-anticipated, transformative applications with van der Waals
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.