* 2150356
* REU Site: Back to the Future
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* William Cross, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2025
* USD 360,723.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation Back to the Future
Research Experience for Undergraduates Site at the South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology will expose a diverse group of undergraduate students, including
Native American students and women, to the research environment and help them
develop as professionals. The focus of the student research is the study of
metals and metal production, an area of vital technological importance to
national interest in areas of defense, manufacturing, resource utilization, and
energy. Students will also participate in research projects with the National
Park Service focused on the preservation and analysis of historical artifacts as
well as supplemental activities like metal forging and casting that highlight
the importance of metals throughout history, hence, the Back to the Future
theme. This context will give students a broader appreciation for the nature of
current and future research as well as the impact of engineering in society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
Site: Back to the Future at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology is a
10-week summer program that will provide research opportunities in metallurgical
and materials engineering that enhance the global competitiveness of the nation
in the areas of mineral beneficiation, resource recovery, strategic metals,
advanced materials, manufacturing, and energy-efficient materials. The project
will address challenges faced by future engineers by providing a research
experience within a unique cultural and holistic framework. This framework will
be provided by teaming with the National Parks Service on research that has
historical significance and innovative activities led by faculty from
engineering, science, and the humanities that explore the interface between
engineering, history, and art (the Back to the Future theme). Students will
participate in an integrated supplemental training program that nurtures their
research skills and career development. This program includes advanced technical
communications training, workshops and seminars to give historical context for
current trends in research, and activities that connect students to each other
and the community. The diverse nature of program activities will attract
students of varied background and intellectual typology. The Site will provide
opportunities for underserved students in engineering with an emphasis on two-
year community and Tribal Colleges from the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.