* 2150351
* REU Site: Applied Computing Research in Unmanned Aerial Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Dulal Kar, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2025
* USD 406,356.00

Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi, a Hispanic Serving Institution on the
Texas Gulf Coast and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) approved site for
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS), will continue to offer a ten-week summer research
experience in UAS technology to ten undergraduate students per year. Students
are selected through a nationwide recruitment process that encourages
participation of students from groups underrepresented in computing. This unique
research experience opens the door for undergraduate researchers to a wide range
of applications of UAS to address problems of regional and national
significance, such as coastal management, coastal ecology, human safety,
precision agriculture, and security of UAS technology. The REU Site organizes
many beneficial, transformative activities such as mentoring of participants by
a team of experienced faculty, skill-building seminars and workshops, research
presentations, graduate school preparation, and other professional development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the program is to provide
participants unique research experiences in a stimulating environment that
involves developing secure, autonomous UAS technology. Activities include
research in applied computing for UAS-based applications as well as a series of
skill-building training sessions designed to enhance group cohesiveness and to
hone their technical writing, communication, and research skills. Primary
research activities occur in the areas of autonomous UAS, security of UAS, and
applications of unmanned systems in a variety of domains. The participants write
and submit research papers on their work in local, regional, and national
symposiums. Through the REU Site, the participants explore opportunities of UAS
technology in commercial, civilian, and governmental applications, develop
confidence and passion for research, become motivated in seeking advanced
degrees, and be inspired in life-long learning in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.