* 2150390
* REU Site: Cyberinfrastructure Research 4 Social Change
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Kelly Gaither, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2025
* USD 376,771.00

The world is becoming increasingly more dependent on computational power,
augmented by an ever-larger network of sensors and instruments. As the
scientific research landscape rapidly evolves, it is no longer sufficient to
limit training and educational skills to a single discipline. To fuel innovation
across multiple scientific disciplines, advanced computing (data, high
performance computing, analytics) is required to keep pace with and accelerate
the rate of scientific discoveries. In response to the National Science
Foundation's mission to promote the progress of science; advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare; and secure the national defense, the
Cyberinfrastructure (CI) Research 4 Social Change REU site project is actively
engaging ten undergraduate students each summer for nine weeks to solve real-
world problems of national relevance. The REU site project is preparing the
future scientific workforce to use advanced CI resources, thus building capacity
in research areas that support major advances in understanding across a broad
range of societal challenges. Students have a strong desire to have an impact in
their communities, a strong desire to have a sense of belonging, and a strong
desire to be materially part of something larger than themselves. Connecting
social change principles to real-world problem solving is key to long-term
success for recruiting and retaining students from underrepresented communities
into computational fields and for preparing students to leverage the national
CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site aims to meet three objectives: (1) train
students to use the national Cyberinfrastructure (CI) by integrating learning of
computational science, data-enabled science and multi-disciplinary science in
preparation for graduate programs and the workforce, (2) train students to apply
advanced computational skills, critical thinking, and creativity to address
problems relevant to society, and (3) increase the diversity and number of
computationally trained students in the STEM pipeline. The program offers an
enriching and transformative experience at a world-class supercomputing center
and includes: training using TACC (Texas Advanced Computing Center) resources;
mentoring by The University of Texas (UT) at Austin and TACC researchers, social
and team-building activities on the UT Austin campus, professional development
and graduate school preparation, leadership development, and opportunities to
develop and enhance communication skills. Research projects emphasize advanced
computing as a tool to power discoveries that will impact social change for
future generations. Using advanced CI, students will conduct cutting-edge
research in engineering, science, and computational medicine: help automate
processes in support of cleaner energy sources for production of biofuel;
enhance research resources for modeling/prediction of porous material properties
in fields of petroleum, civil and environmental engineering as well as geology;
use data science and visualization methods to illustrate interfaces between
science, traditional culture, and pressing societal problems in the Pacific
region; develop and analyze numerical algorithms for multiphysics, multiscale
flow and transport problems in storm surge, tides, and coastal circulation; and
develop and analyze machine learning algorithms for individualized medicine. The
REU site will recruit underrepresented students including Latinxs/Hispanics,
African Americans/Blacks, and Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders (NHPI).
Targeted recruitment will also include women, first-generation college students,
and the students from teaching-intensive institutions, including Minority-
Serving Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.