* 2150721
* SBIR Phase I: Computer-based co-reading for students with reading disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* marty schultz, OBJECTIVE ED, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide an out-of-school reading tool to
complement and reinforce the in-school work of special education teachers. In
the US, over 3.6 million students are assessed with reading difficulties, but
school districts face challenges in providing appropriate services, specifically
due to teacher shortages and budgetary constraints. Additionally, the number of
students receiving special education every year is increasing. This research
seeks to benefit school districts by enabling current teachers to become more
effective in several ways: students will practice reading independently and
receive appropriate feedback from the technology, the lesson plans will be
customized by the teacher for the individual needs of the student, teachers will
have additional time to concentrate on teaching new concepts or providing
individualized attention to resolve specific problems, and teachers will have
digital data on student progress tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) seeks to produce a prototype that students
can use at home to improve their oral reading. This prototype will use a cloud-
based infrastructure and end-user application to perform computer-based co-
reading with the student. The technology solution will: (1) validate the
student’s reading accuracy and offer remediation when the student makes a
mistake, (2) allow the students’ reading teacher to customize the reading
experience and the remediation, and to monitor the student’s progress, (3) use
engaging book content, (4) capture and analyze data including how the students’
eyes track as they read and this data will be displayed for the teacher, (5)
capture audio of students’ oral reading, and (6) provide to the teacher with the
captured audio, the corresponding text using automated speech recognition, and
the students’ mistakes. This prototype will undergo efficacy testing and
customer discovery, receiving feedback from Directors of special education and
specialized reading teachers, in order to confirm the acceptable integration
with current teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.