* 2150932
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Developing REsilient African cities and their urban environMent facing the pro-vision of essential urban SDGs (DREAMS)
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Raymond Tutu, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 01/31/2024
* USD 70,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. The forum aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
developing and accessing scenarios for sustainable urban development planning in
three African cities. The project combines, natural and social science
methodologies with smart computer-based solutions to provide city planners with
visual and quantitative information on the state of the environment and
potential impacts under different scenarios. The project team seeks to intensify
the cooperation between planners focusing particularly on urban fringes.
Typically, these areas are the most critical parts in cities, where formal
instruments to coordinate informal settlements are lacking, often resulting in
highly negative trade-offs in risk management (flood, fire), health and
sanitation, and air quality. The results of this research project will help us
understand how communities can create more sustainable development
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.