* 2150929
* Women’s Psychosocial and Physiological Experience of Speaking in Work Teams
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Keaton Fletcher, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,763.00

On average, women are less likely than men to express their ideas, emerge as
leaders, and spend time talking in work teams. This can harm women’s career
advancement, pay, and contribution to the workforce. To address this issue and
facilitate women’s success in the workforce, it is necessary to understand why
and when women speak up in work teams. This project explores potential barriers
to women speaking up in work teams including social and psychological
consequences, as well the key role social anxiety may play in exacerbating these
negative experiences. This project directly and positively impacts participants,
their organizations, and the overall workforce by creating clear suggestions on
how to facilitate women’s participation in work teams, and ultimately increase
their career success.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project fosters an
understanding of why women are less likely to speak up and emerge as leaders in
work teams by testing potential mechanisms across two studies. Study 1 is a two-
week field study of approximately 150 employed adults using experience sampling
methodology, capturing daily anticipated and actual experiences with speaking in
work teams as well as their psychosocial consequences. Study 2 takes a more
granular focus, using an observational laboratory study in which approximately
125 teams come together for one-time meetings. During these meetings, audio and
video recordings of interactions and individual heartrate variability, galvanic
skin response, and respiration rate are recorded. By studying the momentary
physiological changes leading up to, and following speaking in a team, this
study teases apart stress processes, cognitive processing, and their
resolutions. Overall, this research project evaluates the how the experience of
speaking up in work teams differentially unfolds over moments and days for men
versus women, and the role social anxiety plays in this process. The project
addresses critical theoretical and practical questions about women’s
participation in workforce leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.