* 2150327
* I-Corps: Hematoma Reduction Compression Device and Wound Cosmesis Improvement in Patients Undergoing Cardiac Device Implants
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Nishaki Mehta, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an intervention that may improve patient safety and satisfaction
and reduce healthcare costs for cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED)
procedures. CIEDs are being implanted more frequently as patients are living
longer with cardiac disease. Hematomas are a common complication following CIED
implant procedures, occurring in up to 9% of patients. Most of these patients
are on a combination of blood thinners, which further compounds the risk.
Hematomas are not only painful and disfiguring for patients, but they are the
greatest risk factor for developing CIED infections as they increase the risk of
infection by 20-fold. CIED infection is associated with high
morbiditiy/mortality with an upwards of $50,000 in healthcare costs per
infection. With over 3 million CIEDs implanted annually worldwide, reducing
hematomas and subsequent infection may result in healthcare savings and risk
mitigation for the hospital. There is additional incisional scarring on the
chest wall for patients requiring battery and generator exchange procedures
occurring every 6-10 years. Improvements in wound healing and scar cosmesis may
result in improved patient satisfaction and quality of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a non-
invasive, externally applied, pneumatic compression device that reduces the
incidence of hematomas and improves wound cosmesis for patients undergoing CIED
implant procedures. The proposed device is applied post-operatively to the
surgical site for 2-4 hours in the recovery room. The design is a pneumatic
compression system that consists of a transparent air inflation mechanism with
an inflatable surgical balloon and an air release valve. The compression system
is fixated to the surgical site via four circumferentially applied adhesive
pads. The balloon is inflated to ~40 mmHg, a pressure that has been well
tolerated in a clinical trial and sufficient to combat venous pressure to reduce
bleeding. The deviceâ€™s transparent material allows for direct wound assessment
during device wear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.