* 2150415
* REU Site: Neurotechnologies to Help the Body Move, Heal, and Feel Again
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 402,511.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award at the University
of Houston (UH) will support the renewal of a REU Site focused on
"Neurotechnologies to Help the Body Move, Heal, and Feel Again." This Site will
inspire participants to pursue, with confidence, graduate education and future
engineering careers with technical, ethical, and societal leadership. The REU
site will pair 10 undergraduates per summer with faculty mentors from the
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Building Reliable Advances
and Innovations in Neurotechnology (IUCRC BRAIN), for a 10-week research,
educational, and outreach experience in the field of neural, cognitive and
rehabilitation engineering. The REU Site addresses society's current critical
needs for the aging and disabled populations, leverages current research
strengths in the IUCRC BRAIN, and is expected to resonate with undergraduate
students and the general public, who have a rising awareness of healthcare and
innovative health management devices and are interested in addressing the
growing national need for effective management of chronic diseases in the aging
population. Thus, this site will give students an opportunity to contribute to
the development of safe, effective and affordable personalized neurotechnologies
for diagnostics, restoration, enhancement, and rehabilitation of sensory, motor,
affective, and cognitive functions. This goal will be pursued by supporting
innovative interdisciplinary research across the multiple dimensions of brain
function and behavior with the ultimate goal of improving the national health in
an inclusive environment that promotes the active participation of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site is led by an
outstanding group of nationally recognized faculty mentors and innovators from
the University of Houston's IUCRC BRAIN faculty to guide undergraduates in
addressing grand challenges in neural, cognitive, and rehabilitation
engineering. The goal of the REU is to excite, inspire, train, and nurture
future undergraduates and to provide research experiences in projects with clear
societal impact to students who might not otherwise have opportunities for
research experiences at their own institutions. The site will actively recruit
students underrepresented in STEM fields and from non-research institutions. At
the end of their REU experience, students will understand the societal impact of
neurotechnologies, develop research laboratory skills and good engineering
practices, obtain hands-on training in research tools, cultivate soft skills,
learn about innovation and entrepreneurship in engineering, understand the
ethical aspects of neurotechnology, appreciate and promote the value of
diversity, equity, inclusion, and access in research, develop early mentoring
skills, and participate in social activities that promote a collegial and
collaborative atmosphere among student participants, while learning about the
community. Research areas will include, but are not limited to, device
development, neural activity measurement, neuromodulation, neurorehabilitation
and assistive devices, and artificial intelligence applications in
rehabilitation, and brain research. The ultimate goal of this REU site is to
advance the national health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.