* 2150826
* Robotic Learning with Reusable Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Sergey Levine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

One of the major challenges in modern robotics is making robots capable of
performing a broad range of tasks in open-world environments, such as homes,
offices, hospitals, and construction sites. Such sites are characterized by
being very different from each other and include events that are unknown ahead
of time. Machine learning has emerged as one of the most effective approaches to
allow such broad generalization, particularly in areas that require human like
sensing, such as the visual sense. However, effective applications of machine
learning to robotics suffer from a major problem: they require collecting large
enough observations (referred as to datasets) to enable such broad
generalization. While widely reused and shared datasets have enabled broad
generalization in areas, such as computer-based vision recognition, this data
reuse is difficult in robotics. In this project, the investigators’ goal is to
develop methods and techniques that can make it possible to utilize large
reusable datasets for robotic learning, such that the same data can be reused
repeatedly for a wide range of tasks and domains (with some modest amount of
domain-specific collection in each case), while enabling broad generalization.
The focus will be on methods for directly learning new skills for robots from
the visual observations, using both human-provided data and collected data by
the robot itself. The investigators will aim to both develop such algorithms and
to collect and disseminate suitable datasets that other researchers can reuse.
If successful, this project may lead both to new methods for controlling robots
in diverse real-world settings, and tools and resources that can further
facilitate future research on robotic learning, making it accessible to
scientists and engineers that may not have the capability to collect large
datasets on their own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling robotic learning with
reusable data requires resolving several important questions: How do people
develop robotic learning techniques that can reuse such data? How can people
gather the kinds of datasets that can be used for multiple robots, applications,
and environments? Answering these questions will require new algorithmic tools
for robotic learning, new data collection methodologies, and of course
collecting the datasets themselves. The investigators’ technical approach will
be focused around two key thrusts. Thrust 1 will be concerned with algorithms
development for data reuse, which itself will be divided into two parts: the
first part, focuses on imitation learning, and the second part, focuses on
reinforcement learning. In Thrust 2, the objective is to collect large and
reusable datasets that can be effectively utilized by the broad robotics
research community. The first part of Thrust 2 will focus around the development
of open-source tools for high-volume data collection. The second part will focus
on collecting and disseminating the datasets
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.