* 2150890
* Preparing Rural STEM Teachers for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Nicholas Shudak, Wayne State College
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 01/31/2027
* USD 768,001.00

The project aims to serve the national need of mitigating increasing STEM
teacher shortages in rural and high-need school districts. By recruiting,
preparing, and placing a greater number of highly qualified STEM educators in
rural settings, this effort will allow rural districts to hire a larger number
of well-prepared teachers. In turn, this will allow schools to better engage the
breadth of learners within northeast Nebraska and other rural settings
nationwide. To meet this need, Wayne State College, in concert with multiple
local educational partners, will support and prepare teachers through its
existing dual-credit educator pathway program. This intentional pathway program
is guided by principles of equity, excellence, and affordability. The pathway
program is designed to change the way teachers are recruited and prepared for
their world of work. This project will recruit and support high school students
interested in becoming STEM teachers through early access to college-level
courses and exposure to careers in STEM education through hands-on, experiential
learning opportunities. The project will engage participating students through
college acceptance, STEM internships, teacher candidacy, scholarship support,
student teaching, and ultimately placement as a STEM educator in a high-need
district. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Wayne State College includes
partnerships with Columbus Public Schools, Grand Island Public Schools, Norfolk
Public Schools, South Sioux Community Schools, northeast Nebraska’s Educational
Service Unit #1, and several smaller rural districts throughout the state.
Teachers in high-need and rural districts often do not receive the preservice
training or in-service support that they need to successfully embark on long
careers in high-need districts. The project’s first goal seeks to provide
scholarships and professional development to twenty undergraduates as part of an
effort to increase the number of highly qualified mathematics and science
teachers graduating from Wayne State College and being placed in teaching
positions at high-need school districts. Secondly, through pedagogical
innovations, experiential learning opportunities, and sustained peer mentoring,
this project aims to improve the cultural competency, STEM content knowledge,
and overall preparation of graduates to teach mathematics and science in high-
need, rural secondary schools. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.