* 2150787
* Expanding collaborations that recruit, prepare, and retain diverse and highly-qualified STEM teachers in Eastern Washington
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Ashley Lamm, Eastern Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2027
* USD 853,051.00

This Noyce Track 1 project aims to serve the national interest by diversifying
and supporting the STEM teacher workforce. This project seeks to recruit diverse
STEM preservice teachers to be awarded Noyce Scholarships to teach in high-need
schools via new strategic partnerships across eastern Washington. These Scholars
will receive dual degrees in a STEM content field as well as earn their teaching
certification, to ensure a high degree of pedagogical content knowledge. The
project will develop new professional development training for mentor teachers,
a new field experience course for prospective Scholars, as well as additional
cultural competency training for Scholars. This project provides wrap-around
support for new STEM teachers via an induction program. Providing customized
support and training to Scholars will help retain a more diverse STEM teacher
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Eastern Washington University
includes partnerships with Spokane Community College, Spokane Falls Community
College, Columbia Basin College, Recruit Washington Teaching Academies, as well
as Spokane, Cheney, and Liberty Public Schools. The project goals include: 1)
increasing the number of STEM teachers with exceptional content and pedagogical
content knowledge; 2) increasing the number of diverse STEM teachers in science
and mathematics disciplines; 3) preparing STEM teachers to develop engineering
and mathematical practices aligned with the Common Core State Standards and Next
Generation Science Standards; and 4) increasing the number of teachers who
effectively teach diverse students and persist in the field. This project will
fund 32 new STEM teachers over 5 years. Undergraduate scholars will be recruited
from mathematics, chemistry, biology, physics, and geosciences. This project
will explore the ways in which both new and strengthened partnerships with
external institutions and internal campus units increase the number of diverse
preservice teachers, and what implications the contextual differences across the
collaborating institutions have on recruitment efforts. This project will
develop a new first year STEM education course and enrollment data will be
collected in STEM education programs. Additionally, this project will explore to
what extent, explicit instruction in cultural literacy and co-curricular
activities improves cultural competence, and the ways in which expanding
induction support and scholarships impact Scholarsâ€™ persistence in teaching at
high-need schools. An external evaluator will assist in evaluating the
effectiveness of the program at achieving the stated outputs and impact. The
project team will disseminate findings at regional and national conferences, in
journal articles, and online via a project website. Noyce Scholars will have a
long-lasting positive impact on student learning through their use of the
evidence-based practices emphasized in this program and by sharing effective
practices with other teachers. Additionally, recruiting diverse students,
preparing them for the classroom, and then developing, supporting, and retaining
them in the profession will have a positive impact on all students in STEM. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K- 12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.