* 2150010
* CAREER: Advancing Network Configuration and Runtime Adaptation Methods for Industrial Wireless Sensor-Actuator Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Mo Sha, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 02/28/2026
* USD 271,061.00

A decade of real-world deployments of industrial wireless standards, such as
WirelessHART and ISA100, has demonstrated the feasibility of using IEEE
802.15.4-based wireless sensor-actuator networks (WSANs) to achieve reliable and
real-time wireless communication in industrial environments. Although WSANs work
satisfactorily most of the time thanks to years of research, they are often
difficult to configure as configuring a WSAN is a complex process, which
involves theoretical computation, simulation, field testing, among other tasks.
To support new services that require high data rates and mobile platforms,
industrial WSANs are adopting wireless technologies such as 5G and LoRa and
becoming increasingly hierarchical, heterogeneous, and complex, which
significantly increases the network configuration difficulty. This CAREER
project aims to advance network configuration and runtime adaptation methods for
industrial WSANs. Research outcomes from this project will significantly enhance
the resilience and agility of industrial WSANs and reduce human involvement in
network management, leading to a significant improvement in industrial
efficiency and a remarkable reduction of operating costs. By providing more
advanced WSANs, the research outcomes from this project will significantly spur
the installation of WSANs in process industries and enable a broad range of new
wireless-based applications, which affects economics, security, and quality of
life. This project enhances lectures and course project materials, supports
curriculum developments, creates research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, and establishes outreach programs for K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different from traditional methods that rely largely on
experience and rules of thumb that involve a coarse-grained analysis of network
load or dynamics during a few field trials, this project develops a rigorous
methodology that leverages advanced machine learning techniques to configure and
adapt WSANs by harvesting the valuable resources (e.g., theoretical models and
simulation methods) accumulated by the wireless research community. This project
develops new methods that leverage wireless simulations and deep learning to
relate high-level network performance to low-level network configurations and
efficiently adapt the network at runtime to satisfy the performance requirements
specified by industrial applications. This project demonstrates the performance
of WSANs that are equipped with those new methods through testbed
experimentation, case study, and real-world validation. The research outcomes
from this project affects not only industrial WSANs but other complex wireless
networks as this project creates a replicable template for novel network
configuration and runtime adaptation strategies that advance the state of the
art of wireless network management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.