* 2150540
* REU SITE: Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship in Earth and Environmental Sciences (SURFEES)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Christopher Kim, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2025
* USD 490,066.00

This summer REU Site program in the Schmid College of Science and Technology at
Chapman University will annually provide 12 students selected exclusively from
two-year community colleges (focusing specifically on low-income students,
women, and students from underrepresented minority groups) with the opportunity
to engage in research projects related to earth and environmental science issues
from the molecular to global scale. This REU site program will provide an
underserved student population with hands-on, interdisciplinary research
experiences and enhance the recruitment and retention of underrepresented
students into STEM fields. The program will partner with multiple local
community colleges that serve ethnically diverse communities. Faculty mentors
include biochemists, biologists, chemists, earth scientists, and food scientists
with active undergraduate research groups at Chapman.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern California is a highly developed urbanized area
with considerable natural resources, resulting in a wide range of earth and
environmental challenges and problems. Addressing these complex issues requires
an interdisciplinary and educated workforce of scientists. Through participation
in cutting-edge research with faculty mentors working at the forefront of their
respective disciplines, students will engage in complex scientific studies on
topics including the transformation pathways of pollutants, environmental
impacts on intertidal ecosystems, effects of climate change on extreme weather-
related events, and carbon sequestration in wetlands. Projects involve
combinations of benchtop experimentation, training and usage of advanced
scientific instrumentation, computational modeling, and data analysis.
Participants will also engage in professional and career development
opportunities including workshops on data visualization, public speaking,
presenting research results, applying to fellowships and graduate programs, and
career panels. The program will conclude with a university-wide research
showcase where participants will give oral and poster presentations summarizing
their summer research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.