* 2150423
* HSI Pilot Project: Including others in the teaching and practice of STEM disciplines
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lissette Delgado-Cruzata, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,982.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to promote systemic change
in the teaching of STEM disciplines in order to close the gap between learners,
educators, and the pedagogical material used in the classroom. The expected
outcomes of this work are to increase faculty expertise through training in
anti-racist and inclusive approaches that promote diversity in the STEM
classroom, to have STEM students engaged with the faculty-created culturally
affirming and anti-racist materials and activities, and to share the newly
created resources in an open resource repository to support STEM faculty across
the university and improve their pedagogical skills regarding culturally
affirming teaching practices. This project proposes to promote institutional
transformation in the teaching of STEM disciplines that better represents the
student populations at Hispanic Serving Institutions by applying this approach
to seven STEM courses at CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the project is to conduct an incentivized
1-year STEM faculty seminar in which faculty will learn about anti-racist and
inclusive pedagogies, as well as discuss their role and determine actions to
undertake to diversify the students’ voices in the classroom. The seminar
outcomes include classroom materials and activities aligned with the course
content and developed with a culturally affirming, anti-racist lens. The second
objective is the implementation of these materials and activities in the first
and second year STEM courses to effect change in their epistemological
perspectives to reflect the diversity of the classrooms and to empower the
students. The third objective is to carry out a robust evaluation that assesses
the impact of these activities in relation to students’ sense of belonging to
STEM and science identity. The fourth and final objective is to develop an open-
resource platform that will house the created resources and tools to make them
accessible to other STEM faculty members. Ultimately, this will promote
widespread curricular change, enhance faculty engagement and equitable student
outcomes. The research plan will include a mixed-method approach to analyze
students’ experiences and outcomes after participating in this program. The
project seeks to generate new knowledge about inclusive pedagogical practices to
increase the connection of students with classroom materials, and shed light
into new strategies to impact students’ persistence in STEM majors that promote
the retention of marginalized and historically underrepresented minority
students in STEM. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education
and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.