* 2150297
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Artificial Intelligence Assisted Malware Analysis
* EDU,DGE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Mahmoud Abdelsalam, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 11/30/2023
* USD 97,320.00

The use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) to solve
cybersecurity problems has been gaining traction within industry and academia,
in part as a response to widespread malware attacks on critical systems, such as
cloud infrastructures, government offices or hospitals, and the vast amounts of
data they generate. AI- and ML-assisted cybersecurity offers data-driven
automation that could enable security systems to identify and respond to cyber
threats in real time. However, there is currently a shortfall of professionals
trained in AI and ML for cybersecurity. This project will address the shortfall
by developing lab-intensive modules that enable undergraduate and graduate
students to gain fundamental and advanced knowledge in applying AI and ML
techniques to real-world datasets to learn about Cyber Threat Intelligence
(CTI), malware analysis, and classification, among other important topics in
cybersecurity. The proposed project will impact more than 400 students annually
and is uniquely poised to provide opportunities to a diverse student population.
Tennessee Technical University and University of North Carolina Wilmington are
located in economically challenged regions. Manhattan College has a student
population that is 31% minority (20% Hispanic) and 33% first generation college
students. In addition, this project proposes to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM by conducting workshops and participating in
professional conferences, such as The Women in Cybersecurity Conference,
Community College Cyber Summit, and Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers.
Providing undergraduate and graduate students with training in the use of AI in
malware analysis is an important step towards bridging the current cybersecurity
talent gap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop six self-contained
and adaptive modules in "AI-assisted Malware Analysis." Topics will include: (1)
CTI and malware attack stages, (2) malware knowledge representation and CTI
sharing, (3) malware data collection and feature identification, (4) AI-assisted
malware detection, (5) malware classification and attribution, and (6) advanced
malware research topics and case studies such as adversarial learning and
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) detection. The course modules will be evaluated
and assessed to determine their impact on students. Workshops and tutorial
sessions at conferences will be used to expand the projectâ€™s impact and provide
students and enthusiasts with hands-on experience of aspects of AI-assisted
malware analysis using real-world datasets. A two-day training workshop for
external faculty will also be arranged to enable further dissemination of the
modules. The suite of activities proposed in this project will train students,
researchers, and professionals in AI-assisted malware analysis and prepare them
to meet future cybersecurity challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds
proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.