* 2150515
* REU Site: UC Davis Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Rena Zieve, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2025
* USD 399,071.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award supports the renewal of the Physics Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of California,
Davis. Each year, the REU program will provide twelve (12) students from around
the United States an opportunity to participate in a ten-week summer research
program. REU students work closely with a faculty mentor on a ten-week research
project chosen from a variety of physics subfields. The individual research
projects involve cutting-edge research in several physics subfields of
astrophysics, biophysics, complex systems, condensed matter, nuclear and
particle physics. The students will have opportunities to be part of efforts to
develop photovoltaics from nanoparticles, design detectors for new particle
accelerators, produce medically important radioactive isotopes, understand
quantum gravity, neutron stars, and the origin of galaxies, and many more. The
students will directly contribute to the body of knowledge and potential
applications that these projects produce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
their specific research project, the students learn from their interactions with
faculty, graduate students, and other REU students, and from field trips showing
physics-related work in diverse settings. They will also practice important
skills including scientific communication, collaboration, and computer
programming. Professional development will include information about graduate
programs and about physics-related careers with and without graduate degrees.
The program targets students from non-research institutions in California,
including community colleges, and from four-year colleges nationwide. Taken as a
whole, the REU activities teach skills useful for further scientific endeavors,
give students a broad perspective on possible future paths, and help them build
a network of professional contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.