* 2150103
* Cultivating Access to Manifest INtentional Outcomes in STEM (CAMINOS)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Francisco Apodaca, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 995,713.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2: IEP aims to build upon existing
education assets in Northeastern New Mexico to broaden student engagement in
STEM. The project will be conducted in one of the poorest U.S. regions, with 28%
of residents below the poverty line, and ~78% of individuals of Hispanic
descent. Led by the ARMAS (Achieving Research in Math And Science) in Education
Center at New Mexico Highlands University, the only four-year college in the
region, Cultivating Access to Manifest INtentional Outcomes in STEM (CAMINOS)
will cultivate collaborations with regional two-year institutions of higher
learning to 1) provide academic support and mentoring to students, 2) facilitate
hands-on and culturally responsive learning experiences, and 3) deliver
professional development opportunities to faculty. The goal is to recruit and
retain students to STEM disciplines, promote student success, and broaden the
STEM workforce by producing more STEM graduates with practical experience who
are workforce ready. The project expects to deliver outreach to at least 1,500
high school students, coach STEM students from three regional community
colleges, and improved mentoring/teaching skills for participating STEM
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAMINOS project will modify and expand
academic and nonacademic activities currently supported by the ARMAS program at
NMHU to meet the HSI program goal of broadening participation of historically
underrepresented groups in STEM. In addition, the project will provide an
opportunity to increase understanding on how best to affect intersectional
systemic change within a broad STEM community. CAMINOS will implement three
novel and innovative initiatives to improve student success and broaden
participation of historically underrepresented populations: (1) ARMAS Counts, a
recognition/celebration program to increase student engagement; (2) ARMAS
Connects, a synergistic partnership with three community colleges to more
effectively recruit and support students; and (3) ARMAS Faculty Fellows to
increase faculty engagement and awareness of studentsâ€™ assets, challenges, and
barriers. The project will also include support for student involvement in
grant-funded research and field experiences from the student experience
coordinator to increase the number of students engaging in these experiences,
leading to increased STEM completion and placement. Lessons learned will be
shared with universities and community colleges facing similar challenges to the
region. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.