* 2150331
* REU Site: Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* James Forney, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 263,866.00

This REU Site award to Purdue University, located in West Lafayette, Indiana,
will support the training of eight students for ten weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an underrepresented group, will be
trained in the program. Participants will be recruited from life science and
chemistry majors who have an interest in research. Students will develop the
knowledge and problem-solving skills required for careers in life sciences
research. The program will contribute to increasing the preparation and
diversity of the nationâ€™s science and technology workforce. Students will learn
how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. The web-based SALG URSSA assessment tool will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual goal of the program is to
provide advanced training in the experimental analysis of protein function. A
three-day orientation will introduce key concepts in protein biochemistry and
experimental design. The remainder of the program will emphasize full-time
research supplemented with weekly sessions on ethical conduct in research,
professional communication, and applications to graduate school. Faculty
mentored projects in the Department of Biochemistry include analysis of enzyme
mechanisms, post-translational protein modifications, epigenetic regulation, and
protein-nucleic acid interactions studied in a wide range of biological contexts
including plant secondary metabolism, photosynthesis, tissue differentiation and
the drosophila visual system. Many of the projects will highlight the value of
genetic approaches to study protein function. Participants will present their
results at a university-wide poster session at the end of the program. Complete
applications will include academic transcripts, two letters of recommendation
and a personal statement. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://ag.purdue.edu/biochem/Pages/REU.aspx, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. James Forney at forney@purdue.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.