* 2150135
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Machine Learning, Analytics, and Augmented Reality for Smart and Connected Health
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Ting Liu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2024
* USD 344,029.00

This project aims to facilitate the inclusion of undergraduates in research
targeting the emerging areas of smart and connected health and computer
engineering. Undergraduate students will design and develop concepts and
applications that integrate artificial intelligence (AI) and data-driven
techniques to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. The REU site
provides a unique opportunity for undergraduates to engage with a diverse
research program that includes working with persons with disabilities such as
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and multiple sclerosis (MS) and planning for
smart city fire-related responses. Some of the research projects address the
behavior and hygiene of children with ASD using new engineering data and cyber
visual techniques. Integrating technology such as biosensors, virtual reality,
and machine learning are crucial for developing reliable and sensitive
assessment tools for people with MS and increasing confidence in the results.
Smart city firefighting provides a unique learning experience for undergraduates
in monitoring temperatures while developing autonomous data collection methods
to highlight areas of concern for safety officials. Moreover, many research
topics are not covered under traditional undergraduate curricula and will help
prepare a new generation of professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site
seeks to expose undergraduate students to research in the emerging fields of
smart and connected communities and smart and connected health. The
undergraduate students will design and develop concepts, systems, and
applications that target smart-health and smart-community engineering problems.
The intellectual theme of this project ranges from designing an ecological
assessment to applying machine learning (ML), data analytics, and augmented
reality (AR) as new paradigms to analyze and discover new aspects of health-
related applications. Each summer, the REU site will provide a diverse group of
undergraduate students, many from underrepresented groups, opportunities to
directly participate in research activities to develop disciplinary knowledge,
research abilities, and team skills. The focus of the REU site is to enable
students to perform research in three main areas: 1) intelligent emotion
recognition and cyber training for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD);
2) cognitive and body posture control for persons with disabilities; and 3)
smart-city fire response. The REU research projects will advance the state of
the art in ecological assessment utilizing ML computational models, AR
visualization, and data analysis and will be performed by the undergraduate
students to serve their communities. Eight weeks of in-depth summer research
will increase undergraduate studentsâ€™ retention, improve their career
perspectives, engage them to participate in the next frontier of data-driven
research, and motivate them to enter graduate STEM-Health
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.