* 2150961
* Engaging Noyce Scholars in Anti-Racist Community-Based Teaching in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* EUN KYUNG KO, National-Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2027
* USD 645,744.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality teachers
in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics to teach in high-need schools.
From the recruitment through the induction of scholars, the project focuses on
community engagement. The incorporation of community-based inquiry as a form of
effective STEM teaching positions school communities as sources of strength and
knowledge. This project intends to prepare STEM teachers who will strengthen the
STEM persistence rates of marginalized groups by providing anti-racist,
community-based science and mathematics instruction that gives secondary
students the skills and experiences to understand how STEM can positively impact
their own communities. The project develops and evaluates a model for preparing
high school STEM teachers who can use their instruction to positively address
the very conditions that have limited who in our country takes part in
mathematics and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
partnerships among National-Louis University (NLU), a private university,
Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), a private, technology focused
undergraduate university, and Chicago Public Schools. The project will provide
22 Secondary-level STEM teacher candidates (Noyce Scholars) $15,000 scholarships
over the course of the students’ last two years (4 semesters) of their
coterminous BS/MAT degree programs in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, or
Physics. In addition to scholarships, the project will engage these students in
activities that build their capacity for community-based STEM inquiry. The
project centers on a liberatory form of education by preparing Noyce Scholars to
be anti-racist, community-based STEM teachers. Through mentored cohorts,
communities of practice, and structured and supported field experiences in
Chicago Public Schools, scholars will develop three interrelated capacities,
namely: 1) familiarity with and commitment to serving in high-need school
environments; 2) a deep knowledge of the systemic inequities within STEM and how
it impacts their students and their students’ communities; and 3) the
pedagogical content knowledge to enact STEM learning opportunities that connect
to the reality of students’ lives, including the strengths and sources of
knowledge in their communities. Once the scholars graduate, they will continue
to receive two years of support and guidance through an induction coach, a site-
based school mentor, and a professional learning community. The induction
process will include social-emotional support for Noyce Scholar graduates as
they discuss and collaborate around different problems of practice related to
being an anti-racist community-based STEM educator. Additional induction themes
for the new teachers will include how to identify and leverage financial, human
and social capital resources and development of an understanding of the ‘hidden’
or ‘unstated’ curriculum of and navigation within a high-need school or
district. The project’s research and evaluation will generate new knowledge and
fill gaps in the literature related to building engagement with community into
teacher preparation and building the STEM engagement of diverse sets of
students. The project’s commitment to community is further realized through the
embedded Delphi study that applies a research process to understanding a broad
range of perspectives on the possibilities of community-based STEM instruction.
This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.