* 2150441
* REU Site: Ecohydrology of Tropical Montane Forests—Diversity in Science, Interdisciplinary Breadth, and Global Awareness
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Peyton Smith, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2026
* USD 778,590.00

This REU site will support eight students per year, recruited nationwide from
2-year and 4-year institutions, to participate in a 10-week international
research experience. Participants will work under the guidance of Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU) faculty from four colleges (Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Engineering, Geosciences, and Bush School of Government), alongside
international experts based in Costa Rica. Participants will spend 5 weeks on-
campus at TAMU and 5 weeks at the TAMU Soltis Center near San Isidro de Peñas
Blancas, Costa Rica. This program aims to enhance student development towards
future careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by A)
demonstrating the foundational importance of Diversity in Science; B) instilling
competencies and appreciation for Interdisciplinary Breadth while broadening
awareness of the interconnection between forests, water, people, and planet; and
C) fostering Global Awareness by providing a transformational international
research experience within the tropical forest and nearby sites. In addition to
conducting research projects, students will undertake professional development
activities to foster their acceptance of a place in STEM research and continuing
education and participate in cultural exchanges and hands-on learning projects
that enhance their ability to live and work effectively in a diverse and global
society. The expected outcomes include joint faculty-student publications in
leading research journals, research conference presentations, and studies to
assess the success of international field experiences. The project directors
will share strategies to recruit diverse student cohorts, program design and
management, and building successful international REU programs through workshops
and other far-reaching outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique learning
environment of this international REU site supports crosscutting discoveries
that relate changing climate and land management to tropical ecosystem function
and associated hydrological services provided by forests for local communities,
e.g., clean reliable drinking water and hydropower generation. Key science
questions will include, among others: how will altered climate affect tropical
forest ecosystem function, water reliability, biodiversity, and soil carbon
sequestration?; how does land management affect the land-atmosphere interaction
through changes in evapotranspiration, leaf wetness duration, and productivity?;
and how are hydrological services provided by forests for local communities
affected by climate, land management, and natural geology? Our recruitment and
multi-phase selection process prioritizes potential impact from this REU,
appropriate expectations and attitudes, and contribution to diversity of the
cohort. Cohort-building activities are designed to create an inclusive and
supportive learning community to improve skills in critical thinking, problem
solving, communication and collaboration. Educational program assessment will
also be conducted to understand the full timeline of student experience and
self-conception as researchers. In addition to standard pre- and post-program
surveys, more frequent assessments will be used to evaluate students’
experiences with overconfidence versus struggle cycles for various aspects of
the research process. Additional outcomes of this program include workshops
through the TAMU Center for Teaching Excellence and assisting with the TAMU
Office of Undergraduate Research on topics such as application design, processes
for recruitment and selection, setting appropriate expectations, cohort-
building, designing professional development aimed at ‘entering research’, and
building successful international programs outside of the study abroad
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.