* 2150110
* Building Capacity to Recruit and Prepare High-Quality Secondary STEM Educators in Kentucky
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Mark McKinnon, Lindsey Wilson College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 74,885.00

The project aims to serve the national need for highly qualified biology and
mathematics teachers in secondary schools. In particular, the project will
address the secondary STEM teacher shortage in rural Kentucky. This will be
accomplished by bringing together STEM faculty and Education faculty to
collaborate on improving STEM courses and aligning course content with state
teacher certification standards. Additionally, the project will collect evidence
from college students about their interests in teaching careers and use this
information to improve recruitment of future secondary STEM teachers. Further,
the project will explore the feasibility of building a new Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT) program that could provide a graduate education pathway to
secondary STEM teaching careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building
project at Lindsey Wilson College includes partnerships with Somerset Community
College and two high-need local school districts – Russell County Schools and
Adair County Schools – that will lay the groundwork for a future Noyce Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends proposal. The project goals are to: 1) improve
coordination among STEM and Education faculty; 2) collect evidence and develop
new strategies to increase enrollment of future secondary STEM teachers; and 3)
determine feasibility of a new Master of Arts in STEM Teaching graduate program.
To accomplish these goals, the campus will establish a new STEM Education
Curriculum Committee to build key bridges between STEM and Education faculty.
STEM faculty will be engaged in taking the PRAXIS subject assessments for
teachers as a novel approach to guide authentic revision of 36 STEM content
courses to produce highly qualified future secondary STEM teachers for the
region. Additionally, the project will collect evidence from students to inform
and improve materials to recruit undergraduate STEM majors, local community
college transfer students, and local high school students to secondary STEM
teaching careers. The project will translate recruitment materials into Spanish
and conduct outreach specifically to reach Hispanic and Latino students, who are
currently underrepresented in the teacher workforce compared to secondary
student populations in the region. An experienced, external consultant will be
contracted to analyze the feasibility of developing a Master of Arts in Teaching
program that could enable entry to STEM teaching careers at the graduate level,
in addition to efforts to attract future STEM teachers from undergraduate
student populations. Project evaluation will be led by an Advisory Committee
composed of stakeholders from the campus, the local school districts, and the
partner community college. In addition to building capacity to recruit new
secondary STEM educators in the region, the project will produce insights into
how STEM and Education faculty can collaborate to revise undergraduate STEM
curricula such that they align with state certification standards and better
prepare highly effective secondary STEM teachers. This Capacity Building project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.