* 2150613
* Arresting methanogenesis with bioelectrochemically generated hydrogen peroxide for producing volatile fatty acids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhen He, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 390,261.00

Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a promising and versatile environmental
biotechnology platform for converting organic wastes to an energy-rich biogas
for heating, electricity generation, and upgrading to produce renewable natural
gas. AD has also shown great potential to convert organic wastes to volatile
fatty acids (VFAs) which can serve as building blocks for the manufacturing of
high-value products. During the anaerobic digestion of organic wastes,
acetogenic bacteria generate VFAs that also serve as intermediate compounds for
biogas production by methanogenic bacteria. Thus, the inhibition of methanogens
has emerged as a promising strategy for enhancing the production of VFAs while
minimizing biogas generation during the anaerobic digestion of organic wastes.
The overarching goal of this project is to investigate the utilization of
hydrogen peroxide generated from the bioelectrochemical (BEC) conversion of
organic wastes to inhibit the growth and activity of methanogenic bacteria in
anaerobic digesters. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator proposes
to explore the design, evaluation, and validation of an integrated and efficient
AD-BEC-membrane separation system that could convert organic wastes to VFAs with
high product yield and purity. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the generation of fundamental knowledge to advance the
sustainable conversion of organic wastes to high value products. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and educational activities
including the mentoring of one graduate and two undergraduate students at
Washington University in St. Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic digestion
(AD) has shown great potential to contribute to the decarbonization of the
chemical industry via the conversion of organic wastes to high-value chemicals
such as volatile fatty acids (VFAs) which can serve as building blocks for the
manufacturing of industrially relevant products. However, the ability to tune
and control the product spectrum of anaerobic digesters to maximize the yield
and purity of VFAs remains a critical and unresolved challenge. The goal of this
project is to explore an innovative approach to maximize the yield and purity of
VFA production during the anaerobic digestion of organic wastes. To advance this
goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to explore the utilization of in-
situ generated hydrogen peroxide to inhibit the growth and activity of
methanogenic bacteria which utilize VFAs as intermediate compounds to generate
biogas in anaerobic digesters. The proposed inhibition of methanogenesis will be
investigated within an integrated VFA production system consisting of an
anaerobic digestor for product generation, a membrane separation module for
product purification/concentration, and a bioelectrochemical reactor for in-situ
H2O2 generation using organic wastes. The specific objectives of the research
are to: (1) Advance the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of
methanogenesis inhibition by H2O2 during AD through integrated experimental and
modeling studies; (2) Evaluate thermal or electrically driven membrane systems
for the effective separation and purification of VFAs generated during AD; and
(3) Explore the establishment of a translational scale system as a platform for
performing a techno-economic assessment of the proposed integrated VFA
production system. The successful completion of this research has the potential
for transformative impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to
advance the development and implementation of more efficient and cost-effective
technologies to recover valuable chemicals and compounds from organic wastes. To
implement the education and outreach activities of the project, the PI plans to
integrate the findings from this research into existing undergraduate/graduate
courses at Washington University in St. Louis to provide students with hands-on
training (including lab sessions) on environmental resource recovery. In
addition, the PI plans to explore the development and implementation of a
Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program in collaboration with local high
schools in St. Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.