* 2150617
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing and Testing Novel Strategies to Detect Inattentive Responding in Intensive Longitudinal Self-Report Methods
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Shirlene Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 17,861.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the accuracy of
participants' responses to mobile surveys. Surveys are one of the best ways for
researchers to learn about the behaviors and attitudes of a population. Due to
the popularity of smartphones, researchers have the option of conducting real
time repeated surveys on participants' smartphones. However, participants may
choose not to respond to the surveys or may respond without fully paying
attention. Currently, there is a lack of data and guidance on how to detect and
manage the latter problem of inattentive responding in surveys. Inattentive
response to surveys may result in poor data quality and affect the accuracy of
research conclusions. This research will examine inattentive responding in
longitudinal and repeated surveys. The project will establish models of when and
why inattentive responding is likely to occur and provide insights into
preventive strategies to increase the validity of self-report measures. The
project also will generate recommendations for detecting poor data quality and
suggest preventative measures. Data and techniques resulting from this project
will be made publicly available. Improved research methodology and more accurate
research conclusions will benefit policy formation and evidence-based decision
making, as well as society through scientific journalism, education, and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will translate inattentive
response detection elements from online survey research to an intensive
ecological monetary assessment (EMA) study to develop novel and practical
strategies that could be recommended for future intensive longitudinal studies.
Due to advancements in mobile technology, there is increased promise of using
smartphones to access individuals in their natural environment. EMA is a real-
time sampling strategy that researchers can use to collect repeated measures of
self-report data such as current experiences, behaviors, and moods, resulting in
more ecologically valid data. However, sustaining participant engagement can be
challenging given the potential burden from completing repeated surveys, and
there is a lack of research and guidance on how to manage decreased data quality
due to burden. This project will 1) test the accuracy or indices to detect which
surveys may be invalid, 2) use a mixed methods approach to determine what
factors increase the probability of engaging in inattentive responding, and 3)
model how including these invalid surveys in data analysis creates deviations in
results. As a result of these analyses, guidelines will be developed for
conducting longitudinal studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.