* 2150637
* I-Corps: Prognostic test for dairy heifer selection
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Heidi Rossow, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop an
assay to identify calves that will not survive to 2 years of age or will be low
milk producers. The goal of the proposed technology is to reduce the number of
calves that must be raised by dairies as replacements so dairies may focus their
resources on raising healthy, efficient, productive calves and reduce costs,
feed waste, and methane and manure production. During the first 24 months of
age, heifer death loss and culling can be as high as 20% resulting in a loss of
$1800-$2400 per heifer. Currently, dairies are faced with raising these heifers
to a productive age (2 years old) to determine which heifers to keep and which
to cull when they only need to keep 50% as replacements. This adds approximately
$900,000 in costs per year to feed and care for heifers that should have been
sold and raised for beef at less than 1 week of age, making heifer raising the
second largest cost for a dairy. In addition, the proposed technology also may
be used to enable the development of other products that promote energy
efficiency, milk production and health such as cardiolipin, prebiotics,
probiotics, supra levels of vitamins as well as the development of novel
therapies for diseases such as ketosis, fatty liver, obesity, and
hypocalcaemia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a prognostic assay of mitochondrial function to identify calves
that will not survive to 2 years of age or will be low milk producers.
Mitochondria are cellular energy generators and play a key role in metabolic
flexibility - the ability of mitochondria to respond to physiological changes
such as immune challenge, energy restriction, lactation, and gestation.
Mitochondria have their own genome and are maternally inherited, however,
current genetic tests do not include their impact on milk production or
longevity. The proposed prognostic assay is based on measuring mitochondrial
activity and includes distinct relationships between age, level of milk
production, and specific mitochondrial enzyme activities within the electron
transport chain. The proposed assay has been shown to predict death and culling
based on data from calves tested at 3-5 days of age and followed through to
their second lactation. This suggests that the assay results may predict
survivability and could be used to identify potential interventions that support
mitochondrial function resulting in improved immune function and milk
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.