* 2150975
* Transport Mechanisms across Geomorphic Transitions: Capturing Spatial and Temporal Evolution of River-Floodplain Connectivity within the Trinity River System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Mohrig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 352,826.00

Connections between rivers and floodplains control the transport of water,
nutrients, pollutants, and other materials through river systems, thus affecting
the functioning of rivers, storage of carbon on floodplains, sediment movement,
and ecosystem functioning. This project harnesses recent advancements in high-
resolution topographic analyses and modeling capabilities, applied to the
Trinity River in Texas, to enable new understanding of the interactions between
rivers and floodplains. An innovative approach to analyzing the dynamic boundary
between river and floodplain is used to improve understanding of how water and
other materials move through this complex interface. Project activities also
contribute to development and dissemination of river modeling capabilities and
the advancement of research-based learning experiences for high school and
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines an extensive
collection of field observations, lidar data sets, numerical modeling, and
advanced tools for feature extraction and analysis, to quantify river-floodplain
connectivity of the Trinity River, Texas. The research is articulated around a
two-part overarching hypothesis that (i) accurate characterization of exchanges
in water, solutes, and solids between a river and its floodplain requires
treating channel banks as moving internal boundaries, and (ii) these moving
boundaries regulate the flow of water and sediment between the two domains in
ways that differ in time and space. This research changes the way in which the
boundary between the river and its floodplain is commonly viewed and analyzed;
from a static boundary demarcating where the river ends and the floodplain
begins, to a geomorphic transition whose spatial and temporal evolution controls
the interactions between a river and its floodplain. Multiple planned activities
integrate research and education to advance the inclusion of diverse groups in
the geosciences and engineering and to bridge the gap between data analysts and
modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Geomorphology
&amp; Land-use Dynamics and Hydrologic Sciences
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.