* 2150194
* REU Site: Atmospheric Measurements and Data Analysis at Hampton University
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* William Moore, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2025
* USD 388,259.00

The 8-week summer REU program for 8 students hosted by Hampton University is
aimed primarily at under-represented minority students to conduct research
centered around the broad theme “Measurement and Analysis of Atmospheric
Properties.” REU students will work with mentors from the Department of
Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, with support from its associated research
center, the Center for Atmospheric Sciences. Research projects will include
several broad themes. Satellite image analysis will be applied to the detection
of flood waters on normally dry land and to the appearance and growth of harmful
algal blooms in local rivers. Hampton University’s NSF-funded observatory will
be used to monitor the atmospheres of Jupiter, Saturn and Venus. Ground-based
instruments will be used to measure atmospheric properties for comparison with
satellite measurements. Students will participate in the collection of
atmospheric measurements from a variety of instruments, apply fundamental data
analysis techniques, develop basic research skills (literature review,
instrument calibration, data validation, model fitting, coding), and participate
in a research team to develop collaboration skills (active listening,
leadership, communication, delegation). The students will also receive
professional development training including topics such as paper and proposal
writing, peer review, and oral presentation skills. This REU program, by
instilling confidence in under-represented minority participants in their
pursuit of STEM degrees and careers, will enhance the contribution of Hampton
University to the diversification of the nation’s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hampton University has state of the art
atmospheric instrumentation. Instrumentation available includes met sondes, O3
Sondes, Cimel Photometer, 48” Mie-Ramen OPA DIAL, 48” Mie-Ramen lidar, doppler
lidar, scanning lidar, and Pandora Spectrophotometer. Research topics students
may work on are related to three major themes: 1. Satellite mission design, 2.
Observational Analysis of Planetary Atmospheres, and 3. Critical analysis of
aerosol measurements. Participants will have the experience enhanced by visits
to The Virginia Air and Space Center and The Virginia Living Museum. Mentors
participating in the program will receive mentor training from the Hampton
university Faculty Institute Program. Graduate students will serve as near-peer
mentors and receive training from the program director on responsible code of
conduct for research and prevention of sexual harassment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense ASSURE
program in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.