* 2150697
* I-Corps:  Flavonoid derivative for treatment of anxiety without alcohol or opiate enhancing properties
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2022
* James Simon, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of safe and effective treatments for anxiety, specifically for
individuals at high risk of substance use disorders and polysubstance overdoses.
Benzodiazepines (BZDs) are the most commonly prescribed class of anti-anxiety
medication, and currently prescribed to more than 5% of the US population.
Although effective, BZDs are highly addictive and commonly involved in
polysubstance overdose fatalities. In fact, BZD prescription rates per state are
directly linked to overdose fatality rates. Despite this risk, BZDs remain
widely prescribed, even in those at high risk for polysubstance use. When BZDs
are taken with alcohol, opiates, or other CNS depressants, they can cause life
threatening respiratory depression among other effects such as drowsiness and
reduced motor function, which often lead to accidents and hospitalizations. The
proposed research is committed to the development safer and effective
alternatives to BZDs, specifically for those at risk of polysubstance overdose.
In doing so, the goal to improve safety and efficacy of anxiety treatment and
substance use disorders, improve long-term recovery success, and combat the
rising pandemic of polysubstance overdose fatalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of partial and functionally subtype
selective GABAA (Gamma-Amino Butyric Acid-A) receptor modulators for the
treatment of anxiety, specifically for individuals at high risk of substance use
disorders and polysubstance overdoses. Select natural and synthetic flavonoids
have been shown to be potent GABAAR modulators with anxiolytic activity and
reduced sedative and alcohol-enhancing effects. However, flavonoids are poorly
absorbed and rapidly excreted due to a lack of druglike properties. This has led
us to the design of novel derivatives with improved druglike properties with the
aim of identifying a druglike anti-anxiety (GABAAR PAM) without alcohol and
opiate enhancing properties. The foundation for this project is based upon work
completed in 2021 targeting positive modulation and inhibition ethanol-induced
potentiation of GABAARs as a novel mechanism for the treatment of alcohol use
disorder. This work also led to the filing of a provisional patent, and a recent
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.