* 2150537
* REU Site: Scripps Structure and Function Summer Institute (SFSI)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Dawn Eastmond, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2025
* USD 142,486.00

Thie REU Site award to The Scripps Research Institute, located in La Jolla, CA,
will support the training of ten students for ten weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. The Structure and Funcation Summer Institute (SFSI) creates a dynamic
and stimulating educational and research environment, provides undergraduate
students, particularly freshmen, sophomores and juniors from underserved and
underrepresented populations with the opportunity to conduct cutting-edge
research collaboratively with faculty and scientists and inspires them to choose
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) careers. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths and understand the impact of the SFSI
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFSI offers its diverse participants an
academic structure that integrates cutting-edge hands-on laboratory research
with professional skills development and mentoring. Each of the major program
components – (1) curriculum and professional development workshops and (2)
research training – is made up of several elements that work together and
provides a stepwise approach to improving interns’ critical thinking skills,
scientific preparation skills, knowledge base, and research expertise. The heart
of the program is the hands-on research experience in one of the site's state-
of-the-art laboratories where interns learn the scientific process by
participating in the scientific process side-by-side with world-renowned faculty
and scientists. As an adjunct to the lab research, interns attend themed weekly
professional development workshops and scientific seminars where they are
expected to read current scientific articles and lead discussions about the
rationale behind the experiments, analyze the work critically, and engage in
scientific discourse with their peers. Applications, due on February 15th, are
reviewed by faculty mentors. Selected participants are contacted by April 15th.
More information about the program is available by visiting
https://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/summer-research/reu-programs/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Dawn Eastmond at
eduprgm@scripps.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.