* 2150449
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Microelectronics and Sensor Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Nicole McFarlane, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 384,771.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site Program will support 10
students at the University of Tennessee. A diverse group of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science faculty will mentor students in a 10 week
research project which address the ways in which devices and electronics at the
micrometer and smaller scale impact modern technology and provides advances in
environmental science, physics, agriculture, space exploration, and biology.
Students will use state of the art software and instrumentation to develop
theories and design and implement microelectronics and sensor systems. In
addition to independent projects, students will be exposed to potential career
pathways enabled by advanced degrees and through professional development and
mentorship improve their competency in oral and written communication, research
strategies, the scientific method, and critical thinking. This program seeks to
improve diversity in the engineering industry and increase student participation
in graduate school by offering opportunities to traditionally underrepresented
minorities and deaf or hard of hearing persons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
site in Microelectronics and Sensor Systems addresses the question of â€œhow
information can be efficiently processed from measured signals." Under the
guidance of their faculty mentors students will perform research tasks towards
developing new devices and circuit architectures to new computing architectures
and algorithms that spans the academic fields of computer engineering, quantum
computing, energy and power, space exploration, and biotechnology. Students will
gain knowledge and experience in the basic essentials of microelectronics,
research methodologies, working in teams, communication, and multidisciplinary
research methods. Students will be exposed to potential career pathways with
advanced degrees including national labs, academia, industry, and intellectual
property with attention being paid to the challenges faced by D/HH students and
underrepresented minorities. The REU contribution to Microelectronics and Sensor
Systems will be invaluable and could impact faculty mentors by leading to unique
microelectronics design approach and unique sensor system solutions and improved
communication methodologies. The REU will have long term impact on the cohort
through post-completion mentoring relationships and peer-peer cohort
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.