* 2150454
* HSI Pilot Project: Improving Undergraduate Biology Courses to Enhance Student Achievement and Interest in Biology and Related Coursework and Careers
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Melissa Michelson, Menlo College
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,751.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program this project aims to investigate the effect of a new
introductory multidisciplinary biology curriculum that integrates content
exploring biological concepts related to race on student academic achievement,
the pursuit of additional biology coursework, and career aspirations in STEM.
Underrepresented minority students at HSIs have the academic abilities to
succeed in STEM, but they are underrepresented in STEM majors and occupations.
At Menlo College, Hispanic students in particular, tend to choose business
majors due to expectations of well-paid careers. As an HSI in Silicon Valley
with a focus on undergraduate business education, Menlo College is uniquely
situated to test how a change to the undergraduate biology curriculum can
encourage Hispanic students majoring in business to increase their knowledge of
biology and pursue careers in or related to biotechnology. The project will
develop a new introductory multidisciplinary biology course that integrates two
existing classes: Human Biology and Evolution, and Race and Racism. The class
will include guest speakers from local biotechnology companies and students will
visit local biotech businesses. The new curriculum is expected to generate
enhanced student success, interest in completing additional biology classes, and
interest in pursuing careers in biotechnology and related STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will contribute to our understanding of
how best to enhance Hispanic student academic success and postgraduate
involvement in biology and related STEM fields through changes to undergraduate
biology curricula, with the broader effect of increased numbers of Hispanic
students choosing STEM postgraduate work and careers. Across four semesters, we
will compare student learning and attitudes between students assigned to one of
three versions of the introductory biology course (Human Biology): treatment,
control, and baseline. Treatment sections will add a new race and racism module,
with some lectures and labs delivered by an instructor with appropriate
expertise and experience. Control sections will deliver the standard curriculum
but the same instructor will deliver lectures and lab sessions in parallel with
the treatment sections. Baseline sections will follow the standard curriculum.
We hypothesize that enrollment in the treatment course will increase student
learning and interest in STEM courses and careers. We expect that these effects
will be stronger among students who identify as a race/ethnicity other than
white, non-Hispanic. Outcomes will be measured using standard assessment
procedures (e.g., final exams), student surveys, and institutional data (e.g.,
enrollment in additional biology courses, and post-graduation destinations).
Findings will be submitted to an academic journal for dissemination with the
broader public. Pilot data will also be used to generate an HSI Track 2:
Implementation and Evaluation Project proposal to extend the insights from the
pilot to improve student success in other STEM courses at Menlo College (and
provide guidance for other institutions seeking to make similar curricular
shifts). The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.