* 2150473
* Using the immune system to understand vertebrate-microbiome interactions and evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sarah Hird, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 348,702.00

An animal’s “microbiome” consists of all the microorganisms that live on and
inside it. The microbiome interacts with the animal’s immune system in complex
ways. How an animal has both a highly effective immune system, but also a highly
diverse microbiome that potentially contains pathogens, is achieved through
adaptive immunity that has variable responses to detected threats. One job of
the immune system is to monitor the microbes in an animal’s gut and to stop
potential pathogens from crossing over into the blood by tagging them with
immunoglobulin A (IgA). This proposal will optimize a procedure developed in
humans, called “IgA-Seq”, for application to birds. IgA-Seq sorts a microbiome
into two populations, based on whether or not each individual microbe has been
tagged with IgA (by the host). The separate populations can then be sequenced
and analyzed, to determine who the host sees as a potential threat and what
genes those potential threats have. Completing this research will provide a view
of the microbiome from the lens of the host’s immune system. This research has
implications for multiple fields of study and, once optimized, will be a non-
lethal and novel link between the immune system and the microbiome, for use in
wild animal studies. To promote future research, the researchers will create
video tutorials of the entire process. To promote future generations of
research, the researchers will facilitate observations of the field work and
handling of wild birds by local elementary aged children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gastrointestinal epithelium is especially vulnerable
to microbial infection, because vertebrates bring microbes into their digestive
tract on food and the process of digestion occurs in a protected and nourishing
environment. Vertebrates have gut-associated lymphoid tissue and immunological
mechanisms that monitor and manage the gut microbiome, such as coating a
potential pathogen with Immunoglobulin A. Whether a microbe is tagged with IgA
is not random and minimizes specific threats to the host without causing a
systemic immune response or inflammation, which can be costly to produce.
Therefore, we can use IgA to better understand the ecology and evolution of the
vertebrate microbiome because it signifies how the host views and curates its
microbiome to maximize host fitness. The primary hypothesis of this proposal is
that the interaction between the host’s immune system (via IgA) and the
commensal gut microbiome is a central regulator of host-microbiome dynamics and
key to understanding the evolution of the microbiome as a trait of the host. To
address this hypothesis, we propose one initial research aim: optimize the
method IgA-Seq, developed in humans, that sorts a microbiome cell-by-cell into
populations based on whether an IgA is attached. Using unsorted, IgA positive
(IgA+) and IgA negative (IgA-) cell populations will identify the “core”
microbiome and quantify persistence of microbial taxa and functions within and
across individuals and species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.