* 2150298
* Transitions and Research Across  Interfaces (TRAINS)
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Peter Chung, Rio Hondo College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2027
* USD 999,504.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to transition students at HSI
community colleges to baccalaureate-granting institutions with a declared major
in a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) discipline. Despite
the social, economic, and innovation benefits of a diverse workforce in STEM
fields, graduates in these fields do not reflect the inclusive community
necessary for America to compete globally. Although 18% of the American
population identifies as being non-white Hispanic, Bachelor’s degrees in STEM
fields at baccalaureate-granting institutions are awarded at a dramatically
lower rate to Hispanic students. Community colleges are in a position to address
this disparity with 27% of all community college students identifying as
Hispanic and over 200 community colleges that have been federally recognized as
HSIs. This project, Transitions and Research Across Interfaces (TRAINS), will
facilitate the transition of students at Rio Hondo College, an HSI community
college, into future leaders in STEM fields through an intensive, 15-month
classroom/research laboratory experience at Rio Hondo College and the University
of Southern California. By providing career counseling, laboratory training, and
direct mentoring, TRAINS will seek to reverse the loss of interest in STEM
Fields amongst community college students and provide the opportunity for
students to transfer to baccalaureate-granting institutions where they may
graduate and pursue a career in a STEM field. Through data acquired through this
program, TRAINS will eventually present a modular strategy that can be
replicated at other population centers (that contain community colleges and
research universities) and fundamentally redefine the role of community colleges
as a strategic resource for America’s scientific and engineering workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the primary aim of successfully increasing the rate
at which Rio Hondo students transfer to baccalaureate-granting institution and
eventually pursue a career in a STEM field, TRAINS will also develop a cohort of
graduate students/postdoctoral fellows that can mentor non-traditional students
and advance knowledge on supporting students to overcoming cultural barriers
that lead to attrition in interest in STEM fields. These aims will be
facilitated by program evaluation specialists at the Center for Science and
Engineering Partnerships (CSEP) at the University of California, Santa Barbara
and education research team at High Point University. CSEP will ensure progress
towards program objectives through timely feedback via focus groups and tracking
surveys. The education research team will focus on testing novel strategies and
refining best practices to increase the persistence for non-traditional students
to maintain their interest in STEM fields. The results of this program will be
disseminated through education research journals and promotion at
regional/national conferences. Furthermore, with over 200,000 students that
attend HSI community colleges within 15 miles of the University Park Campus at
the University of Southern California, this program contains opportunities for
expansion and can serve as a model by which other regions integrate community
college students into research enriched programs. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.