* 2150042
* REU Site: Community-Engaged Training for Advancing Health Equity
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Katie Edwards, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 234,270.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits in addition to integrating
research and education. This REU project will introduce undergraduates to
research methods in health equity fields that prioritize the involvement of
community members. This includes approaches where community organizations or
community members themselves may guide the focus of the research. This is in
contrast to other methods where the research questions and methods are only
determined by the researcher. These kinds of methods help to engage community
members, which is especially important for addressing health equity topics. This
is because health equity topics often focus on populations who have experienced
exclusion and discrimination and may distrust researchers or the institutions
they represent. It also ensures that the community members have a voice in
determining what areas of health are of greatest need. We will introduce
students to these methods by having them work on one of several ongoing or
recently completed research projects that uses these kinds of methods. Students
will complete analyses on the project of their choosing and be involved in other
research activities to help them learn common methods for engaging and
collaborating with community members. This work will be overseen by a mentor who
led the original project. Undergraduate participants will also attend workshops
that introduce them to a variety of key concepts for research that engages
community members. Additional workshops will focus on professional development.
At the end of these experiences, undergraduate participants will present their
findings to researchers at the host university. Our approach to this kind of
research helps ensure that undergraduates receive training on the best available
methods for doing health equity research in a way that moves toward equity in
outcomes. Because of the focus of the project, we also anticipate that our
participants will be more diverse than the field as a whole. We therefore are
likely to help advance the careers of a more diverse workforce to better address
health equity research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The health research workforce
remains far less diverse than the communities they serve. Adequate
representation is vital to advancing health equity within these fields.
Prioritizing health equity and utilizing community-engaged approaches that
respect the populations being studied provides the best opportunity for engaging
the students who share these same backgrounds. Such approaches clearly
communicate that their perspectives are valued and central to successful
advancing this research. This summer REU will promote interest in advanced
methodological approaches for health equity and health disparities related
research. Faculty teach science through sequenced, weekly didactics leading to
and operating alongside hands-on research across a 10-week summer program. This
REU further facilitates cohort experiences in a laboratory setting, integrating
REU students with project managers, post-doctoral researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduate research assistants for optimal learning and
engagement. The goal of the project is to increase representation in health
science careers by training participants in community-engaged methodological
approaches to health equity research. Health equity is critical to overall
public health and subsequently a central component of crosscutting initiatives
within NSF, NIH, SAMSHA, and others. The continuation of this REU in health
equity is critical for providing students diverse, applied research
opportunities in health equity. It centers effective, yet underutilized methods
like Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) and culturally sensitive
paradigms. This unique REU experience will continue to: 1) generate interest in
health sciences, especially in health equity; 2) promote skill development for
success in graduate education; 3) create a research support network to support
students; 4) provide mentoring on career paths and graduate education, and 5)
provide undergraduate students experience in presenting and publishing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.