* 2150394
* REU Site: Collaborative Human-Robot Interaction for Robots in the Field
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* David Feil-Seifer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 405,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site will develop and evaluate
robotic systems whose function is to help bridge the human-robot collaboration
gap and achieve objectives efficiently and effectively. Human-robot interaction
research has the potential to affect several real-world challenges of operating
autonomous systems in environments outside of a traditional lab setting where
robots are uniquely able to assist a human team member to achieve a common goal.
However, there are many challenges for effective human-robot collaboration that
impinge on this promise, such as communicating with human partners using natural
language, providing information to an operator through a visual interface, or
quickly providing information so that a person is able to offer assistance. The
site will develop new autonomous robot capabilities and supporting network and
data science technology to address real-world challenges of operating autonomous
systems in hospital, clinic, home, and infrastructure environments. Students
will develop domain knowledge, mathematical skills, and interdisciplinary
competency. The summer activities for undergraduates will provide hands-on
science and engineering activities related to current research projects, and
professional development with training sessions on writing a graduate school
application and how to apply for fellowships to support graduate education. This
REU site links projects together through the common objective of developing
assistive technology that can be used in the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project team will mentor 10 undergraduates each summer, pursuing research
directly impacting the following technical challenges: development of autonomous
robot capabilities targeted for care environments, such as networked robotics
devices cooperating with care professionals to perform complex tasks in support
of aging in place; human command-and-control infrastructure for operations that
utilize robots for technology support; and connectivity and security for a
network of robots, computers, and embedded devices collectively used to address
mission-critical goals while utilizing unused parts of the wireless spectrum.
The site combines five projects related to these computing domains: socially
appropriately navigating in public spaces; understanding user comfort through
interactions; tightly-coupled collaborative human-robot teams; efficient
collaboration with remotely-situated agents; and first-responder search and
rescue operations with human-robot intertwined networks. Intellectual results
may include discoveries about long-term human-robot interaction, wireless
networking for challenging signal environments, autonomous robot capabilities
for human-robot teaming, and data science tools for processing high volumes of
data from real-world systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.