* 2150086
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Hardware and Embedded Systems Security and Trust (RHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* John Emmert, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 414,939.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the University of Cincinnati. This REU site will host ten undergraduate
students for ten summer weeks each year to work on research projects in the area
of hardware and embedded systems security and trust. The security and trust of
hardware and embedded systems play increasingly critical roles in building
secure, reliable, and trustworthy computing systems, communication networks, and
cyberinfrastructures. The students will work closely with faculty mentors,
advance their knowledge and hands-on skills in hardware and embedded systems
security and trust, and develop professional skills for their future careers in
computing. The site will attract undergraduate students across the nation,
particularly focusing on recruiting students from underrepresented groups in
computing and institutions with limited research opportunities in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU research projects cover critical and emerging
research problems in hardware and embedded systems security and trust, including
side-channel attacks, fault injection attacks, reserve engineering, security
validation of third-party intellectual properties, and detection of hardware
Trojans. The goal of the research projects is to defend against (or mitigate)
attacks, minimize information leakage, and strengthen the security and trust of
hardware and embedded systems. The research findings of this project will
promote workforce development in cybersecurity, increase the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. in hardware and embedded systems, and enhance
national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.