* 2150873
* Research in Undergraduate Institutions: Relationship between Area Size and Population History
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Alex Knodell, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 206,850.00

In this Research in Undergraduate Institutions award the principal investigator,
along with colleagues will carry out archaeological fieldwork and lidar-based
remote sensing research in order to understand the history of occupation and use
across a number of small, currently uninhabited islands. Archaeology is uniquely
positioned to investigate the history of such marginal environments, which have
been largely dismissed in the recent past as unsuitable for human habitation.
Previous research has already revealed a rich (if non-continuous) history of use
on many such islands. The current project will provide an expanded and
comprehensive study of small-island environments in order to investigate the
correlation between island size and risk of settlement and exploitation, based
on size, environmental diversity, and locational affordances of marginality and
connectivity. Survey archaeology has traditionally focused on the history of
settlement across a continuous landscape. This project provides also a history
of non-settlement, of incidental use, across a particular type of maritime
setting. The research will produce a series of individual cases studies and a
large-scale, comparative framework analysis of cycles of use and abandonment in
an under-researched type of island environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two seasons
of fieldwork will provide systematic archaeological surveys of 30 uninhabited
islands. A geomorphological study will be conducted alongside the archaeological
survey, in order to provide a fully interdisciplinary analysis of individual
island landscapes, as well as a new study of the dynamic human and natural
history. As an RUI proposal, this project provides unique research opportunities
to undergraduate students in the archaeology program (and related fields).
Moreover, it provides multi-level mentoring and training that also involves
international graduate students. In addition to the present research, the lidar
data will be made available to other archaeologists and environmental science
teams.. This will have a impact on the ability to assess and monitor areas that
are uniquely vulnerable to looting and landscape
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.