* 2150950
* Master Teachers Conducting STEM Practices and Action Research
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2028
* Elizabeth Allan, University of Central Oklahoma
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2028
* USD 626,912.00

This Noyce Track 3 project, Master Teachers Conducting STEM Practices and Action
Research, at the University of Central Oklahoma aims to serve the national need
of 1) retaining science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
educators and 2) developing leaders who can support others who have
nontraditional certifications. This project includes partnerships with Oklahoma
City Public Schools and the Central Oklahoma STEM Alliance. Project goals
include training 14 high school biology and mathematics teachers, Master Teacher
Fellows, in Central Oklahoma, over six years. The goal of the Masters’ level
training is to solidify teachers’ understanding of STEM practices by engaging
them in authentic research, including bringing research into practice in their
educational settings (educational action research). Central to this project is
engaging teachers in leadership training while exploring a problem of practice
related to equity and achievement gaps exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
This work not only contributes to addressing the need for highly effective
biology and mathematics teacher leaders in secondary education in Oklahoma, it
also addresses student achievement. Results from this project are positioned to
increase the available curriculum aligned with state and national standards and
help quantify how retention and students’ attitudes toward science and
mathematics are affected by these changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentored by
faculty from the University of Central Oklahoma, the Master Teacher Fellows
(MTFs) are expected to design a research project, collect and interpret data,
and communicate their findings to their professional community. In addition, the
project aims to have MTFs develop STEM curricular projects aligned to state and
national standards utilizing a three-dimensional learning approach: scientific
practices, crosscutting concepts, and disciplinary core ideas. Implementing the
curricular projects in classrooms, evaluating the effect of using the three-
dimensional curricula on student attitudes towards science and mathematics, and
retention of content are major objectives of this project. Leadership training,
hosted by the Central Oklahoma STEM Alliance, connects these practicing teachers
to industry mentors. This training provides a framework to generate solutions to
inequities in STEM learning experienced by students in schools with varying
resources. Training during the M.S. degree program and ongoing professional
development prepares these teachers to effectively support and mentor other
teachers, especially those with emergency and alternative certification. The
project plans to foster increased fluency in curriculum-based leadership, which
can translate into courage in adapting curricula to a variety of modalities.
This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Track 3 Noyce program
supports exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.