* 2150048
* HSI Pilot Project: Fostering Hispanic Achievement in Computer Science and Engineering with Affinity Research Group Model (Project Achieve)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Ausif Mahmood, NEW UNIVERSITY OF BRIDGEPORT, INC., THE
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,998.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: Planning and Pilot Program grant aims
to increase student retention/persistence and preparedness in Computer,
Electrical, Mechanical Engineering, and Computer Science (CS) majors, thereby
increasing their degree attainment at the University of Bridgeport.
Additionally, along with faculty development, the grant aims to enhance
undergraduate CS and engineering teaching strategies that will lead to students’
higher degree completion rates. Barriers, like financial hardships and lack of
research mentorship, for low-income, first-generation, and minority students
prevent them from completing baccalaureate degrees in STEM disciplines. Further,
cultural and academic barriers can lower self-efficacy and self-identity as a
scientist and engineer when they participate in research experiences. Project
ACHIEVE will implement the Affinity Research Group Model from the Computing
Alliance for Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI) through an engaging
undergraduate research course, Introduction to Scientific Research Challenges.
This course will offer an opportunity to participate in research experiences
with faculty and graduate students in Computer Science, Computer, Electrical,
and Mechanical Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this Track 1 PPP project is to implement, evaluate, and produce preliminary
knowledge on evidence-based methods to overcome significant barriers to entry
and persistence among students in undergraduate engineering and computer science
degree programs. The project will adapt the Affinity Research Group Model, a set
of practices built on a cooperative team framework to support the creation and
maintenance of dynamic and inclusive research groups. It will pilot an
intervention to mitigate known barriers to maintaining engagement in and
completing STEM majors, focusing on students’ acquisition of career-related
skills, connectedness to professionals, and building their confidence to
complete an intellectually demanding course of study. It will address the
research questions as follows. (1) How does the Affinity Research Group Model
play a role in increasing students’ persistence in engineering and computer
science majors during their first two years of study? (2) How does the model
play a role in increasing students’ engineering self-efficacy during their first
two years of study? (3) What are the approaches used by the faculty when
implementing the model that leads to the development of students’ research
skills (laboratory research skills followed by publication) – a community of
practice, engagement with students outside the classroom, etc.? This project
will inform the next phase of implementation, which will generate data useful
for replication, adaptation, and increased knowledge about increasing student
representation in engineering and computer science majors and associated STEM
careers. It will also develop a community of practice for faculty to apply the
model for other underrepresented undergraduates in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.