* 2150788
* Seeking and Teaching Extraordinary Science Majors to Become Exemplary K-12 Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* John Conrad, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,125.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality science
teachers that are prepared to teach in high-need districts. In turn, this will
contribute directly to the continued development of a skilled STEM workforce in
the United States. Building upon ongoing collaborative efforts between the
University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) and Omaha Public Schools (OPS), a high-
need school district, this project will attract, retain, and empower a diverse
cohort of future educators in biology, chemistry, geology/environmental
sciences, and physics. This project will prepare science teachers by providing
multiple supports within a layered learning community. These prospective science
teachers will gain direct mentorship by faculty, participate in a near-peer
support system, participate in informal and formal teaching opportunities, and
explore research experiences. After the prospective teachers complete teacher
licensure, the project will continue to provide them with mentorship and
professional development aimed at ensuring their early years in the classroom
will be a success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) includes partnerships with high-need schools in the
Omaha Public School (OPS) District. In addition to enhancing the quality,
quantity, and diversity of certified science teachers, the project will further
strengthen collaborative relationships between UNO and OPS, thereby establishing
a strong foundation for the continued education of culturally responsive science
teachers who are prepared to succeed in high-need schools. Beyond providing
financial support for at least 10 Interns and at least 27 Scholars, project
goals include engaging prospective science teachers in a variety of high-impact
practices to prepare them to be effective pedagogical and disciplinary experts.
Interns will engage in structured experiences with one of several existing
university partners in the local community. As they complete their licensure
program, Scholars will participate in the Culturally Responsive Teaching series
each semester, mentor lower-level undergraduates, lead discussions in biweekly
discipline-based education research journal club meetings, and complete a
mentored senior project related to science education. Additionally, Scholars
will have the opportunity to serve as learning assistants in general science
courses and will assist with ongoing recruitment efforts of the next generation
of teachers from local high schools. Induction support for Scholars moving into
their first teaching assignments will include regular meetings for new teachers,
opportunities to participate in teacher-researcher partnerships, and an
invitation to continue involvement in journal clubs, summer programs and other
project activities. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.