* 2150965
* Collaborative Research: Constraining transient magma intrusion processes in the Nyiragongo-Kivu continental rift zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2024
* USD 315,613.00

On 22 May 2021, a very large and destructive volcanic eruption occurred along
the southern flank of Mount Nyiragongo in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), killing at least 30 people and causing substantial threat and damage near
and in the city of Goma, affecting approximately a million people. Early
satellite imagery showed that a segment of an underground magmatic rift began
opening further southward and across the border into Rwanda, damaging homes and
farmland, and creating further risk as it continued below the northern half of
Lake Kivu, bounding Rwanda and the DRC. Continued rifting beneath the lake
presents an additional risk of causing a massive and rapid release of carbon
dioxide that could gravely threaten nearby populations (a similar event in Lake
Nyos in western Africa killed over 1700 people in 1986). This project will
investigate the interactions between magmatic movement in the subsurface and
earthquake faulting during and following the 2021 sequence to aid in developing
a stronger understanding of the mechanics and behavior of rifting and the
hazards they pose in such environments. To do this the project will address key
scientific questions to develop a better understanding of the magmatic and
faulting evolution over time and gaining insight into some of the critical
processes that govern changes in eruptive behavior. The project will create
detailed images of earthquake activity along active faults, as well as magmatic
material pathways using geophysical tools. The geologic processes learned here
will aid in understanding this and future potentially dangerous rifting events
elsewhere in East-Africa and in the US. The research performed through this
proposal will fund fieldwork for one Kenyan and two US-based Rwandan graduate
students and four Rwanda-based students enrolled in graduate studies at the East
African Institute for Fundamental Research (EAIFR). The research and educational
partnerships with EAIFR, University of Rwanda, and Goma Volcano Observatory will
help to foster improved collaborations between US and central-African
scientists, extractive industry, emergency managers and diplomats from the Kivu
rift region, and help to inform planners regarding natural hazards. The work in
the region will assist with real-time monitoring, hazard assessment and
mitigation, and contribute to the training of at least seven African scientists.
A Tulane student will be recruited from a cohort of formerly incarcerated
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will collect detailed land-deformation,
seismic, and electromagnetic signals information to examine the time-history and
extent of continued deformation following the Lake Kivu rifting event, as well
as cumulative effects of 12 million years of deformation and magmatic buildup.
The project will maintain a temporary continuous network of 7 GPS/GNSS stations
(for land-deformation measurement) and 9 seismometers, including 2 that were
installed during the intrusion event. The new and permanent seismic stations and
25 magnetotelluric imaging sites (electromagnetic measurements) will enable
determination of lateral variations in physical properties of the crust, and the
degree of magmatic modification. The project too will collect and evaluate
satellite-based Synthetic Aperture Radar information to further constrain
deformation over time. The data will aid in kinematic and physics-based modeling
of the evolution of the young continental rift system. The information gained
here will help to illuminate the process of magma migration in these
environments, their interaction with the fractured, intruded, and heated crust,
and their dynamic relationship with induced earthquake activity. Data from the
GPS/GNSS and seismic networks will be available globally, and colleagues in
Rwanda will be provided with access to software for rapid analysis for emergency
response. This project is supported by the Geophysics and Petrology/Geochemistry
Programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.