* 2150596
* Collaborative Research: Power Systems Dynamics from Real-Time Data: Modeling, Inference, and Stability-Aware Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Vassilis Kekatos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2025
* USD 280,000.00

Rapid decarbonization and deployment of flexible, distributed resources in the
electricity energy sector are quickly transforming the real-time operation
paradigms of the interconnected power grid infrastructure. These changes have
led to growing concerns over power system dynamics and stability, due to the
reduced capability of grid inertia and increasing levels of external
disturbances and variability. Meanwhile, the electricity infrastructure has
benefited significantly from the ongoing deployment of sensing and cyber
resources, which give rise to a huge amount of high-rate, high-quality data and
information collected during real-time operations. Thanks to the enriched data
availability, machine learning advances are envisioned to play an increasingly
important role to address the challenges in power system dynamics and stability.
This project aims to bridge domain-specific machine learning tools to transform
the current grid dynamic modeling, inference, and stability-enforcing solutions.
At a societal level, the anticipated outcomes can improve energy efficiency and
security, and facilitate higher and smoother penetration of renewables and
carbon-free resources. This project will further benefit industry practices with
advanced algorithmic solutions, as well as education efforts by providing
student training opportunities and reaching out to pre-college students via
interactive demos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop data-enabled
and physics-informed modeling, monitoring, and optimization algorithmic
solutions targeting power system dynamics. The proposed activities put forth and
explore three creative, original, and potentially transformative ideas: i)
Correlating synchrophasor data collected at two arbitrary grid locations can
efficiently unveil the impulse response of the associated linear time-invariant
(LTI) system under certain assumptions, which can be waived leveraging physics-
informed analysis; ii) Gaussian processes (GPs) constitute a powerful tool for
inferring signals occurring in LTI systems, and thanks to the underlying
physics, GPs can be uniquely adapted to learn grid dynamic signals and their
derivatives from heterogeneous, noisy, spatially and temporally incomplete,
and/or multirate synchrophasor readings; iii) Well-established grid stability
metrics can be expressed as convex functions of the steady-state operating
point, and stability-aware OPFs can be handled via a semidefinite program
relaxation. The outcome will be a comprehensive suite of computational tools
dealing with grid dynamics from learning to power system operations, evaluated
by both real-event synchrophasor datasets, and synthetic datasets generated from
realistic power systems such as a Texas 2000-bus case in collaboration with
ERCOT. The research results will also be integrated into engineering educational
activities at the secondary and higher education levels. In addition to standard
dissemination venues, close collaboration with grid operators will assist in
showcasing the effectiveness of the project findings on real-world systems and
lead to quick adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.