* 2150091
* REU Site: A Summer Research Program that Integrates Deaf, Hearing and Sign Language Interpreting Students to Advance Chemistry Research and to Enhance Science Communication
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Christine Hughey, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2025
* USD 522,093.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to James Madison
University (JMU), located in Harrisonburg, VA, supports the training of 12
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2022-2024. This program, jointly
funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activity
(OMA) in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate will broaden
participation and train STEM students by providing research and professional
development opportunities in the chemical sciences to deaf and hard-of-hearing
(D/HH) students, underrepresented minority students and first-generation college
students, primarily from institutions with limited research infrastructure. In
addition, American Sign Language (ASL) interpreting students will be immersed in
the science community. This both broadens the interpreters’ skills and expands
the pool of professionals with science-interpreting experience, thus lowering
the barriers for D/HH students to persist in STEM. Through the REU, both deaf
and hearing participants learn together, removing communication barriers in the
scientific research environment. This experience is expected to foster cultural
awareness and provide for a more inclusive scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this REU program, James Madison University
faculty, along with a visiting faculty from Gallaudet University, will provide
research opportunities in all major sub-disciplines of chemistry, with expertise
centered in synthesis, biophysical chemistry, and materials. In addition to
conducting research, REU students will also participate in professional
development activities aimed at enhancing effective science communication. A
faculty member from JMU’s School of Media Arts and Design (SMAD) will co-host
workshops on the use of visual communication to inform both scientific and non-
scientific audiences about the impacts of the research conducted at JMU on
science and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.