* 2150280
* REU Site:  Mathematical Biology Team Science (MBioTS) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program at Clarkson University
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Susan Bailey, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 324,104.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The Mathematical Biology Team Science (MBioTS) Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at Clarkson University is a ten-week
interdisciplinary research summer experience for undergraduate students. The
objective of the program is to train students interested in quantitative biology
through an immersive team science approach. The program is designed to prepare
future biologists and applied mathematicians to effectively communicate and
collaborate across disciplines to solve problems arising in the biological
sciences. The targeted population for the MBioTS REU site includes students from
a diverse set of academic backgrounds such as mathematics, biology, health
sciences, physics, computer science, and engineering. Students will be recruited
nationally, with a focus on women, underrepresented groups in STEM, and students
at institutions with limited research opportunities. The faculty mentors have
expertise working collaboratively in mathematical biology, and the research
projects span biological phenomena ranging from ecology, cell biology, and
public health. Participants will develop skills applicable in collaborative
science, in science communication, in publishing and presenting research
results, and in graduate studies and careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
MBioTS REU program will introduce students to interdisciplinary research at the
intersection of biology and mathematics through projects that directly combine
experimental and theoretical components. Students will work in pairs on mentored
research, with one participant focused on data collection in a laboratory
setting and the other focused on computational and mathematical analysis. Each
team will be mentored by faculty from both the Biology and Mathematics
Departments at Clarkson. A key component of the MBioTS REU will be the close
interaction between student team members across disciplines, as they
collaboratively design both experiments and models to address biological
questions. The program will also include research seminars on mathematical
biology projects from faculty both at Clarkson University and other
institutions. The skills students develop are versatile and broadly applicable,
and include experimental design, modeling, computation, data fitting and
uncertainty quantification, and mathematical analysis. Technical communication
skills will also be emphasized via research presentations, and professional
development seminars intended to prepare students for graduate school and
scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.