* 2150387
* REU Site: Airborne Connections: From Emission Source to Impact to Solution
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Tami Bond, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 407,212.00

Air contaminants affect human health and climate, and a disproportionate
fraction of adverse impacts are felt in under-resourced communities. The
“Airborne Connections” Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Colorado State University provides summer training to address a hazard that
affects all Americans and particularly disadvantaged communities: the release of
airborne contaminants from energy use, industrial operations, and natural
processes. This three-year REU site will recruit and train 30 diverse
undergraduate students to measure, evaluate and understand where these
contaminants come from, how they travel in the atmosphere, and the influences
they have on human health and global climate. Students will gain technical
skills in measurement or modeling. They will also interact with professionals in
research, industry and government and among their own cohort to build an
understanding of connections that create challenges and solutions. Recruitment
efforts of students will prioritize first-generation and non-traditional
students, and students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
three-year “Airborne Connections” REU Site at Colorado State University will
recruit and train 30 diverse undergraduate students in the skills, context and
motivation to address air contaminants. The Site will focus on projects
connected through a broad theme: the life cycle of atmospheric pollutants,
beginning with their emission, followed by transport, spatial variation and
characteristics, and quantifying their health and climate impact during their
lifetimes. Specific objectives are: (1) Provide opportunities for a diverse
cohort of undergraduate students to experience research, conceptualize complex
human-natural interactions, and understand how focused research solves an
interdisciplinary problem; (2) Foster skills required for success in STEM
careers and graduate study through individual planning, mentoring, and
professional development offerings; and (3) Systematize a recruitment program
that facilitates participation of first-generation and non-traditional students
in research. Students will participate in designing sensors and detection
methods, developing remote sensing approaches, explaining variation in air
concentrations, interpreting model output to assess health and climate impact,
and developing protective strategies for buildings. Along with technical skills,
students will learn about connections between contaminants, human health and the
environment, disproportionate effects on low-income communities, and reduced
resilience. Recruitment efforts of students will prioritize first-generation and
non-traditional students, and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.