* 2150389
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Arctic Renewable Energy Development, Economics, and Integration
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Daisy Huang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 514,072.00

The REU Site at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks will focus on energy
developments in the Arctic. Circumpolar remote Arctic communities have some of
the highest rates of energy production worldwide and are still largely dependent
on fossil fuel power generation. The cold Arctic environment in conjunction with
a changing climate (for instance permafrost degradation, coastal erosion,
ecosystem changes) and national security interests have a profound effect on
energy affordability, sustainability, resilience, and equity. Alaska is a leader
in renewable integration in remote microgrids, as around 30% of Alaska’s 200
remote communities that operate microgrids have integrated renewable energy.
Twenty-four undergraduates will be recruited to participate over the three-years
of the project. The program will benefit the energy science community by
attracting young and diverse people to the STEM fields and preparing the next
generation of Arctic engineers and scientists. In addition, the unique
experiences are designed to create a pipeline for STEM professionals from K-12,
to undergraduate study, to graduate school and/or to industry and utility
employment and partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site at the University
of Alaska-Fairbanks will focus on energy developments in the Arctic. Alaska is a
leader in renewable integration in remote microgrids, as around 30% of Alaska’s
200 remote communities that operate microgrids have integrated renewable energy.
Developing solutions and increasing our understanding and knowledge of renewable
energy and microgrids is vital to the well-being of communities in the Arctic,
and lessons learned can be transferred to other remote and rural areas of the
world. This program will focus on research pertaining to energy developments in
the Arctic and include topics on the integration of renewable energy sources
into existing microgrids; energy data collection, analysis, and visualizations;
societal changes and impact in attitudes toward renewable energy and energy
equity; and macro- and micro-economic policies and regulations in rural and
remote areas of the Arctic. Four main elements comprise the program: (1)
research projects addressing Arctic energy issues, (2) a five-day Microgrid Boot
Camp, (3) Arctic Science, Engineering and Community lectures and activities, and
(4) a series of Professional Development lectures and exercises. The program
will benefit the energy science community by attracting young and diverse people
to the STEM fields and preparing the next generation of Arctic engineers and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.