* 2150204
* REU Site: RIDE - Research for Inclusivity and Driving Equity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eleni Christofa, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,489.00

The Research for Inclusivity and Driving Equity (RIDE) Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site will provide undergraduate students an immersive and
interdisciplinary experience in community engaged research focused on improving
the transportation experience for underserved and underrepresented communities.
The RIDE REU Site will develop well-rounded researchers by providing them the
knowledge necessary to design transportation systems that better serve
communities; to formulate transportation policies and regulations that lead to
more equitable transportation outcomes; and to help bridge communication gaps
across disciplines and with communities of interest. The RIDE REU Site will
support the full participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM
through recruiting and mentoring, and by sustaining relationships with REU
students and faculty at their home institutions. This promotion of women and
minorities will facilitate a more equitable future professoriate. Moreover, the
REU will help build the workforce in a key strategic area – transportation -
helping to increase the economic competitiveness of the U.S. by exposing
promising students to community engaged research, design, and
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the RIDE REU Site are to: (1)
engage a diverse pool of undergraduate students in transportation research, (2)
expose and educate undergraduate students on convergent research that affects
their communities’ transportation decisions, (3) encourage undergraduate
students to pursue graduate research in transportation related fields, and (4)
enrich the undergraduate student experience through lifelong mentoring. The
intended contribution of the REU site is preparing and motivating 10 diverse
undergraduate students per year to pursue graduate education in fields related
to transportation. Students will participate in a variety of mentored research
projects that require data collection and analysis such as interviews, focus
groups, surveys, and secondary data analysis. In addition to engaging with
interdisciplinary researchers, students will also engage with community partners
to collect data and disseminate the results. Outside of research, students will
participate in a host of activities over the summer, including: professional
development and communication seminars, technical seminars, field trips, working
lunches, end-of-summer presentation and poster session, technical writing, and a
broader impacts project. Students will be recruited from: women’s colleges;
community colleges; a minority serving high school; Northeast Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Partnership institutions; minority serving institutions
(i.e., HBCUs and HSIs); and UMass student affinity groups (e.g., National
Society of Black Engineers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.