* 2150108
* REU Site: IUPUI REU Program in Mathematics with Applications to Medicine, Neuroscience, and Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jared Barber, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 259,184.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The REU Program at Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI) will provide eight undergraduate students from across the
United States with the opportunity to conduct mathematics research applied to
medicine, fluid dynamics, and neuroscience. The students will spend eight weeks
during the summer in Indianapolis working with faculty mentors from the IUPUI
Department of Mathematical Sciences. This REU Site program will introduce
students to interdisciplinary research experience and yield new research
outcomes that will impact multiple scientific disciplines. Specifically, the
participants will work on one of four main projects: modeling treatment
strategies for heart transplant patients, investigating the influence of
addictive drugs on the brain, modeling the forces and fluid flow over
neighboring bone cells to understand bone development, and studying
synchronization of brain rhythms in health and disease. The students will
advance the analytical, logical, and numerical skills that are needed to
continue their careers in STEM-related fields. The Site will prepare a diverse
and well-prepared STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The REU projects aim to
address new and open problems in transplant immunology, fluid dynamics, and
neuroscience. Students participating in the first REU project will work closely
with a mathematician and immunologist to design, analyze, and validate a
mathematical model of mouse heart transplantation in the presence of novel
combination therapeutic approaches. The second project will involve a multiscale
integrative model of bone cells and their surrounding interstitial fluid and
bone matrix. This project will lead to a better understanding of bone
development. In the third project, the students will develop a mathematical
model (based on in vivo electrophysiological experimental data) that can be used
to identify the neural mechanisms that underlie aberrant decision-making typical
for alcoholic subjects. The fourth project will require mathematical modeling to
understand the role of neural synchronization in brain functions. It will focus
on understanding the increased interactions between the brain and heart during
sleep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.