* 2150217
* REU SITE: CMU in Software Enginneering (REUSE)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2025
* USD 416,347.00

Software engineering (SE) is a rich field focused on improving the effectiveness
of software development through a variety of tools and techniques. Research in
software engineering brings core aspects of computer science, such as
programming languages and machine learning, to bear on emerging software
concerns such as privacy, security, mobility, and adaptability. This project
supports an ongoing Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
Carnegie-Mellon University that provides students with training in
interdisciplinary software engineering research, including understanding the
research literature, formulating and refining research questions, developing
novel solutions to software engineering problems, and applying scientific
evaluation methods. The project will support the training of 30 undergraduate
students over 3 years with research experiences in interdisciplinary software
engineering at Carnegie Mellon University. These students will be recruited
primarily from undergraduate-only institutions where students have limited
research opportunities, with a special emphasis on providing opportunities to
members of underrepresented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) and first- and second-year students. Participants will
perform research with faculty mentors, participate in community activities, and
communicate their work both through traditional publication channels and student
research competitions and via department-wide presentations at the end of the
summer. A primary goal for the program is to improve the pipeline from college
to graduate school and from graduate school into faculty positions;
simultaneously, the site actively trains graduate students to act as effective
mentors of research assistants, a critical skill for future faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on the experience of many
of the faculty mentors who have worked with undergraduate students in their
individual research. While built on computer science fundamentals (like
algorithms, programming languages, compilers, and machine learning), software
engineering is simultaneously an engineering discipline. That is, both the
practice of SE and SE research problems revolve around technical solutions that
successfully resolve conflicting constraints. As such, trade-offs between costs
and benefits are an integral part of evaluating the effectiveness of methods and
tools. This REU site takes this further, by tackling research problems that are
at the intersection of software engineering and another field, including
privacy, security, mobility, and human psychology and other sciences. A subset
of these problems includes, among others: development of novel programming
languages that can support visualization of mathematical diagrams and notation;
automatic generating readable tests using deep learning; security of multi-party
computation; sustainable maintenance of critical open source infrastructure;
automatic identification and repair of defects in complex, modern software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.