* 2150692
* Mentoring Urban STEM Teachers for Equity and Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Yun Lu, Kutztown University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2027
* USD 720,551.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the diversity of
students entering STEM professions by supporting and training a broader
diversity of secondary STEM teachers to teach those students. The project team
will recruit post-baccalaureate STEM professionals, drawn from a wide range of
demographic, disciplinary, and professional backgrounds, to careers in secondary
STEM teaching. In turn, the project will prepare these professionals for the
challenging task of serving as STEM educators in under-resourced urban
communities. Project team members will foster a synergistic collaboration among
university faculty, secondary-school educators, and community partners. In
particular, the participants will be prepared in the pedagogical and cultural
knowledge needed for effective teaching in underserved communities. As part of
induction, the investigators will provide sustained mentorship to the new
teachers as they implement that knowledge in the classroom. As a result, the
project will contribute directly to the development of a skilled STEM workforce
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based at Kutztown University (KU) in
Pennsylvania, the project includes partnerships between the KU College of
Education and College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, the Reading and Allentown
School Districts, and community partners. The project has several guiding goals.
First is to recruit, provide scholarships to, support the academic training of,
generate teacher-certification for, and place in high-need local education
agencies (LEAs) twenty-five (25) STEM professionals through the five-year
duration of the project. The training and certification of professionals with
STEM degrees will be via a one-year Master's of Education degree program. A
second goal is to increase the demographic diversity of STEM teachers through
this program. The third goal is to prepare STEM teachers to be capable of
implementing culturally relevant approaches to STEM education through a
community-based co-curricular program. A culminating goal is to provide
sustained induction mentorship and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) workshops
for the new teachers by engaging both education and STEM faculty in the process.
This induction program will continue through the first two years of post-degree
teaching. Project evaluation and research will assess the impact and merit of
underlying components of the program on both the Noyce scholars and faculty
members. In particular, the investigators and external evaluator will employ
mixed-methods approaches to explore the values of: (1) STEM-faculty mentoring
related to both content and pedagogical content knowledge (PCK); (2) an annual
workshop on implementation of PCK by Noyce scholars in the STEM classroom; (3)
education-faculty mentoring and co-curricular experiences on implementation of
culturally relevant pedagogy (CRP) in the classroom; and (4) the effects that
mentoring Noyce scholars on PCK and CRP have on the STEM and education faculty
mentors themselves. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.