* 2150774
* Cloud-Aerosol-Dynamic Interactions in Cold Air Outbreaks over the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Greg McFarquhar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 299,662.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to provide observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used in an effort to better
understand the characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic
climate system more broadly, in order to inform climate models and projections.
The project will also help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with
significant relevance to naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal
communities. The broader field effort includes significant opportunities for
students and early-career scientists, international collaboration, and public
outreach. This award will feature multiple routes for participation by
undergraduate students through existing programs at the University of Oklahoma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on providing fundamental new
understanding of the microphysical processes responsible for the production and
maintenance of supercooled liquid water (SLW) in cold air outbreaks (CAOs),
including the role of primary ice nucleation and secondary ice production,
surface fluxes and turbulent mixing. The research team will have primary
responsibility of coordinating with NCAR on the use and processing of the CDP,
2DS, 2DC, HVPS3, King, RICE and Nevzorov probes. The 2DS, 2DC and HVPS3 data
will be processed using the University of Illinois/Oklahoma Optical Array Probe
Processing Software (UIOOPS). The testable hypotheses include: 1) variations in
SLW, ice mass and ice in drizzle at given cloud top temperatures are more
correlated with updraft velocities than aerosol, cloud condensation nuclei
(CCN), and ice nucleating particle (INP) properties; 2) relationships between
cloud properties with aerosols and/or turbulence are different for stratus and
convective clouds, with SLW playing a larger role in the former and turbulent
mixing in the later; 3) generating cells are more prevalent/important in
determining cloud properties when fetch is reduced due to more convective
overturning, with primary ice initiation increasing with fetch, distance from
the sea ice and CAO intensity; 4) glaciation is principally driven by secondary
ice production; 5) cloud properties are more strongly correlated with aerosol
and INP concentrations above cloud than below
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary funding for this project comes from the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program with partial funding from the Arctic
Natural Sciences program. The deployment of observational assets for CAESAR is
being funded by the Facilities for Atmospheric Research and Education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.