* 2150445
* REU Site: Research in Physics and Astronomy at Louisiana State University
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Robert Hynes, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 326,815.00

This award is funded in whole (or in part) under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The award supports the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in physics and astronomy at Louisiana State
University. The impact of this program is seeking to foster interest in careers
in science by introducing students to research-oriented careers in physics and
astronomy while further developing research-related skills and knowledge. REU
students are recruited nationally and the students can be in any academic year.
For the ten-week program, the participants are matched with faculty mentors
based on student interests. Students join their mentors in active research
projects, such as performing analysis on data from the long baseline neutrino
oscillation experiment T2K,instrumentation development and data simulations to
support gravitational wave research, and designing quantum error correction
codes and quantum memory for photonic qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
weekly seminars and workshops that introduce the students to various topics such
as faculty research, overall skills development, to common research resources,
and to professional development topics such as ethics and patents/intellectual
property. Students participate in field trips and other activities, some of
which are coordinated with concurrent LSU summer science programs in computer
science, biomedical science and other areas. Students from all programs are
lodged in proximity at on-campus apartment-style housing, to foster group
interactions and a sense of community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.