* 2150886
* Building Capacity to Expand Recruitment and High-Quality Preparation of Secondary STEM Teachers in High-Need Districts in Rural Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Mary Carmichael, Hollins University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 74,914.00

The project aims to address the national need to prepare high-quality secondary
STEM teachers to serve in high-need school districts. It intends to address
shortages of high-quality secondary STEM teachers in rural Virginia by building
streamlined pathways for STEM majors to complete both a STEM degree and teacher
licensure in four years. This will occur through collaboration of Hollins
University STEM and education faculty for the purpose of being able to recruit
biology, chemistry, and mathematics majors to complete their STEM baccalaureate
degree with teacher licensure as undergraduates. Through this Capacity Building
project, Hollins University, a women’s university in Roanoke, Virginia, will
develop recruitment strategies to attract STEM students to secondary STEM
teaching careers in local high-need schools. In addition, the project will
enable transfer STEM students to complete both a STEM degree and teaching
licensure in two years. To meet the needs of students from diverse backgrounds
or from low-income communities in the region, the project will integrate
culturally and linguistically inclusive teaching methods into the revised
teacher education curriculum. These efforts will prepare future STEM teachers to
work effectively with secondary student populations in rural
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building project at Hollins
University includes partnerships with Virginia Western Community College (VWCC)
and two high-need schools, William Fleming High School and Lucy Addison Middle
School. Hollins STEM and education faculty will reevaluate the STEM and
education curricula to create streamlined pathways for STEM undergraduate
students to complete their STEM degrees and teacher licensure within four years.
Culturally and linguistically inclusive teaching methods will be integrated into
the revised curricula coursework to prepare future teachers to effectively
support learners from diverse backgrounds. In addition, faculty from both
Hollins and Virginia Western Community College will collaborate to develop
articulation agreements to support STEM transfer students in completing a STEM
degree with teacher licensure within two years. Data will be collected from
students, faculty, and advisors about barriers to STEM teaching careers. These
data will be used to build a recruitment strategy to attract STEM undergraduate
students in biology, chemistry, and mathematics to pursue STEM teaching
licensure and careers in the region. Partnerships with representatives from the
community college and high-need schools, along with integration of culturally
and linguistically inclusive pedagogy, have the potential to produce highly
qualified STEM teachers prepared to serve increasingly diverse student
populations in Virginia’s rural high-need schools. Evaluation of the project
will be conducted by Brockport Research Institute through interviews with
project stakeholders and on-going review of documents produced by collaborative
stakeholder teams. Outcomes of the effort will be disseminated through national
and regional teacher education conferences, as well as communications with local
and regional educational agencies. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.