* 2150633
* Scalable diamond quantum systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Color centers in diamond are impurities which give color to this otherwise
colorless crystal. In addition to jewelry, they are also of scientific
importance and have emerged as a promising platform for implementing quantum
technologies such as quantum networks, sensors, and computers. We propose to
further investigate and develop the tin-vacancy (SnV) color center in diamond,
which is particularly promising because of its operation at friendlier
temperatures (not requiring dilution refrigerators), high efficiency of photon
emission, and ability to act as quantum memory and store quantum information.
However, for all of these applications it is critical to embed either individual
or several color centers inside of photonic structures, in order to implement
interfaces to color centers without degrading them. We propose to do this over
the course of this project, and to push the limits of such quantum photonic
interfaces and interaction between color centers and light with specially
engineered diamond structures, new materials processing, and new design
techniques. We will demonstrate the interaction of one or a few color center
qubits with an optical resonator over the course of this project, which is a key
element of many quantum technologies. The proposed research will impact quantum
engineering, fundamental physics, and materials science. The project includes
educational and outreach activities integrated with research, which the PI has
already initiated, including active recruitment of minorities and women for
science and engineering careers, and undergraduate research and advising.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We propose a
3-year effort focused on developing optically accessible spin qubits with long
coherence time, high operation fidelity, efficient light-matter interfaces for
long-range interactions, and the potential for high-temperature operation (a few
Kelvin, eliminating the need for a dilution refrigerator). We will develop this
system based on tin-vacancy (SnV) centers in diamond photonic resonators. The
specific research goals are: &lt;br/&gt;● To investigate novel nano-fabrication
methods on diamond substrates that enable controllable, strong coupling of a
single SnV and several SnV color centers to the cavity.&lt;br/&gt;● To
demonstrate and to investigate single and multi-emitter cavity QED between SnV
emitters and a diamond cavity. The demonstration of the strong coupling regime
of light-matter interaction is crucial for numerous quantum technologies, and
can be used as a building block for quantum network nodes, quantum sensors, and
for scalable photonic or spin based quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.