* 2151122
* Science Teachers for Rural America - A Post-Baccalaureate STEM Teacher Licensure Project
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Eric Deyo, Fort Hays State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2027
* USD 713,832.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality science
teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to serve in rural
communities. The project at Fort Hays State University in Hays, Kansas, will
recruit high-quality biology, chemistry, and physics majors and prepare and
place them to teach in rural settings, which often represent spaces of education
inequity. The prospective teachers will complete a one-year post-baccalaureate
preparation program to teach in high-need districts. During the first two years
of their teaching careers, they will receive mentoring and additional
professional development training to help them continue to develop as effective
teachers who are culturally responsive, resilient, and skilled at teaching in
high-need rural schools. An important impetus of the project will be the
development and testing of strategies to address the challenge of staffing high-
need rural school settings with effective science teachers. This will enable
high-need schools in western and central Kansas and other rural areas nationwide
to provide their students a better science education. This, in turn, will help
prepare many of these same students for the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Fort Hays State University
includes Kansas partnerships with Southwest Plains Regional Service Center at
Sublette, Deerfield High School and Deerfield School District – USD 216, and
Dighton School District – USD 482. This project aims to address rural STEM
teacher workforce challenges and retention through a focus on the unique
contexts of rurality and teaching STEM in rural settings. The project has four
underlying goals. First, the project will recruit, provide scholarships, and
prepare, through a post-baccalaureate program, thirty (30) STEM majors over the
five-year duration of the project to obtain licensure to teach. A second goal is
to place the newly licensed teachers in rural schools and implement an online
induction (mentorship) program designed to assist in teacher retention. Third,
project team members will engage in an iterative and formative feedback process
aimed at continuous program improvement. The fourth goal is to explore various
models and develop and disseminate a model for high-quality rural science
teacher preparation. The theoretical basis behind exploring models and
developing a rural model has three fundamental components - context, curriculum,
and conveyance (Azano, et.al [2019,2021] and Schulte [2018]). Context will hold
an emphasis on rural settings. Curriculum will include place-based pedagogies.
Conveyance will feature in-person and online access to teacher preparation
programs. Evaluation of the activities and strategies will utilize a mixed-
methods approach and be performed by the Docking Institute of Public Affairs
using process and outcome elements to advance understanding of effective STEM
teacher preparation and retention for rural schools. The project team will take
a multi-tiered approach to dissemination of program outcomes, findings, and
features of rural science teacher preparation. In particular, dissemination will
include presentations at state and national conferences along with publications
in rural and teacher education journals. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.