* 2151840
* I-Corps: Workforce development program to complete data wrangling and data labeling tasks
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2022
* Betsy DiSalvo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a replicable system for more accessible and appropriate digital
tools that forms the basis of a service that employs people with little
computing education in entry-level technical work. Data collection and use has
become ubiquitous in smart communities, but the access to affordable and ethical
data workforce is limited. In this I-Corps project, the goal is to investigate
customer-centered business models for providing affordable and ethical data
services. This potential service will broaden participation in computing by
providing work that helps individuals from underrepresented groups develop
technical skills. By focusing on data work, participation includes not only
engagement with computing but also workforce development to fill a gap for local
data expertise. The proposed service also will serve a need in civic and non-
profit sectors, providing low cost and ethical data cleaning and preparation for
these organizations. This may enable organizations that are serving communities
to leverage data in decision making. The plan is to explore client needs,
business models, and opportunities to franchise this business model to
communities across the United States. There is potential for to serve
communities in both rural and urban areas â€“ providing jobs, opportunities for
computing careers, and data services to civically engaged organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
computational digital tools, including guidelines that are accessible and
appropriate for people with little computing experience, to create replicable
data work service programs. Through the design and deployment of different data
learning pathways, learning in the context of work may be purposefully
structured to move underrepresented youth from entry level participation with
data science and civic engagement to fuller participation in both data science
and civic domains. The proposed tools and design guidelines will involve workers
in the development to help ensure more appropriate digital tools for entry-level
data work. Importantly, this is accomplished in ways relevant to the target
communities as well as to the larger context of digital civics to identify needs
for computational data tools that further digital and civic literacy. Existing
data tools will be analyzed and an indexed and searchable catalog of data work
tools will be developed. Based on this analysis, gaps in tools that are needed
may be identified. Prototypes of these data tools will be tested to iteratively
improve the design to meet the needs of underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.