* 2151154
* Understanding Hierarchy and Multi-stability in Mechanical Metamaterials for Advanced Energy Absorption
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Frazier, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2025
* USD 365,327.00

Energy-absorbing materials are essential in engineering applications; however,
conventional materials possess inherent shortcomings that limit their utility.
For example, foams are lightweight, but the randomness of their internal
structure makes their behavior hard to predict. The behavior of rubber-like
materials is easier to predict but they are not lightweight compared to foams.
This project will devise a new class of foam-like materials with a regular
internal structure to improve the predictability of energy absorption while
remaining lightweight. Critically, this award will introduce and investigate the
impact of new structural features – hierarchy (as seen in bone) and multi-
stability (as seen in pop tubes) – with the aim of enhancing the energy
absorption performance, including the capacity, efficiency, and directionality.
Increasing capacity and efficiency impacts, e.g., aerospace and automotive
capabilities, where space/weight limitations call for a material with maximum
energy absorption per unit volume/mass. Controlling the absorption
directionality permits tailoring the response to the complex loading
environment. Understanding the impact of hierarchy and multi-stability can guide
the design of new materials for superior performance and promote their utility
in practice. Executing the research will also impact the education of
undergraduates (approx. 100) where, as a part of their coursework and to
reinforce learned principles, they will contribute to the experimental component
of the project. In addition, local high school students will be engaged with
lectures and hands-on demonstrations to pique their interest in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to devise a new class
of cellular metamaterials characterized by hierarchical, multi-stable internal
architecture and to analyze the impact of those attributes on the innate
absorption performance – specifically, the capacity, the efficiency, and the
directionality thereof. In pursuit of this goal, the project aims to accomplish
three main objectives: (i) to enhance the absorption capacity and efficiency
toward that of an ideal absorber; (ii) to control the directionality of the
absorption beyond that of periodic architectures; (iii) to link the absorption
performance of minimal surface/volume architectures to their topology. In
general, it is hypothesized that hierarchy and multi-stability may work in
tandem to control stiffness, peak load, and deformation range that define the
load-displacement hysteresis, affecting the absorption capacity and efficiency,
not to mention damage tolerance. The specific use of rotation-based snapping
elements will open the cellular architecture to non-periodic designs and, thus,
permit the absorption directionality to break free of the response imposed by
the rotational symmetry of traditional, periodic lattices. Understanding the
combined, potentially synergistic, effects of multi-stable snap-through and
hierarchy on the mechanical behavior can guide metamaterial design for specific
performance and promote metamaterial adoption and utility in practical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.