* 2151668
* STTR Phase I:  Active Blade Morphing Control to Improve Efficiency and Reduce Loading for Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* John Hall, Atrevida Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is expanding global deployment of wind turbines
with increased production not obtainable with today’s fixed blades. An adaptable
blade with advanced control capabilities helps solve technical and scientific
challenges as wind projects accelerate their move offshore, extending the
physics of the larger turbines needed for future wind farms. Developing a high-
fidelity modeling tool to design morphing blades capable of boosting energy
production, reducing wear and tear, dampening vibration, improving stability,
and reducing load effectively achieves two crucial goals. These goals include
accelerating the deployment of renewable energy with affordable electricity that
is efficiently and economically extracted from wind and improving the loading
and stability necessary for the development of floating wind farms capable of
installation in challenging water depths and extreme weather. The technology
proposed makes large turbines better at capturing wind in more locations to
protect against volatile energy prices, generate jobs, and promote greater
participation in the global energy transition for developed and developing
countries alike. Furthermore, the blade technology resulting from this research
provides opportunities for new manufacturing techniques and commercial
applications in other industries such as aviation, automotive, and marine
renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
examine a high-fidelity model to support the design and control of an advanced
wind turbine blade configuration with an adaptive twist angle distribution
(TAD). Conventional control is generally applied to rotor torque to maximize
wind capture, and thus production, below the rated wind speed. Above this speed,
control shifts to the blade pitch angle to maintain full power. However,
limitations in existing designs lead to trade-offs where wind capture or power
production is relinquished to reduce loads, mitigate vibration, and improve
stability. The actively adaptive TAD provides greater control capabilities and
satisfies these objectives without trade-offs. A crucial goal of this research
is the means to understand the complex aeroelastic and aerodynamic relationships
with respect to the TAD. The technology is a high-fidelity model that simulates
these dynamics and the aeroelastic performance in a reasonable amount of time.
This model involves the development of a framework combining these dynamics and
uses computational tools that leverage data analytics and machine learning. The
technical result of the proposed work is the creation of a digital twin that
enables effective design and robust control of highly sophisticated blades with
adaptive TAD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.