* 2151829
* CNS Core: Small: Budgets, Budgets Everywhere: A Necessity for Safe Real-Time on Multicore
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Multicore computers are increasingly being used to implement real-time systems.
In a real-time system, programs exist that are subject to timing constraints. An
automobile is a good example: When a car's brake pedal is depressed, the braking
system must react by a certain deadline. Many real-time systems are safety-
critical, meaning that failures may have catastrophic consequences, such as loss
of life or serious financial repercussions. Automobiles are also a good example
of a safety-critical system; while a typical driver may be unaware of it, modern
cars contain many computers that run a myriad of programs that perform functions
required for steering, braking, engine control, etc. Safety-critical real-time
systems typically must undergo a certification process that ensures that
important functionality is properly supported. An important part of this process
is to validate that deadline requirements are met, i.e., that programs execute
"on time." To do this, worst-case execution times (WCETs) of programs should be
known. Unfortunately, on today's complex multicore computers, determining
accurate WCETs is difficult because the worst-case execution time of a program
may occur under rare circumstances and thus be difficult to reproduce. The
traditional defense against not knowing WCETs with absolute certainty is to have
the operating system (OS) enforce execution budgets; a program's budget is a
limit on its execution time that the OS ensures won't be
exceeded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While budgets have conventionally been enforced
at the program level, in challenging real-time applications of interest today,
such enforcement is needed at many levels. For example, in an autonomous
vehicle, the overall system is broken into subsystems, where each subsystem
provides some separate function, e.g., sensing obstacles in the road, computing
a plan to react to obstacles, etc. These subsystems, which may contain many
programs each, should be subject to budget enforcement as well. For instance, if
the obstacle-sensing subsystem takes too much time, then executing the planning
subsystem is pointless. This project is directed at (i) identifying the various
levels at which budgets must be enforced in complex multicore real-time
applications, (ii) examining the implications for real-time safety certification
that arise from making multi-level budget enforcement a first-class concern, and
(iii) producing efficient implementations of such enforcement. Addressing these
goals will enable safer systems to be developed. In terms of broader impacts, a
special emphasis will be placed on outreach to girls and women. Such outreach
will include: events involving the Graduate Women in Computer Science (GWiCS)
group at UNC, which hosts an annual research symposium targeted toward
undergraduate women and other underrepresented minorities; Tar Heel Hack, a
hackathon for local middle and high school girls; UNC Computer Science's Girls
Who Code Club, which provides local girls in grades 6-12 with a community for
learning about computer science; and UNC Computer Science's annual Open House
and Science Expo. Further outreach to female students will be done in the
context of a computer science club for undergraduate women led by the PI called
TOPICS (Talking Over Papers In Computer Science).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.