* 2151027
* A Community-Based Approach to Inclusive STEM Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Hsiu-Ping Liu, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2027
* USD 765,445.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing confident,
flexible, effective teachers who can connect with diverse students and their
families in high-need schools. This project also focuses on learning about ways
to support teachers’ own social-emotional needs. Both goals are especially
important in today’s context of ever more diversifying public schools and the
ongoing strains due to the COVID-19 pandemic and social conflict. Teachers who
understand the application of STEM concepts to real world problems can serve to
increase relevance and application of content for all students, especially those
students from diverse communities. STEM educators focused on closing opportunity
gaps recognize the need for more interdisciplinary approaches in STEM to
cultivate equitable and inclusive practices in high-need schools. The approach
of this project is student-centered, in both the ways it will support Noyce
Scholars as learners, and the ways it will help STEM teachers center the diverse
needs of their own students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Metropolitan
State University of Denver includes partnerships with Aurora Public Schools, the
Aurora Public Schools: Action Zone, and the Early College of Arvada. Project
goals over this five-year period include offering funding coupled with
comprehensive support for 17 undergraduate and post-baccalaureate mathematics
and science Scholars during their teacher preparation program and transition
into teaching. This project features a new teacher induction program focused on
capacity building, community building, and social-emotional learning. Its
components include near peer mentoring, a professional learning community, co-
teaching, and lesson study. These efforts are situated on a foundation of
previously funded Noyce programs, built over the past five years to foster a
community of learners. Participants are expected to develop a sense of
belonging, shared mission, and increased professional competencies. The project
is designed to support outcomes including inclusive STEM teaching and learning,
field experiences, near peer mentoring, interdisciplinary connections, family
engagement, and vertical integration across the grades. Broader impacts and
intellectual merit are grounded in an investigation of the impact of integrating
interdisciplinary STEM experiences and connections in STEM teacher preparation
and new teacher induction support. The external evaluation is intended to ensure
that implementation processes are working efficiently and effectively and will
provide summative data about the impact of the program and its various elements
on participating students. Dissemination will occur through a range of local,
regional, and national practitioner networks. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.