* 2151058
* Cultivating Exemplary STEM Teachers for High-Need Rural School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Rick Silvey, University of Saint Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2027
* USD 668,993.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality
mathematics, chemistry, and biology teachers to teach in predominantly rural
high-need school districts. Nationally, STEM teaching positions are often hard
to staff and retain, particularly in high-need, rural schools. This project will
address this need by awarding scholarships to STEM students who will earn a
bachelorâ€™s degree in mathematics, chemistry, or biology while completing a
secondary education minor and teacher licensure program. These STEM students
will also complete their student teaching practicums in high-need schools and
teach in high-need school districts for a minimum of four years after
graduation. The project will provide a unique blend of short- and long-term
field experiences, one-on-one and group mentoring and tutoring, and innovative
new-teacher support. The project has potential to contribute to knowledge on how
to prepare and support teachers in predominantly rural high-need school
districts. In turn, the project aims to increase the number of STEM graduates
prepared to teach in high-need schools and address the STEM teacher shortage in
Kansas and Missouri, and across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at the University of Saint Mary (USM) includes partnerships with
Donnelly College, a two-year Hispanic Serving Institution, and the local
education agencies (LEAs) of Leavenworth, Lansing, and Tonganoxie. Project goals
are to: (1) recruit, retain, and graduate eighteen highly qualified STEM
secondary teaching candidates; (2) increase opportunities for preservice
clinical training in high-need partner schools; and (3) increase the retention
rate of STEM teacher alumni in high-need schools. The project is based on the
theoretical basis that with the support of three mentors (faculty, in-service
teachers, and district-appointed) along with a total of 130 hours of field
experience, the completers of the program will be more likely to become highly
effective teachers who are retained in their positions in high-need LEAs. The
project will contribute to the knowledge base regarding how the mentorship and
in-service hours contribute to placing and retaining STEM teachers in these
high-need LEAs. The project will be evaluated using a mixed-methods approach
that includes process (formative) and outcome (summative) components. In
collaboration with an external evaluator, the leadership team will disseminate
results locally, regionally, and nationally through meetings with partners and
organizations and submissions to scholarly journals and conferences. This Track
1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.