* 2151030
* Addressing the STEM Teacher Shortage through an Inclusive STEM Teacher Education Pipeline
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Nathan Lien, Saint Mary's University of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2027
* USD 946,670.00

The Inclusive STEM Teacher Education Pipeline (ISTEP) project aims to serve the
national need to increase the number of highly qualified middle and high school
STEM teachers, including those from diverse backgrounds, in high-need schools.
The shortage of licensed STEM teachers, particularly teachers representing the
demographic backgrounds of most students in high-need schools, is a serious
problem that affects southeastern Minnesota as well as the nation. Saint Mary’s
University of Minnesota will address this problem by recruiting more high-
achieving students, including those from diverse backgrounds, into its
STEM+Education dual degree program and Master of Arts in Teaching program. These
24 prospective teachers will be prepared to teach in high-need schools in a
state with a growing STEM teacher shortage and significant racial disparity
between teachers and students. It is anticipated that ISTEP Scholars’
preparation and mentorship in STEM teaching will improve their future secondary
students’ STEM achievement and readiness for post-secondary learning and careers
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Saint Mary’s University of
Minnesota is in partnership with Winona Area Public School District, a high-need
school district and the Rochester STEM Academy, which serves students from high-
need communities. Over the five year project, project goals will include: (1)
increasing the number of secondary STEM teachers from diverse backgrounds
committed to teaching in high-need local education agencies (LEAs) in
southeastern Minnesota; (2) strengthening the pipeline of secondary STEM
teachers from diverse backgrounds committed to teaching in high-need LEAs in
southeastern Minnesota by institutionalizing the key ISTEP project components of
recruiting, preparing, and supporting retention of diverse, high-quality
secondary STEM teachers in high-need LEA schools; and (3) contributing to the
knowledge base related to recruitment, preparation, and retention of secondary
STEM teachers from diverse backgrounds. The project's 24 high-achieving
prospective teachers (13 undergraduates and 11 at the master’s degree level)
will either (1) obtain dual degrees, with one degree being a baccalaureate
degree in biology, chemistry, or mathematics, and the other in secondary
education (referred to as STEM+Education); or (2) will already possess a
baccalaureate degree in a STEM discipline and will earn a Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT). ISTEP Scholar recruitment will include a diverse set of
strategies for both undergraduates and STEM professionals. Scholar mentoring
will be implemented within a Cognitive Coaching framework. An external evaluator
will assist the ISTEP management team in advancing the frontiers of knowledge in
recruitment, preparation, and retention of secondary STEM teachers from diverse
backgrounds. Improving the quality of science education at the secondary level
by preparing teachers of diverse backgrounds licensed in STEM fields will
ultimately contribute to a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.