* 2151075
* CAESAR: Characterizing and Understanding Atmospheric Boundary Layer Fluxes, Structure and Cloud Property Evolution in Arctic Cold Air Outbreaks
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Cassano, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 363,467.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to provide observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used to better understand the
characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic climate system
more broadly, to inform climate models and projections. The project will also
help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with significant relevance to
naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal communities. The broader
field effort includes significant opportunities for students and early-career
scientists, international collaboration, and public outreach. This specific
project includes a training component for senior level undergraduate students on
field methods and observations that will parallel the planning and execution of
the CAESAR campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to use
multiple remote sensor and in-situ measurements to (1) characterize Marine
Boundary Layer (MBL) fluxes, structure and cloud properties and (2) understand
the process controlling the evolution of MBL fluxes, structures and cloud
properties during cold-air outbreaks (CAOs). The research team will deploy the
Multi-function Airborne Raman Lidar (MARLi) and the nadir-only Airborne Doppler
Lidar (ADL) to provide profiles of water vapor, temperature, air vertical
velocity, and aerosol/cloud structure below the NSF/NCAR C-130 research aircraft
to document MBL thermodynamic and dynamic structures, mixing across the MBL top,
and cloud phase and property distributions. Analysis of MARLi and ADL data,
combined with other observations and modeling during CAESAR, will allow the team
to focus on understanding of how upstream boundary layer stratification and
wind, MBL rolls and small-scale vertical motions, and surface fluxes and
Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) top entrainment/mixing controls MBL development
and evolution during CAOs. In addition, these measurements will address the
question of how aerosol, MBL processes, and cloud dynamics (stratiform and
convective clouds) impact mixed-phase cloud properties, especially liquid-ice
mass partitioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary funding for this project comes
from the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program with partial funding from the
Arctic Natural Sciences program. The deployment of observational assets for
CAESAR is being funded by the Facilities for Atmospheric Research and Education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.