* 2151698
* The Role of Scientific Support Staff in the Creation and Dissemination of Knowledge Within and Across Core Infrastructural Facilities
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Stephen Barley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 139,800.00

Shared instrumentation facilities, or “core facilities” have become increasingly
important to science. Core facilities are often seen as places where scientists
share knowledge with each other around common tools, advancing fields and
sparking interdisciplinary collaborations. We know, however, that scientists
often hesitate to share knowledge about ongoing work— particularly with close
peers or competitors— because they seek credit for their own work and want to be
the first to publish findings. While prior research has considered how
scientists navigate tensions between openness and secrecy in their work, this
research has largely overlooked the role that scientific support staff— those
who maintain and develop scientific instrumentation and technique— play in
diffusing valuable technical knowledge among scientists. This study examines the
role of scientific support staff in two core facilities through a fifteen-month
ethnographic study. By documenting how scientific support staff in core
facilities create and disseminate knowledge among potentially competing
researchers, we hope to inform decision makers who seek to increase the
productivity of shared research infrastructures. By explicating the various
tasks, skills, competencies, and specialties that characterize scientific
support staff’s work, our study should also suggest how universities and core
facilities might implement better reward structures and careers for scientific
staff, thereby strengthening the nation’s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the role of scientific
support staff in core facilities through an ethnographic study of two university
nanofabrication facilities, facilities that provide cleanrooms and semiconductor
fabrication equipment to a regional community of researchers. Our goals are: (1)
to explore in depth the kind of knowledge that scientific support staff in core
facilities possess, (2) to document the ways in which (and the points at which)
the contributions of staff facilitate the progress of users’ research projects,
(3) to explore whether, and if so how and how frequently, support staff
disseminate knowledge in ways that counter the deleterious effects of secrecy
among users, and (4) to document whether and how knowledge developed by support
staff in one core facility is disseminated to other core facilities. Our overall
aim is to develop a deeper understanding of how science benefits from shared
resources in core facilities by better understanding the role of scientific
support staff in creating and disseminating knowledge within and across core
facilities. The research will contribute to several fields including science
studies, organization studies, public policy and the sociology of work and
occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.