* 2151666
* SBIR Phase II:  High Performance Microalgae Building Enclosures for an Energy Efficient Retrofitting Application
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Yau Shun Hui, ECOCLOSURE LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 995,534.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is in enabling an energy-efficient and cost-effective solution for a
healthy, sustainable built environment. Stringent environmental protection
policies are presenting the building industry with challenges in reducing
environmental impacts. High performing windows could play an role in reducing
energy use and pollutant emissions. Creating a window system that reduces
building energy consumption and carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions may have broad
societal, economic, and commercial impacts. The proposed biochromic windows can
serve as an alternative, energy efficient retrofit and help meet net zero
energy, net zero carbon buildings. Their multiple environmental, economic, and
social benefits include high energy efficiency, improved air quality, carbon
capture, and renewable energy production. Energy efficient window retrofitting
accounts for over 60% of the global window market share. In 2021, the global
window market grew to $10 billion for replacement and renovation and $6 billion
for new construction with a compound annual growth rate of 8.6% and 8.3%
respectively. This energy efficient, carbon sink technology may result in 20~30%
energy savings and carbon reductions. The good air quality further benefits
occupant health and well-being, making the building more appealing to occupants,
industry professionals, and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical
innovation of the biochromic window is to integrate biological cells within a
window assembly for commercial building retrofitting applications. As a primary
building enclosure system mediating between indoor and outdoor environments, the
biochromic window offers improved insulation, dynamic shading efficacy, daylight
penetration, views to outside, carbon dioxide (CO2) biofixation, and biomass
production, all of which are attributes of improved building energy efficiency,
good indoor air quality, beneficial carbon sequestration, novel biofuel
production, and user satisfaction. The primary project objectives are to: 1)
prototype of a biochromic window, integrated with an intelligent control system
to enable the maximum performance; 2) conduct performance testing and obtain
performance certificates; and 3) scale-up mass production manufacturing and
carry out technology demonstrations at early adopter’s buildings. Project
outcomes seek to save building energy consumption in heating, cooling, and
artificial lighting load while producing on-site renewable energy and
sequestrating CO2. The biochromic windows, coupled with an intelligent control
system, further enhance economic and environmental performance depending on
solar intensity and carbon concentration. The view-out area within the
biochromic window admits year round daylighting. Proximity to green nature is
expected to provide aesthetic quality and emotional comfort for user
satisfactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.