* 2151712
* STTR Phase I:  Electrode Materials and Processes for Atmospheric Pressure, Continuous Manufacturing of Multi-Layer Capacitors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Kevin O'Connor, CAPORUS TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve capacitor technology in power conversion equipment used to
electrify our transportation systems. Capacitors are critical components to the
systems needed to accelerate the energy transition from petroleum to other
fuels. This project will develop new electrical materials and production
processes for capacitors. The new electrical materials are formulated to be less
hazardous to humans and the environmental while also being compatible with more
efficient manufacturing processes. Benefits of the proposed technology include
faster charging rates of electric vehicles and reduced sizes of on-board
batteries, which lowers the cost and environmental impact of electric vehicle
manufacturing. Reduced costs will allow a broader population access to electric
vehicles. Through development of these new electrode materials and processes,
manufacturing of capacitors in the United States will be available to serve the
growing US electric vehicle industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of the
proposed work is to develop electrode materials and roll-to-roll processes
compatible with an integrated, continuous manufacturing process for multilayer
capacitor products. By combining additive manufacturing process in a roll-to-
roll system, sequential deposition, drying, and curing of alternating layers of
dielectrics and electrodes will enable production of multilayer capacitors in a
single system at atmospheric pressure. Electrode inks and printing processes
used in flexible/hybrid electronics do not meet the specifications to replace
vacuum-based evaporation or sputtering of thin electrode layers for capacitor
applications. The primary approach will be based on adapting the layer coating
and alignment techniques developed for dielectrics to conductive materials.
These electrode materials will improve upon state-of-the-art conductive inks
with poor interfaces between particles to produce dense layers with uniform
thickness and low surface roughness. This project seeks to provide prototyping
of multilayer capacitors produced in discrete processing steps for verification
of electrical performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.