* 2151062
* Developing and Strengthening Partnerships to Support Teacher Recruitment and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Lisa Martin-Hansen, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 10/31/2023
* USD 74,999.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to address the
critical teacher shortage and diversity gap between students and STEM teachers.
Ultimately, the goal of the project is to support the recruitment, development,
and retention of STEM teachers who are committed to and have the dispositions
for teaching in high-need schools. This project intends to build institutional
capacity in secondary mathematics and science teacher education through
development of expanded partnerships across its colleges and with local high-
need school districts and community programs. These partnerships, which will
foster mentoring and summer experiences for prospective teachers, will support
the recruitment and retention of a diverse pool of secondary mathematics and
science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at California State
University, Long Beach builds upon the existing collaborative relationship
between mathematics and science education in the College of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics and the secondary teacher credential program in the College of
Education, in partnership with the Long Beach Unified and ABC Unified school
districts, local non-profit agencies, and the College of Engineering. The
intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in applying research theories of
prospective teacher cohort engagement, mentoring of beginning teachers,
retention, and culturally relevant pedagogy to corresponding program activities.
These include developing and piloting professional development activities based
on needs assessments for districts' induction programs and the needs of mentor
teachers. The broader impact of this work lies in the team building and
collaboration that is essential to launching a major project across sectors. The
impact this could have on high-need schools, the STEM teacher shortage and
diversity gap across California, the preparation and support of future
mathematics and science teachers, and the students attending their schools is
considerable. This Capacity Building Project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.