* 2151678
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Moment-Based Descriptors and Deep Neural Network for Screening Three-Dimensional Biological Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Daisuke Kihara, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 164,000.00

Three-dimensional (3D) imaging is essential for understanding complex biological
systems, as it provides indispensable information about organs, tissues, and
molecules that cannot be captured using two dimensions. While contemporary
imaging methods produce an enormous amount of image data, tools for efficient
and effective analysis of such volumetric data sets remain to be developed. This
project aims to provide a general foundation for analyzing volumetric images
obtained using multiple imaging modalities and for various data types. The
research aims to contribute to progress in many science and technology domains
in which image analysis is crucial and of significant societal impact. The
primary application will be to biological molecular recognition and
classification. The methods are also expected to apply to other biological and
medical 3D data retrieval as well as other types of 3D data in other
disciplines, such as human face recognition, geographical and climate data, and
computer-aided design. The project will leverage efforts in the
interdisciplinary computational life science and engineering departments at
Purdue University and Saint Josephâ€™s University by recruiting and training
students through multidisciplinary coursework and direct involvement with the
project. The two institutions will foster student and faculty participation in
this research by organizing a joint mathematical biology conference and a summer
undergraduate research fest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
and integrate two complementary and synergistic methods: The first is to extend
mathematical moments to encompass fractional-order moment descriptors and hence
provide a more accurate representation of 3D images. The second is to integrate
the new moment-based approach into a deep neural network to achieve high
accuracy and efficiency in classifying 3D data. Finally, the techniques will be
combined to implement a one-stop biomolecular 3D image web server, which will be
publicly available and used for screening protein ligand-binding pockets,
functional sites, and drug molecule search. Protein structures will be
represented with voxel grids, mapping values onto 3D grid points. Because
voxelization is highly prevalent in 3D imaging, the new methods are expected to
apply to data from other imaging disciplines, such as radiology (x-ray, MRI, CT)
and electron microscopy. The new techniques for integrating moment-based
approaches and deep learning for 3D data recognition are also expected to
substantially influence the machine learning domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.