* 2151020
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Real-time Strategies and Synchronized Time Distribution Mechanisms for Enhanced Exascale Performance-Portability and Predictability
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2024
* USD 106,453.00

Advances throughout science and engineering have for several decades been driven
by High Performance Computing (HPC), with the pace of discovery accelerating in
concert with continued innovation in computing capabilities. But as
semiconductor technology now faces fundamental physical limits, even while
large-scale systems are reaching warehouse scales, new approaches are becoming
essential to achieving efficient use of computing resources. In particular,
given this divergence of scales, HPC systems have necessarily become more
distributed and asynchronous (in the sense that system clocks are asynchronous),
resulting in increasingly variable and unpredictable execution. While these
effects are recognized as critical hindrances to HPC performance, the mechanisms
are not yet fully understood. What is known, however, is that much HPC
infrastructure is tasked with dealing with inefficiency derived from asynchrony,
variability, and unpredictability, leading to a deep and complex
hardware/software support stack. The project team's hypothesis is that while
each stack element provides a local solution, it may also exacerbate the global
problem: that complexity has resulted in more variability, not less, and made
determining its causes more difficult. This project explores the possibility of
reversing the trend of ever-increasing complexity by removing and simplifying
support layers. This strategyâ€™s achievable gains remain limited, however, while
the underlying cause, execution asynchrony, remains unaddressed. The approach
begins by leveraging recently developed technology that enables clocks to remain
extremely accurate even when distributed on a planetary scale. Such accurate,
distributed clocks serve to underpin a virtuous cycle where synchrony
establishes baseline predictability, which, in turn, reduces variability, and at
each stage of the cycle enables reduction in the complexity of the support
stack. A benefit of this approach is that the individual steps are largely
simple and can be applied directly to existing software systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year project aims to obtain early findings and
practical demonstrations for the importance of synchrony and predictability to
increase HPC compute efficiency and thereby improve large-scale program
execution. Five tasks are conducted. The first is to demonstrate the feasibility
of accurate clock distribution by augmenting existing HPC network
infrastructure. The second is to demonstrate the application of synchrony in the
establishing a virtuous cycle enabling simplifications to the software/system
support stack. The third is to devise mechanisms to model, measure, and validate
systems using the proposed methods. The fourth is to investigate the relative
benefits of applying the synchrony-based virtuous cycle with respect to various
application classes. The fifth is to demonstrate the overall efficacy of the
proposed approach through a case study involving a production application.
Overall, the project works to determine whether added synchronization through
accurate clocks enables significant improvements to HPC computations in terms of
how efficiently they use computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.