* 2151497
* RUI: Global Optimization of Chance-Constrained Programming for Reliable Process Design
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Yu Yang, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 96,171.00

Incomplete knowledge of the accuracy of mathematical models used for the
optimization-based design of chemical processes can lead to degraded quality of
fuels, vaccines, manufactured foods, and other chemical products, potentially
giving rise to further economic, safety, health, and environmental effects.
Current computer-aided process optimization methods are deficient in handling
uncertainties due to the high computational cost of rigorously evaluating the
designs of complex, highly interconnected chemical plants, inevitably resulting
in conservative, sub-optimal design solutions. Motivated by this challenge to
advancing U.S. chemical manufacturing technology, this project will establish
entirely new, deterministic global optimization techniques combined with
flexible data-driven modeling methods that will make it possible to design high-
performance chemical processes under uncertainties without sacrificing safety.
The resulting chemical products and processes will meet quality and operational
constraints with predictable probability while minimizing the plant and
operational costs. The fundamental research to be carried out in this project
will build a deeper understanding of how data-driven uncertainty models can be
used in optimization to simplify the process of identifying the true optimal
solution. This proposal would support the integration of research and
educational activities through the addition of new content to process design and
chemical engineering laboratory courses, the mentoring of undergraduate
researchers, and organizing workshops for K-12 students. This work will educate
a new generation of students from traditionally underrepresented groups to solve
process design problems using data analytics and global optimization
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to build and
test a global optimization framework to solve chance-constrained programs (CCPs)
formulated for chemical process design under uncertainties. The proposed
research plan will focus on advancing the theory behind single- and two-stage
CCP subject to large-scale joint chance constraints affinely dependent on
general uncertainties. In the single-stage CCP, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs)
will be investigated for their effectiveness in describing generic
uncertainties. To achieve this objective, the CCP-GMM framework will be
reformulated into a bi-convex structure. In the two-stage CCP, a piecewise
linear decision rule will be integrated with GMM to facilitate more flexible
policy representations. The resulting bi-convex problem then can be solved to
the global optimum through a combination of second-order cone relaxations,
branch-and-bound methods, reformulation-linearization techniques, and
optimality-based interval reductions. A vegetable oil blending experiment will
be constructed to validate the proposed optimization algorithms, with an
objective of edible oil cost minimization subject to the viscosity, energy, and
total fat constraints as uncertainties. The proposed research program has
transformative potential in that it seeks to improve the use of available data
in the optimization process by embedding the identified GMM into the
optimization process. This innovative strategy can bypass the difficulty of
integral over chance constraints and enable much improved computational
efficiency of global optimization. If proven effective, the proposed global
optimization algorithms for CCP can be widely applied to complex design problems
in the chemical, oil, fuel, and pharmaceutical industries, to reduce cost,
enhance safety, and mitigate environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.