* 2151137
* Creating Curriculum and Community to Support a Diverse, High-Quality STEM Educator Pipeline for Colorado
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Debora Scheffel, Colorado Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2023
* USD 55,488.00

The project aims to serve the national need for more K-12 teachers with strong
backgrounds in STEM. In line with the nation, Colorado has an acute need for
STEM teachers who are prepared to teach a diversity K-12 students. This project
intends to build capacity for a program of study that could result in a more
skilled STEM teacher workforce that is more representative of the K-12 student
population in Colorado. The project, through partnerships with K-12 schools,
will build capacity for the recruitment and education of STEM majors interested
in teaching mathematics and science. Meeting this goal will help fill the need
for scientific and technical professionals throughout the greater Denver area,
Colorado, and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Colorado
Christian University (CCU) includes partnerships with Alameda International
Jr./Sr. High School and Littleton High School. Project goals include: (1) Revise
CCU STEM and education curricula to create and widen pathways for STEM majors to
become prepared teachers; (2) Generate a strong STEM education community,
particularly for Hispanic students; and (3) Increase recruitment capacity
through expanding K-12 school partnerships. Knowledge gained from this project
will be used to develop a Noyce Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends proposal.
Collectively, these projects could contribute to understanding ways in which
small, faith-based, liberal arts colleges can attract STEM majors for training
in secondary STEM education. The project will investigate the effects of
building infrastructure and processes that engage and support STEM majors,
support new STEM teachers, and strengthen culturally and linguistically
responsive pedagogical content. CCU will disseminate project evaluation findings
to other small, private universities. This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.