* 2151654
* STTR Phase I:  Automating Employability Skills Development for Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Jody Mitchell, DIRECTED ANALYTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to increase the competitive employability
of individuals with developmental disabilities. For individuals with
developmental disabilities (autism spectrum disorder and other intellectual
disabilities) employment disparities are far greater than their non-disabled
peers; Approximately 20% of working-age adults supported by state developmental
disability agencies are employed in a paid job and only 15% were employed
competitively. The proposed project will develop a product for school districts
and higher education establishments to address the needs of approximately 8
million intellectually disadvantaged individuals in the United States education
system. The implementation of this innovation seeks to impact the rates of
employment in this population, resulting in increases in personal income,
reduction of poverty levels, and better health outcomes for individuals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project plans to create a scalable software framework which integrates,
evaluates, and analyzes data from school districts and higher education programs
in order to enable the use of machine learning to improve the relationship
between transition intervention methods and employment outcomes. Using this
innovation, school districts would be able accurately predetermine an
individuals’ ability to successfully perform tasks associated with employment.
Higher education programs which enroll adults with developmental disabilities
may then effectively scale and develop an individual’s employability skills. The
framework will provide structured data collection, data alignment, and data
interlinking for roadmaps which will be implemented into the product, enabling
educators and individuals to interact, learning how employability programmatic
factors and educator corrective actions contribute to employability skills
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.