* 2151653
* STTR Phase I:  Superparamagnetic, antimicrobial nanocomposites and magnetic toothbrush for synergistic dental care
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Leisha Martin, MNT SMARTSOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve oral health. Although the conventional antimicrobial
compounds in oral cleaning products can kill certain types of bacteria, others
are harder to remove. The proposed technology advances a new oral cleaning
device that uses magnetic nanoparticles to address this challenge. This project
advances the research needed to make this solution effective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a biofunctionalized
magnetic nanoparticle ferropaste that can efficiently remove the oral bacterial
biofilms under the control of an external magnetic field. The nanoparticles can
significantly enhance antimicrobial activity. The core of the nanocomposites in
this product have demonstrated strong magnetism and antibacterial characters in
vitro. Under the external magnetic field provided by the magnetic toothbrush,
the movement of the nanoparticles can be synchronized. Because of the nanoscale
size, the nanoparticles can enter the oral biofilms through the pores on the
surface and penetrate the cell wall of the bacteria. Therefore, these particles
can disrupt the bacterial cell wall and break the dense biofilms to allow the
released bacteria to be sufficiently eliminated by the antimicrobial compounds
in the toothpaste. Additionally, the surface of the magnetic nanoparticles will
be modified to increase the biocompatibility and favor incorporation into the
biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.