* 2151040
* Developing, Recruiting, and Empowering Alabama Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* W. Gary Martin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2028
* USD 3,249,800.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality teachers
by encouraging, recruiting, and preparing motivated STEM graduates and STEM
professionals in central Alabama to become well-prepared secondary (grades 6-12)
mathematics teachers. An ongoing shortage of qualified mathematics teachers in
the eight partnering high-need school districts is a critical need the project
will address. Well-prepared mathematics teachers are important to ensure that
all students, regardless of race or cultural background, develop the
mathematical knowledge and dispositions needed for success in life. The project
will recruit candidates from mathematics-intensive careers. These individuals
will be supported as Noyce Teaching Fellows (TFs) who will be receive funding as
they complete a streamlined master's degree in mathematics education and teacher
certification, as well as an annual salary supplement for four years as they
teach in high-need school districts. Project personnel and mentor teachers from
the school districts will support the candidates’ professional growth as they
begin their careers. The project will produce 26 mathematics teachers who can
effectively teach mathematics to students in partner schools, and 20 mentor in-
service teachers will gain increased knowledge about the research-based teaching
of mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Auburn University includes
partnerships with Tuskegee University, Alabama State University, both
Historically Black Universities and Colleges, and surrounding high-need school
districts (Chambers, Macon, Russell, and Tallapoosa Counties, and Alexander,
Auburn, Opelika, and Pike Road Cities). In addition, the Auburn University
Foundation, the East Alabama Regional Inservice Center, and the Alabama Math,
Science, and Technology Initiative are non-profit partners in this endeavor.
Project goals include recruiting 26 STEM professionals to become mathematics
teachers, preparing them to teach mathematics using evidence-based strategies to
support the learning of all students, and providing a minimum of four years of
professional learning to help them develop into teacher leaders. A professional
learning community of the new teachers and their mentor teachers will support
mutual professional growth. The project is guided by the Standards for Preparing
Teachers of Mathematics developed by the Association for Mathematics Teacher
Educators. Research on the impact of preparing and supporting mathematics
teachers to provide equitable instruction on their mathematics teacher identity
and mathematics teacher leader identity will occur. Quantitative and qualitative
data will be collected to develop annual snapshots of the new teachers’
longitudinal development; a set of case studies will explore their professional
growth. The evaluation will examine supports and impediments to implementation
of the project activities along with progress toward sustainability. The project
will disseminate its work through presentations at research and practitioner
conferences, manuscripts submitted to practitioner and research journals, and
social media platforms. This Track 2: Teaching Fellowships project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.