* 2151176
* STTR Phase I:  Effect of Alcohol Concentration on Lactic to Acrylic Selectivity and Deactivation Rate over Na-FAU Zeolite Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Christopher Nicholas, LAKRIL TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to commercialize a process to produce low
carbon, bio-based acrylic acid and acrylates for paints, coatings, adhesives,
and superabsorbent polymer markets. This $10 billion market has been seeking a
bio-based, low-carbon alternative for decades, with economics serving as the
major barrier. This project’s high yield lactic-to-acrylic technology will help
grow the corn utilization industry and provide high paying jobs across rural
America as well as economic competitiveness in global markets. Every plant
constructed to convert lactic acid fermented from sugar into drop-in, low-
carbon, renewable acrylic acid is estimated to bring $12 million in economic
activity to a county with significant bio-based sugar crops (e.g., corn, beets,
cane). Approximately 250 plants are needed at this scale to convert today’s
petrochemical acrylic acid to a bio-based source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to utilize high alcohol content feedstocks using
catalyst innovation comprising engineered amine treatment of cation-exchanged
zeolites. The catalyst has been shown to outperform numerous previously-utilized
catalysts with &gt;90% yields of acrylic products during catalyzed dehydration
of lactic acid. So far, those in the field have investigated feeds containing
aqueous solutions of methyl lactate or lactic acid in concentrations from
10-40%. Methanol has not been used as a co-feed in concentrations greater than
5%, therefore this project will investigate higher concentrations of alcohols
(5%-80%, using methanol or ethanol). The project will use both methanol and
ethanol as the alcohol size is likely to alter active site reactivity and/or
shift the equilibrium of esterified versus acidic acrylate products. These
experiments address two areas of concern in the commercialization of the
technology and determine the relative dehydration rates of ethanol and lactic
acid under competitive adsorption conditions to provide foundational information
required for reactor scaling. The proposed research also increases the
percentage of alkyl acrylates formed by forcing the gas phase esterification of
acrylic acid with alcohol towards completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.