* 2151887
* Collaborative Research: Photoswitchable Interlayer Exciton Devices from 2D Hybrid Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jong Hyun Choi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 330,000.00

Collaborative Research: Photoswitchable Interlayer Exciton Devices from 2D
Hybrid Heterostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a
collaborative research program between Purdue University and the University of
St. Thomas, which focuses on investigating two dimensional (2D) materials.
Atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoS2 and WSe2 show
unique physical properties which may not be observed from bulk crystals. These
include strong photoluminescence due to the recombination of an electron-hole
pair, called exciton in a quantum mechanical term. When two dissimilar 2D
materials are brought together (for example, MoS2/WSe2), a new phenomenon
emerges. This is called interlayer exciton originating from strong interactions
between the heterolayers. While there is an excitement about the interlayer
excitons given their potential impact in diverse applications, the relevant
mechanisms are not fully understood. This research introduces novel strategies
to modulate the formation and behavior of interlayer excitons, thereby gaining a
fundamental understanding and developing practical devices. Functional organic
layers will interface with 2D heterostructures, including photosensitive
molecules that can change the optical and electronic properties upon external
light irradiation. This project will combine advanced experimental measurements
with modeling and computational capabilities to elucidate the fundamental
interactions between 2D materials and organic layers, and related interlayer
exciton properties. The research will also be complemented by an educational and
outreach program to advance the public understanding of nanoscale science and
engineering. The activities include (i) development of new course materials,
(ii) research-based engineering education for undergraduate students, and (iii)
development of a hands-on module for K-12 students that illustrates the
principles of 2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the
research is to demonstrate 2D heterostructured hybrid devices from transition
metal dichalcogenides and photochromic molecules and study the related
optoelectronic properties. A library of functional molecules will be examined
such that their highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital levels will be switched by external signals such as
irradiating wavelengths. The photoswitchable behaviors will be exploited for
modulating the interlayer excitons in heterobilayers and several distinct device
configurations will be investigated. The hybrid heterostructures will be
constructed and studied with optical spectroscopy and conductive atomic force
microscopy at Purdue University. Ab initio calculations based on density
functional theory will be performed at the University of St. Thomas to guide and
verify the experiments. The project team will together develop a mechanistic
understanding of the key parameters that govern the photoswitchable interlayer
exciton devices and underpin the structure-property relationship towards general
design principles. The fundamental knowledge from this work will lay the
foundations for understanding architectured 2D materials and providing novel
optoelectronic devices, thus resulting in transformative
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.