* 2151091
* Preparing and Retaining Secondary Mathematics Teachers Who Implement Diversity and Equity Practices in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Jane Wilburne, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 01/31/2027
* USD 712,969.00

This project aims to serve the national need of recruiting, preparing, and
retaining a robust and diverse workforce of secondary mathematics teachers who
implement culturally responsive mathematics instruction in high-need schools.
The project directly addresses the documented nationwide shortage of secondary
mathematics teachers and the high faculty attrition experienced by schools
serving high-need communities. It seeks to build a teacher education program
that will prepare prospective teachers to teach secondary mathematics using
innovative teaching approaches that combine mathematical modeling, emerging
technologies, and culturally responsive practices. The project involves hands-on
coursework and rich field experiences in secondary classrooms at partner
schools. These experiences have the potential to build preservice teachers’
skills in teaching mathematics and in meaningfully incorporating students’
cultural backgrounds and home languages in school learning. A comprehensive
induction support system will include mathematics coaches who will provide
instructional and social-emotional support to the secondary mathematics teachers
to promote their retention in high-need schools upon completion of the project.
Project outcomes include the certification of secondary mathematics teachers who
will be supported into careers in high-need schools, and the establishment of a
vigorous teacher education program that will continue to fill documented
workforce shortages even after the conclusion of funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Penn State Harrisburg (PSH) includes
partnerships with Harrisburg, Central Dauphin, Middletown Area, Steelton-
Highspire, and Susquehanna Township School Districts. Project goals include
enhancing the current teacher certification program and increasing the number of
certified secondary mathematics teachers who will be well prepared to make a
positive difference in secondary students’ learning of mathematics through long-
term careers in high-need classrooms. The project is particularly focused on
recruiting 16 racially and ethnically diverse prospective teachers (scholars)
over five years who are undergraduate mathematics majors or post-baccalaureate
candidates who have an undergraduate degree in mathematics or other STEM
disciplines. Additional project outcomes include a positive impact on the
scholars’ self-efficacy beliefs towards culturally responsive mathematics
teaching and their capacity to select, design, and implement mathematical-
modeling activities in high-need classrooms. The project builds on research that
demonstrates that planning for diversity can promote higher student engagement
and performance. The project’s broader impacts include preparing secondary
mathematics teachers who can develop mathematical-modeling activities that
leverage students’ cultural and linguistic capitals, along with emerging
technologies, to support students’ active engagement in and learning of
mathematics. The innovative mathematics curriculum that results from the project
will be shared through a project website, the university scholarly repository,
professional-development offerings, publications, and presentations at state and
national mathematics education conferences. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need schools. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.