* 2151881
* Scalable Models, Fast Computation and Predictability for Spatio-temporal Ordinal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lauren Lowman, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 130,136.00

The United States Drought Monitor measures the severity of drought as one of six
ordered levels, ranging from no drought through exceptional drought. These
measurements are taken at all US locations, and updated each week. Using these
data to make accurate predictions of future drought would assist water resource
managers, agriculture producers, and other crucial sectors of society plan for
the risk of drought. However, statistical methods needed to analyze this type of
data can be impractical due to computational limitations of fitting the model.
With ongoing advances in data collection and storage, the size and computational
demands of spatio-temporal ordinal data like the US Drought Monitor will
continue to increase. This project will address the challenge by producing new
statistical tools which enable the analysis and forecasting of spatio-temporal
ordinal data at a controlled computational cost, and thereby support drought
research and prediction for the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
is to develop novel statistical methodology to efficiently fit a Bayesian
hierarchical spatio-temporal model for ordinal data. The model will be
interpretable, scalable to large data sets, and specifically designed to support
probabilistic predictions reflecting all sources of uncertainty. The approach
will address spatial and temporal dependence through low rank projections of
random effects onto suitable basis functions, which avoids known problems of
confounding with fixed effects, aids with interpretation, and substantially
reduces the computational cost of fitting the model. By viewing the data as
areal rather than point-referenced, the cost of sampling from the posterior is
reduced by avoiding dense matrix inversion, a major limitation of existing
methods. The investigators will develop this model with a goal not always at the
forefront of other spatio-temporal research efforts --- how to update the model
rapidly to incorporate newly emerging observations, without resorting to re-
fitting the full model each time. The model will be deployed to study US
drought, capturing how prediction uncertainty propagates forward in time, and
documenting when and how this uncertainty overtakes the ability to make
meaningful predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.