* 2151277
* Testing the effects of cooling history and rheology on oceanic plateau accretion and their role in tectonic modification of convergent margins
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Kenneth Ridgway, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 575,072.00

Ocean plateaus are broad and thick volcanic edifices that form in ocean basins.
Subduction, the tectonic process in which oceanic crust is pulled back into the
Earth’s interior, sometimes causes these plateaus to collide with the
continents. The effects of these collisions remain poorly understood and depend
on a variety of factors, including the oceanic plateau’s age. Younger plateaus
remain warm, buoyant, and weak and resist being pulled into the Earth’s
interior, whereas older plateaus are cold, dense, and strong and can more easily
be pulled into the Earth’s mantle. The PIs will investigate and compare the
effects of ocean plateau collision through an interdisciplinary study of two
fragments of the same oceanic plateau that collided with North America at
different times. This comparison will provide insights into how the age of an
oceanic plateau relates to the collisional process. The proposal will support a
female PhD student, several undergraduate researchers, and two early career
faculty. It will include a fieldtrip to Washington State for Native American
undergraduate students that is designed to connect Earth Science to issues
important to Native American communities. This connection is an important step
in gaining student interest, recruiting, and training the next generation of
Native American Earth scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the
proposed research goals, the researchers will undertake a multi-disciplinary
study of two natural examples of oceanic plateau accretion: the Eocene accretion
of Siletzia to Washington, Oregon, and Vancouver Island, and the latest
Oligocene to present collision of the Yakutat terrane with southern Alaska. The
terranes are proposed to have formed as a single plateau and likely have the
same crustal structure. However, Siletzia accreted as the plateau was being
built while the Yakutat terrane cooled for an additional 30 million years prior
to its final collision with southern Alaska. These two collisions provide
examples of a collision involving a ‘young, hot, weak, and buoyant’ plateau and
one involving a ‘colder, older, stronger, less buoyant’ plateau, respectively.
To better understand how each collision modified the convergent margin the PIs
will study the syn- and post-collisional sedimentary strata overlying both
terranes. This effort will include constructing a precise chronostratigraphy
using uranium-lead zircon ID-TIMS (isotope dilution-thermal ionization mass
spectrometry) geochronology from interbedded tuffs combined with detailed study
of facies changes to better understand how depositional systems evolved during
and after each collision. The PIs will also integrate (U-Th)/He (uranium-
thorium/helium) zircon thermochronology on targeted detrital zircon populations
within the context of their chronostratigraphy to assess the duration and
intensity of forearc erosion during each collision. Finally, the investigators
will utilize thermo-mechanical models of plateau subduction to help generalize
results by systematically varying parameters such as plateau age and thickness.
This multidisciplinary approach will provide a more complete understanding of
how oceanic plateaus interact with subduction zones, and their role in the
modification of convergent margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.