* 2151115
* Improving STEM Education through a Teacher Residency Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2028
* Brett Criswell, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,077,094.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective
secondary science and mathematics teachers. Two cohorts of six Teacher Fellows
each will progress through a novel residency program. They will then enter the
workforce with a Masters in Secondary Education and will become well-prepared
STEM teachers leaders in both rural and urban schools. As teachers, these
Fellows will have access to research experiences as well as learning
opportunities with partnering industries and organizations. Through these
experiences and their graduate program, it is intended that Fellows will gain
understanding of the Pennsylvania "STEM ecosystem" and will broaden their
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at West Chester University in
Pennsylvania includes partnerships with the Oxford Area School District and the
Chichester School District, as well as Longwood Gardens, Fluxspace, and Texas
Instruments. Twelve teachers, in two cohorts, will be supported in attaining
their Master's degree and persisting through four years of teaching in this six-
year project. Project goals include: recruiting diverse cohorts and preparing
those cohorts for teaching diverse populations with culturally-relevant
pedagogy, supporting Fellows through a rigorous and innovative Master's program
that centers on a residency model, and providing induction opportunities that
enhance and extend Fellows' STEM knowledge and networks. Through their
residency, Fellows progress through a stable year-long teaching experience with
a single classroom and mentor. The partnership with Longwood Gardens is expected
to benefit both Fellows and the organization as they work together to align
garden outreach activities with K-12 Next Generation Science Standards. Other
informal and formal learning can occur through summer activities with Fluxspace
and technology training through Texas Instruments, as well as potential research
experiences in collaboration with Penn State University. Through an assessment
of the residency model and the multi-faceted induction opportunities, this
project will add to the knowledge of how to prepare novice teachers to become
teacher leaders. The partnerships involved may also lead to a more robust
regional STEM ecosystem and serve as models for other states as to how industry
and informal STEM institutions can support teacher education and increased
public scientific literacy. This Track 2: Teaching Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.