* 2151190
* STTR Phase I:  A D-band, silicon-based, phased array radar front-end module for smart sensing applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Kevin Gu, ASTRABEAM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a millimeter-wave imaging radar
sensor with significant advantages over current radar products including a
smaller form factor, lower manufacturing cost, less signal processing and
integration complexity, and improved detection performance such as range and
resolution. The proposed miniature imaging radar sensor supports versatile
deployment and can be ubiquitously applied to a wide range of short- and medium-
distance wireless sensing use cases including industrial safety monitoring,
building security, patient surveillance in medical and healthcare facilities,
etc. The proposed research seeks to aligns with the Federal Communications
Commission's (FCCâ€™s) recent plan to develop new technologies for the global
radar sensor market. The proposed technology requires close collaboration
between the startup and a university team, which will enhance industry/academia
partnerships in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to study and demonstrate
feasibility of a D-band, front-end phased array radar module design that enables
an imaging radar sensor capable of operating beyond 100 GHz with a wide
bandwidth. The radar module prototype under consideration consists of a scalable
area-efficient front-end architecture, phased array transceiver circuits
supported by a mass-producible silicon technology, and a low-cost antenna-in-
package (AiP) compliant with standard manufacturing and assembly process. The
proposed research includes detailed design analysis, modeling, and simulation
verification of a front-end system and core circuit blocks. The project also
includes antenna prototype designs and feasibility analysis for module-level
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.