* 2151476
* SBIR Phase I: Engaging citizens in environmental research to impact science literacy and STEM careers while ensuring data integrity
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Carrie Linden, LIMINAL ESPORTS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,945.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to engage citizen in environmental
research activities, potentially increasing the selection of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers for youth. This project
focuses on enhancing academic and industry partnerships around citizen science,
improving science and environmental literacy, and increasing participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields of study. In addition to improving the
nationâ€™s scientific and technical workforce pipeline, the project seeks to
employ a unique commercialization model for interactive educational media that
allows for both authentic learning and widespread use by general audiences. This
model mixes digital and in-person experiences, digital distribution methods, and
mobile experience commercialization strategies that can serve as a model for
other educational and commercial interactive media
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses two critical issues: engaging more youth in
environmental science and engineering education and increasing local
environmental data for scientists. The project team will research and develop
optimal methods and tools for creating educational and interactive media with
rapid scientific data collection capabilities. For youth and educators, the
project seeks to engage users in national standards-aligned scientific learning
activities. The project will create hyperlocal networks that collect data and
make results directly available to local communities so that they can actively
track pressing environmental concerns such as migrations and changes in
populations of species. The technical goals of the project include creating new
processes for connecting local, crowdsourced user input to citizen science data
repositories in a way that automates the categorization and validation of that
data. The resulting project will actively engage youth in real scientific
research and improve data collection for federal and university environmental
science programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.