* 2151606
* SBIR Phase II:  Sanitation for the circular economy: Treating high strength wastewater for nutrient and water recovery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Abraham Noe-Hays, RICH EARTH LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,925.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project lies in transforming a ubiquitous source of water pollution into a
renewable source of fertilizer, while facilitating onsite treatment and reuse of
recycled greywater. This technological solution is intended to conserve precious
drinking water supplies and reduce dependence on non-renewable resources for
both wastewater treatment and fertilizer production. Rather than combining all
domestic wastewater into one dilute stream, this project separates and recycles
the largest source of nutrient pollution: toilet waste. Source-separating
bathroom fixtures (including waterless urinals, urine-diverting toilets, and
vacuum-flush toilets) direct the waste through dedicated plumbing to a compact
building-scale processor, which converts it into a purified liquid fertilizer.
This technology may have immediate utility in sensitive watersheds where
regulations require landowners to remove nitrogen from wastewater, and in urban
settings where municipalities are subsidizing or mandating distributed
wastewater treatment because their central wastewater treatment facilities have
reached or exceeded their design capacity. The technology may create jobs in
installation and service, reduce loads on wastewater treatment plants, restore
waterways, and yield clean, domestically-produced fertilizer for use in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project focuses on
developing a building-scale, high-strength, wastewater treatment system paired
with source-separating bathroom fixtures to result in a resource recovery
system. Nutrients are recovered from the influent wastewater through a four-
stage treatment train that includes: (1) acidification to minimize pipe
occlusion, (2) freeze concentration to reduce volume, (3) pasteurization to
destroy pathogens, and (4) filtration to reduce the concentration of
pharmaceuticals and other organic compounds. The objective of this research
project is to develop this technology to the point where it can be installed in
a building and is capable of capturing greater than 90% of nutrients from 600
liters of wastewater per day with minimal energy inputs. This goal will require
increasing the working volume of the current freeze concentrator, optimizing the
energy usage of each element in the treatment train, packaging each element so
that they are durable, readily installable, and easily maintained, and
developing a fully automated control system. Each element of the treatment train
will be tested individually to demonstrate that a consistent, concentrated,
sanitized fertilizer can be produced from high-strength wastewater while
decreasing building water demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.