* 2151063
* EAGER: Plant pathogenic Streptomyces encode components for genetic code mistranslation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Dieter Soll, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicole Donofrio
* 01/31/2023
* USD 160,950.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-pathogenic microorganisms
are ubiquitous in soils across the U.S. and negatively affect the production of
vital food crops and the country’s agricultural economy. Understanding the
biological mechanisms to infect and colonize plants employed by these microbes
is fundamental for the development of effective management approaches. The
present project will investigate novel protein factors that are uniquely encoded
by a group of plant-associated microbes, including several pathogens responsible
for the common scab disease in potatoes and other tubers. Early research
indicates that the protein factors endow these pathogens with the ability to
deliberately alter their genomic information without changing their DNA, and
ultimately can result in the production of multiple protein mutants from a
single gene. Why these pathogens encode these dedicated factors and how they
function is largely unknown. The goals of this project are to determine the
function of these factors and to explore their role in plant pathogenicity of
their host species. Importantly, the implementation of this work will involve
the training of two postbaccalaureate associates from underrepresented groups in
STEM and will offer opportunities for undergraduate students to gain a first-
hand research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic code assigns each of
the twenty canonical amino acids to one of the 61 sense codons. One of the only
two exceptions to the rule of one codon specifying one amino acid was recently
discovered in a small group of plant pathogens from the bacterial Streptomyces
family, including Streptomyces turgidiscabies and Streptomyces scabiei. These
organisms, which are the causative agents of distinct tuber diseases that cause
substantial economic losses to U.S. farmers, encode an anomalous aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase and a corresponding tRNA. Expression of these factors causes
translation of alanine codons as proline. This dual use of alanine codons
enables the diversification and expansion of the host’s proteome due to
stochastic Ala→Pro mutations, which can generate a multiplicity of protein
variants from a single gene. This may provide a rapid response against stress
and environmental changes as well as a mechanism for virulence and infection.
This project will combine biochemical, biophysical, multi-omics, comparative
genomics, genetics, and molecular biology approaches to elucidate the molecular
interactions and features that enabled the emergence of these translation
factors and to explore their biological function in the pathogenic Streptomyces
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.