* 2151254
* Artificial Intelligence for Arid Land Agriculture (AIALA)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,281,988.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global food supply and food
security are at risk due to an increasing world population, climate change,
diminishing natural resources, and limited available land. In agriculture, the
primary challenge has been how to be more productive with less - less arable
land, less water, less labor, less certainty. In arid lands, these challenges
are amplified. Agricultural systems struggle to cope with rapid changes in water
availability and land-use patterns, scarcity of labor due to declining
population, variability and uncertainty related to changing weather and climate,
and aging rural infrastructures. Arid lands and drylands, which cover much of
the Western US, are expected to expand as the climate changes. Artificial
intelligence (AI) can bring a paradigm shift in how the twin economic and
environmental challenges of farming and ranching in arid lands can be addressed.
AI can support farmers to operate with greater efficiency and precision through
the assistance of autonomous systems (e.g., drones, ground vehicles, and
intelligent irrigation systems) and the support of intelligent software systems
to aid in decision making (e.g., detecting and resolving crop diseases). AI-
driven solutions will not only enable farmers to do more with less; they will
also improve quality and ensure a faster path-to-market for crops and livestock.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to New Mexico
State University (NMSU) will enable the creation of a coordinated graduate
training program, called Artificial Intelligence for Arid Land Agriculture
(AIALA), to prepare the next generation of scholars and practitioners by
teaching graduate students how to bridge the divides between AI and Agriculture
for Arid Lands. The project anticipates training 33 MS and Ph.D. students,
including 18 funded trainees, from computing-related disciplines and
agriculture-related disciplines .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AIALA scholar
experience will integrate with and complement the traditional graduate
disciplinary training, thus contextualizing the in-depth disciplinary research
for researchers in either AI or agriculture-related areas. Moreover, the
experience will allow scholars to effectively serve as catalysts in research
teams using AI to solve arid land challenges. The research conducted by the
AIALA scholars and their research mentors will advance the state of the art in
both AI and Arid Land Agriculture. The research will promote the creation of
novel multi-agent systems frameworks, advancing the state of the art in machine
learning and distributed data analytics. In addition, it will provide
methodologies and technologies to enhance the adaptability of crops, rangeland
plants and livestock, improve the resiliency of livestock in expansive rugged
rangelands, and ultimately lead to resilient and sustainable arid land
agricultural systems. The AIALA training model benefits from a number of
innovations. First, it establishes a transdisciplinary training pipeline,
embedding AI research challenges in Arid Land Agricultural challenges, enabling
contextualized and situated learning. Second, it integrates graduate students
and faculty mentors in mutually supportive teams of learners, supported, in
turn, by an extensive mentoring infrastructure. Third, it infuses diversity and
inclusion in all operations and learning activities, promoting engagement of a
diverse audience of scholars and preparing the scholars to serve as agents of
change for inclusion. Finally, it emphasizes the development of professional
skills as part of holistic disciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.