* 2151747
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-high Throughput Parallel Optical Links for Chip-to-Chip Interconnects
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Bardia Pezeshki, AVICENATECH, CORP.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 989,153.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to create very low power and very high
capacity optical interconnects for general computer applications. Computer
performance is limited by the speed, power, and latency of connections between
chips and memory. The limitations of electrical interconnects are well known,
and optical interconnects overcome the limitations and offer 100-1000 times
performance improvements. While historically optical interconnects have been
hampered by high cost and high power, recent developments show that the promise
of optical interconnects can be practically realized. Optical interconnects will
dramatically improve overall performance of enterprise and cloud computing
services, especially when used in data center computers, while reducing
electrical power consumption. This will in turn permit a vast improvement in
resource utilization and dramatic reduction in the cost of computation across
all segments of society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
an optical peripheral component interconnect expreess (PCIe)-compatible
transparent bridge for general computer interconnects. PCIe is the most
prevalent interconnect used today in computers. The technology developed in this
proposal, based on light emitting diode (LED)-based transmitters, multicore
optical fibers, and complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible
photodetectors, seeks to reduce electrical power consumption from ~10 pJ/bit for
electrical solutions to ~100-200 fJ/bit. The use of LEDs leverages investments
already made for cost and power effective LED lighting and displays. The small
size of the LEDs and multicore fibers allows for data densities of &gt;1
Pbps/cm2. Electrical interconnects and other optical interconnect technologies
cannot compare with the performance of these LED based optical interconnects.
These advantages enable physical disaggregation of the compute, storage, and
memory functions, improving system performance and resource utilization. This
Phase II effort is focused on the development of a PCIe-compliant transparent
bridge for applications in chip to chip and chip to memory
interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.