* 2151688
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering Seed Microenvironment
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Augustine Zvinavashe, IVU BIOLOGICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is in building climate resilience and promoting lower carbon emissions
in the agricultural food production system. The company seeks to develop a seed
coating technology that can extend the shelf life of plant growth promoting
bacteria (PGPB), also known as biofertilizers. Such coated seeds boost crop
yields and production, and reduce agricultural inputs (e.g. water, energy,
fertilizers, land use, and pesticides). The unique coating could alleviate
abiotic plant stressors such as soil salinity and drought, making the seeds more
climate resilient. The project will provide tools that will make it easier for
microbe-based agriculture companies to build and deploy their technologies more
broadly. Current seed coating and microbe preservation technologies are
generally developed from the non-renewable petrochemicals. These seed coatings
are extremely hard to degrade in the environment, ultimately forming
microplastics that pollute the water and land systems. Because of these
problems, policy makers are banning petroleum-based seed coating usage in the
Food and Agriculture industries. The proposed seed coating technology may fill
in this gap as it uses biodegradable, naturally-derived, and non-toxic
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change, soil degradation, and soil
salinization are emerging issues that have led to major societal problems around
the world. These societal problems include impacts on water, energy, and food
security (WEFS). Scientific discoveries in agriculture may inform innovative
technological solutions that mitigate these pertinent societal issues. This
project will engineer the seed microenvironment to encapsulate, preserve and
deliver PGPB using biopolymers. The proposed work may increase precision in
microbe and nutrient delivery, and lower the environmental impact of synthetic
fertilizers through targeted delivery and substitution with biological
fertilizers. The technical research and development will be focused on the
development of biopolymer seed coatings and tests of their efficacy in hydrated
and anhydrous seed states. The experiments will also assess the protective
capabilities of seeds against abiotic stressors such as fungi and nematodes. The
project aims to carry out initial experiments under laboratory conditions and
subsequently expects to conduct large scale field
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.