* 2151037
* Building Capacity to Develop Elementary STEM Teacher Leaders in Iowa
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Robin Dada, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 66,682.00

This project aims to serve the national need for increased STEM literacy by
building capacity to develop an elementary STEM teacher leader program in Iowa.
Many STEM education efforts address secondary STEM teacher needs. Yet, high-
quality STEM education needs to begin for students during the elementary school
years. The elementary teacher education program at the University of Northern
Iowa is the largest in the state. However, most elementary school teachers have
minimal experience with integrated STEM teaching prior to certification. This is
due to the emphasis on English/Language Arts and Mathematics at the elementary
level with less attention to science, especially in high-need schools. Further,
few elementary teachers have science or STEM endorsements, which results in few
high-quality elementary teachers who can practice and model best STEM teaching
practices. This project will build capacity to develop an elementary STEM
teacher leader program that would provide STEM professional development and
leadership development for practicing elementary school teachers. In turn, these
elementary STEM teacher leaders will model effective STEM teaching and support
high-quality student teaching experiences in STEM for future elementary school
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building project at the University
of Northern Iowa includes partnerships with stakeholders from local high-need
schools, including Hoglan Elementary School and Dr. Walter Cunningham School for
Excellence. The goal of the project is to investigate the current state of
elementary STEM education in Iowa and then to design a program that will develop
elementary STEM teacher leaders. The project team will learn from faculty at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln who have successfully created an elementary STEM
teacher leader program in their state, which shares educational similarities
with Iowa. Additionally, the project team will adapt Horizon Researchâ€™s National
Survey of Science and Mathematics Education and use this survey to collect
evidence about the current state of elementary STEM teaching in high-need
elementary schools from administrators and teachers. Survey results and follow-
up interviews will be analyzed to establish the strengths and needs of
elementary STEM educators in Iowa. Information from survey data analyses,
combined with insights from the Nebraska program, will be used to design an
elementary STEM teacher leader program at UNI. A four-member external Advisory
Board representing STEM education university faculty, state-level STEM education
professional development leaders, and administrators from high-need elementary
schools in Iowa will guide and evaluate the project. This Capacity Building
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.