* 2151586
* STTR Phase I:  Metabolite-based Polymer-loaded Chimeric Antigen Receptor Expressing Metabolically-Fit Immune Cells for Immunotherapy
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Abhinav Acharya, AXILEA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve cancer treatment. This project advances a new therapy that
targets cancer cells and addresses their malignancies. Following the initial
application of lymphomas, the results obtained herein can be applied to several
types of cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will generate
Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)-based cell therapies to improve treatment for
lymphomas. Currently, these therapies show negative effects, such as cytokine
release syndrome and metabolic exhaustion upon reaching the tumor
microenvironment. Furthermore, low nutrient availability for CAR cells in the
tumor microenvironment decreases the efficacy. Therefore, strategies utilizing
CAR therapy to help target the tumors and keep these cells sufficiently
metabolically fit to perform their functions are beneficial. The main goal of
this project is to test the feasibility of generating biomaterials that maintain
activation of immune cells in resource-poor environments. This project will
generate CAR-macrophages and test the ability of our biomaterials to maintain
metabolic fitness in these cells. Technical activities include: (1) Generate
human CAR macrophages using non-viral electroporation, (2) Show proof-of-concept
that human CAR macrophages can survive in a resource-poor environment, and (3)
Show proof-of-concept that mouse CAR macrophages do not induce toxicity in vivo
in mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.