* 2151483
* SBIR Phase I:  Sub-orbital Ballooning System for Low-cost, Instant, and Long-Duration Mesospheric Access for Research, Testing, and Technology Demonstrations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Pradeep Shinde, Space Balloon Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase-I project is the creation of a new, state-of-the-art, low-
cost, semi-automatic. ultra-high-altitude balloon system for suborbital
transportation system. The technology seeks to provide routine sub-orbital
atmospheric flights for environmental testing of payloads in the ultra-low
vacuum of the Mesosphere (260,000 feet). The technology also seeks to transport
metrological payloads, such as radiosondes (that measures pressure, temperature,
and relative humidity) and rawinsondes (that evaluate wind speed and direction,
temperature, pressure, and relative humidity) at all altitudes from the ground
to 260,000 feet for extended periods of time. This capability is especially
critical for increasing the success rate of space missions. The new testing
capability may save the space industry hundreds of million dollars in technology
failures annually. The transportation of metrological payloads to the upper
extremes of the atmosphere for extended periods of time may also provide
improved accuracy of weather forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to solve well-known problems
that prevent balloons from taking payloads to the upper atmosphere. This project
will develop hardware prototypes, perform software development, and integrate
the hardware and software together. The team will perform flight demonstrations
to characterize the impact of the Mesospheric environment on the ballooning
flight transport and demonstrate the low-cost payload transport to the
Mesospheric sub-orbital altitudes for a long duration (&gt;
hour).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.