* 2151477
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Manufacturing for Nucleic Acid Lipid Nanoparticles to Improve the Supply Chain of Therapeutics and Vaccines (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Antonio Costa, DIANT PHARMA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the need for advanced manufacturing
technology that can produce future therapeutics and vaccines. Future clinical
treatments will rely on continuous manufacturing to meet demand, both with
respect to volume and drug product personalization. This project will
incorporate continuous manufacturing principles and process analytical sensors
and technology. These processes will enable faster responses to global health
crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a compact, end-to-end,
advanced manufacturing system for nucleic acid lipid nanoparticles. This new
system will follow current Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) and will support
end-to-end manufacturing by connecting to a nucleic acid assembly system and a
fill-finish system to produce injectable-ready materials. One major goal of this
research is to advance the understanding of nanoparticle drug delivery to enable
manufacturing injectable ready materials on demand and on-
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.