* 2151692
* SBIR Phase II:  Cellulose Based Material Innovations for an Ocean Compostable, Fish Friendly, Plastic Packaging Replacement Platform Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Ariadne Dimoula, PARAMOUNT PLANET PRODUCT
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2025
* USD 986,583.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the design of products that will decompose
in nature, are paper-stream recyclable, and Ocean Compostable Fish Friendly
(OCFF), with a cost similar to plastic packaging. Since 2018, the US typically
recycles between 5-8.7% of its plastic. According to Ocean Conservancy, “Every
year, 11 million metric tons of plastics enter the ocean on top of the estimated
200 million metric tons that currently circulate the marine environments.” The
proposed products do not need biocides and use no additives in their production
process. The products are made with 100% Forest Stewardship Council
(FSC)-certified tree cellulose, which ensures that the product will come from
sustainably harvested trees. These products will drastically reduce plastic
waste while bringing jobs back to rural areas in need of economic development.
The products are non-toxic and will compost anywhere and everywhere. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project continues the prototype development of
novel products and the commercialization of a new molding and drying
technology/techniques required to produce Ocean Compostable Fish Friendly
packaging that is durable, functional, and digestible in nature. This product is
expected to be adopted by the growing number of consumers who want
environmentally-safe, single-use packaging products. This product replaces
single-use plastics and other bioplastics. It is naturally grease resistant and
will replace perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), which are being banned nationwide
due to their harmful effects on human health. Leading Polylactic Acid (PLA)
compostable packaging products are not compostable in nature and contaminate
recycling streams. These products will have a material that feels and costs
similar to plastic, is greaseproof, and is not harmful to nature and wildlife if
littered. The initial product is a soufflé cup comprised of 100% fibrillated
cellulose (FC) from trees, a material not yet developed for packaging on a
commercial scale. Phase I results included a patent-pending benchtop system that
dewaters and molds the FC into desired shapes. The goal of this project is to
scale the machine to mold 100% FC into products that customers
desire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.