* 2151658
* SBIR Phase I:  Collision Regulations (COLREG) Aware Autonomy for Safe Interactions of Crewed and Uncrewed Vessels
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Michael Flanigan, SEASATELLITES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to advance the productivity and safety of
operations across the entire $1.3 trillion Blue Economy. Maritime operations
routinely involve significant risks to human life and property and consequently
bear extraordinarily high operating costs. Autonomous ocean vehicles (falling
under the Robotics technology area) are being rapidly adopted by science,
commercial, and defense organizations due to their potential to dramatically
reduce cost and risk. The success of the proposed project will advance the state
of the art for commercial autonomous vehicle compliance with international laws
regulating interactions between maritime vessels at sea. Giving autonomous ocean
vehicles the ability to interact with crewed vessels safely and predictably will
accelerate the adoption of these tools and the missions they enable. Several
specific market segments stand to benefit immediately from the proposed
technology, including the $31B offshore wind market, the $2B port automation
market, the $233B aquaculture market, and dozens of others. Beyond market
impacts, humanity needs ocean data to understand the critical dangers of
overfishing and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on the design of
systems and software needed for autonomous ocean vehicles to comply with the
international collision regulations (COLREGS) for maritime vehicles. The
difficulty the industry has faced in creating COLREGS compliant autonomy is the
fact that the rules were developed with the expectation that experienced
mariners would be able to make qualitative interpretations in unique situations.
That led to a descriptive rather than prescriptive set of rules that is good for
human mariners, but difficult to implement in software. The objectives of this
Phase I project include the design and simulation of autonomous systems able to
operate in compliance with the COLREGS. In addition to simulations, the software
may be deployed to small autonomous surface vehicles for preliminary on-water
testing. Anticipated results include a system able to maintain COLREGS
compliance within a documented envelope of conditions. The effective
implementation of safe system design, optimized control, and machine learning
techniques can combine to produce the first autonomous ocean vehicles that can
be trusted in congested waterway settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.