* 2151039
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Thermodynamic Modeling of Open Magmatic Systems - Translithosphere Magma Chamber Simulator
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Frank Spera, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 157,439.00

Magma (molten rock) typically forms between 75 and 150 km below Earth’s surface
(in the Earth’s mantle) and either stalls and cools in the upper 35-50 km (the
Earth’s crust) or erupts to form a volcano. Understanding how magmas change
physically and chemically informs an array of societally important topics from
how, when, and where a volcano might erupt to the formation of economically
important resources. These changes are documented by a computer tool called the
Magma Chamber Simulator that was developed by the Principal Investigators.
Funding provided by this grant for advancements to the Magma Chamber Simulator
will enhance geologists’ ability to address a range of questions, such as where
magmas form and cool in the Earth’s interior, how magmas evolve from Hawaiian-
like to Yellowstone-like compositions, and what magma gas content might be,
which potentially controls the explosivity that might occur, with obvious
societal implications. This information provides data for volcanologists to
better predict volcanic eruptions and assess the volcanic hazards that impact
the health, safety, and livelihood of millions of people. Changes to the Magma
Chamber Simulator involve adding additional mathematical approaches to how
magmas change, updating and verifying a complex computer code, and running
computer models on particular groups of volcanic rocks to address typical
questions. The Magma Chamber Simulator is a free computer modeling tool that is
available to anyone and thus provides capability for beginning students to
experienced professionals to learn about how magmas change as they move from
inside the Earth to the surface. Funding will provide opportunities for students
and early career professionals to learn about computer modeling and the benefits
it provides for advancing scientific understanding of a range of geologic
topics. Training activities, from beginning to advanced level, will be provided
both online and in person. Funding will also support advanced educational
training for diverse students who will enter the earth science work force, which
in the coming decades is key to addressing solutions to many of the hazard and
resource challenges humans face. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will support
substantial advances the petrologic community’s capability to model open system
magma evolution for translithosphere magma systems by adding significant
keystone functionality to the publicly available tool, the Magma Chamber
Simulator (MCS). The new tool, called Translithosphere Magma Chamber Simulator
(TL-MCS) utilizes the capabilities of MCS, a thermodynamic model that quantifies
the evolution of an open system where magma, wallrock, and
recharge/stoping/entrainment reservoirs exchange matter and energy. MCS models
simultaneous crustal contamination, magma recharge, cumulate/mush entrainment,
and fractional crystallization. Five new capabilities to TL-MCS include: (i)
transport of a fluid phase from wallrock to magma; (ii) radiogenic isotopic
disequilibrium during wallrock melting; (iii) equilibrium crystallization of
resident magma; (iv) reaction of earlier formed crystals and resident magma; and
(v) translithosphere modeling functionality (i.e., polybaric, polybaric-isobaric
modeling capability). New post-processing capabilities will enhance and
accelerate interpretation of results of TL-MCS models; Jupyter notebooks (using
Python) will include (i) user-friendly statistical techniques that inform the
choice of ‘best fit’ models, and (ii) new algorithms for efficient data
archiving and user ‘on-demand’ plotting. Widespread distribution and use of TL-
MCS are top priorities. Funding will support strategies for sharing TL-MCS and
training users that include continuous updates to the MCS website, online and in
person workshops, and online tutorials offered in English and Spanish. Because
TL-MCS has complex functionality, additional training for advanced users will
focus on effective and efficient modeling strategies and include publication of
a roadmap of effective modeling practices. Application of TL-MCS to igneous
localities worldwide will enable diverse researchers to explore the open system
translithosphere evolution of these systems. Funding for diverse students and
post-doctoral researchers will support their scientific and professional
development and position them to join the earth science workforce as highly
trained computer modelers. Opportunities will include designing and executing
research projects and tutorials, writing proposals, leadership roles in
workshops and tutorial development, oral presentations, peer-reviewed
publications, and development of professional networks. Finally, increased
opportunity for engagement in open system processes research will be available
via an online world-wide open system magma processes working group that the
funded scientists will initiate and manage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by a collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in
the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.