* 2151463
* CRII: OAC: Data Collection Infrastructure for Panoramic Video Monitoring in Wildlife Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Zhisheng Yan, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2023
* USD 171,838.00

Wildlife monitoring has significant scientific and societal impacts. By
utilizing remote cameras, biologists and ecologists can monitor and manage
wildlife in order to prevent the transmission of zoonotic disease from animals
and the invasion of wildlife on crops and livestock. However, current
cyberinfrastructure (CI) in wildlife monitoring is limited to normal angle
videos with a limited field of view and has caused missing the recording of
important events that occurred outside of the direction being filmed. Moreover,
existing remote cameras only allow the recording of short videos for a few
minutes and thus cannot document many hours of wildlife activity in the
monitoring zone. This project proposes methods for panoramic video monitoring
that capture 360 degree uninterrupted videos to document complete wildlife
activities. The project will allow wildlife scientists to access high fidelity
monitoring data in both the spatial and temporal domains. Panoramic videos will
not only capture comprehensive details on and near the monitoring site, but also
depict the monitoring context of the data collection. The abundant research data
and metadata embedded in panoramic videos will enhance the productivity of
biologists and ecologists. If successful, the proposed wildlife monitoring CI
will accelerate the adoption of panoramic data collection in other field
research such as agriculture and archeology. The research outcomes, including
the datasets generated and the software developed, will provide an
interdisciplinary opportunity for undergraduate research, course curriculum
development, and high school outreach activities, especially for
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a video
collection cyberinfrastructure to enable panoramic wildlife monitoring. The
design objective is to archive days to weeks of high resolution video data for
long lived monitoring under the limited storage and energy constraints of remote
cameras. To this end, this project proposes a framework for collaborative local
and networked storage. First, we propose camera computing strategies to
understand the scientific value of monitoring content and maximally compress the
video with negligible overhead. This would mitigate the overall need for
storage. Second, we propose a networked storage scheme to address the
intermittent nature of the network in the wild, where only partial video is
transported while the remaining video is generated in the receiver. We then
schedule compressed video tiles for local storage or networked storage by
orchestrating the storage, network and battery resources. Finally, we will
develop and deploy the panoramic video monitoring in real wildlife research. We
will validate the CI on the Savannah River site and assist wildlife scientists
to study the impacts of animal interaction on disease
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.