* 2151318
* Sex Chromosome Evolution in Lizards and Snakes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Anthony Gamble, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,165,299.00

Sex chromosomes play an important role in the embryonic development of many
animal species by controlling an individual's sex. However, the sex chromosomes
of most animals remain unidentified limiting our understanding of broad patterns
of sex chromosome evolution. This project will advance the study of sex
chromosome evolution by investigating lizards and snakes. These reptiles have a
variety of sex-determining systems with numerous evolutionary transitions among
them. Each of these independently derived systems can act as a replicate
evolutionary “experiment” to test the general principles and processes that
govern sex chromosome evolution. This research will fill gaps in our knowledge
by identifying sex chromosomes in these under-studied reptiles and then use
these data to characterize some general properties of sex chromosome evolution.
The research will train a postdoctoral researcher and students, including PhD
students and undergraduates, in genomics and bioinformatics, skills that are in
high demand for careers in agriculture, biotechnology, and health care.
Researchers will develop genetic sex tests for several reptile species. Such
tests are important for the management and breeding of endangered species and
sexing embryonic material in developmental research. Researchers will engage in
outreach to pet reptile hobbyists and the general public about genetics,
evolution, and sex chromosomes via a museum exhibit and a booth at pet reptile
trade shows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative studies of sex chromosomes in
animal groups with repeated transitions among sex-determining mechanisms, like
the lizards and snakes, can help answer longstanding questions about sex
chromosome evolution. This research will integrate comparative genomics,
transcriptomics, and phylogenetics to enhance the utility of lizards and snakes
as a model clade to investigate sex chromosome evolution and address the
following questions: 1) Are sex chromosomes an evolutionary trap? 2) Are some
chromosomes particularly good at being sex chromosomes? 3) Is sex chromosome
dosage compensation more likely to evolve in XX/XY vs. ZZ/ZW taxa? 4) What is
the relative role of rearrangements vs. sex-biased recombination in suppressing
recombination between the sex chromosomes? Upon completion, this project will
enable subsequent investigations into the mechanisms that drive sex chromosome
evolution in lizards and snakes and establish a framework for comparative
analyses of sex chromosome evolution across the tree of life. Data collected for
this project will have broad utility to other scientists, including new, high
quality genome assemblies for multiple lizard and snake
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.