* 2151209
* Objective Stochastic Modeling of Quasibrittle Damage and Failure Through Mechanistic Mapping of Random Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jialiang Le, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 457,384.00

Understanding stochastic structural response is central to reliability-based
engineering designs and stochastic finite element (FE) modeling has become a
widely used simulation tool to investigate the probabilistic behavior of
structures. Major research interest has recently been directed towards brittle
heterogenous (a.k.a. quasibrittle) materials, such as concrete, rock,
composites, etc., which are highly relevant to many modern engineering
structures. Quasibrittle structures can exhibit complicated failure mechanisms,
ranging from diffused damage to localized damage, which are governed by
different material length scales. Recent studies have shown that, without
considering these length scales in modeling the random constitutive properties,
stochastic FE simulations suffer strong spurious mesh sensitivity. This severely
limits the prediction capacity of the simulation. The goal of this award is to
develop a new computational framework for stochastic analysis of quasibrittle
damage and fracture. The framework is anchored by a mechanism-based projection
of random fields of constitutive properties onto the finite elements. The model
will be validated through a unique set of experimental data focusing on the
effects of specimen size and geometry on the probabilistic failure of a porous
rock. The research will be tightly integrated with educational activities for
high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The educational plan includes
participation in a high-school summer program, recruitment of female and
minority research students, organization of workshops and sessions at
conferences, and development of new courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long
been known that, due to strain-softening material behavior, FE simulations of
quasibrittle structures exhibit a strong mesh dependence. Though various
localization limiters have been suggested to address this issue, the focus has
been limited to deterministic analysis. This research will investigate the issue
of mesh dependence in stochastic FE simulations, and resolve it through a novel
computational framework. The project will develop a mechanism-based model for
mapping of random fields of material properties onto the finite element mesh.
The direct consequence of the model is that the probability distributions of the
constitutive properties depend on the mesh size, and the dependence is
influenced by the prevailing damage pattern. Experiments on a quasibrittle
material using specimens with different sizes and geometries will provide
valuable data for validation of the computational models. The model will be
calibrated based on a new understanding of the effect of spatial cross-
covariance features of constitutive properties on the scaling behavior of the
structural failure statistics. This research will enhance our capability of
stochastic modeling of quasibrittle fracture and failure by linking the
underlying failure mechanisms with the stochastic constitutive model of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.