* 2151049
* CAS: Linking bulk composition and structure to the dynamic active surface in OER
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Zhenxing Feng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 532,560.00

Many chemical processes rely on catalytic materials that enhance process
efficiency and product selectivity by promoting chemical reactions at the
catalyst surface. For example, water electrolysis – the splitting of water into
its constituent hydrogen and oxygen gases – requires catalysts for both the
hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions (HER and OER). Catalyst design has
historically been driven by an understanding of bulk material properties;
however, the surface where reactions occur can change dramatically in the
reaction environment. The project explores relationships between bulk and
surface catalytic properties of perovskite materials as a pathway to efficient,
sustainable, hydrogen production via electrocatalytic water splitting – thereby
enabling the hydrogen economy. Additionally, the project develops related
courses designed to train students in electrochemical devices for energy
conversion and storage, while promoting outreach to underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project illuminates relationships between perovskite
material bulk template and surface properties, during and following
electrocatalytic reactions. The resulting data will guide materials design at
the atomic level. The primary drivers of transformations at functional
interfaces will be identified - considering not only the role of materials
composition (and associated electronic structure), but also two-dimensional
templating from strain imposed by the underlying lattice, and three-dimensional
templating from the presence of defects such as mobile cations and oxygen
vacancies. Additionally, both the magnitude and length scale of charge transfer
between the bulk and surface layer will be investigated. The project will
combine atomically precise materials synthesis with surface-sensitive element-
specific spectroscopy and microscopy, considering the family of (001)-oriented
perovskite oxides for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Together, these
studies will build understanding and ultimately control of the dynamic evolution
of material interfaces, coupled with their activity and stability in the OER,
enabling materials design to exploit this interphase region through innovative
assemblies of matter. The work in this proposal will further be incorporated
into hands-on learning activities and open-ended projects centered around
electrochemical devices for energy conversion and storage in undergraduate
curriculum and outreach to underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is co-funded by the Catalysis program in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Processes (CBET) Division and the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.