* 2151702
* SBIR Phase I:  Intracellular Delivery for Rapid Point-of-Care Labeling of Therapeutic Cells
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Mark Stolowitz, VISICELL MEDICAL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,536.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves leveraging an innovative approach to
deliver and monitor therapeutics more effectively. Real-time monitoring and
tracking of immune and stem cell therapies is in its infancy. However, without
the capability to precisely know where therapeutic cells localize, clinicians
cannot assess safety, design optimal doses, or make clinical decisions related
to therapeutic approaches. As the multi-billion-dollar cell therapy market is
expanding rapidly in its race to develop the next generation of life-saving,
cost-effective, lower toxicity cell therapy products there is a heightened
requirement for safety risk management to monitor on-target, on-tumor delivery
of cell products in patients. This proposal addresses a critical unmet need in
the cell and gene therapy industry for rapid point-of-care labeling of
therapeutic cells specifically to enable tracking in the body. The addressable
market for preclinical and clinical cell tracking in clinical trials involving
therapeutic cells in the United States is estimated to reach approximately $1.14
billion by 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project involves an innovative approach to intracellular delivery
where mechanoporation or cell-squeezing is achieved simply by propelling cells,
in the presence of exogeneous cargo, through a proprietary mechanoporation
element that resides in a column designed to be processed in a centrifuge (spin
column). End users will realize significant advantages over conventional and
microfluidic approaches to intracellular delivery including: 1) Convenient spin
column format; 2) Short cell processing times; 3) Ease of scale-up and
multiplexing; 4) Applicability to numerous cell types; and 5) Compatibility with
automated/robotic cell production systems including autologous cell production
systems designed for clinical settings. Three objectives are proposed involving
the generation of prototype spin columns and their use in optimizing aspects of
element design to afford efficient intermolecular delivery of iron-based
nanoparticles (magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent) into T-cells and
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. The study will enable rapid point-of-care labeling of
therapeutic and regenerative cells for in vivo tracking, empowering clinicians
to make timely decisions with respect to treatment strategies, thus ensuring
better clinical outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.