* 2151135
* Growing STEM Educators through Science Research on the South Plains of Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Adam Reinhart, Wayland Baptist College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2027
* USD 741,379.00

The project aims to serve the national need of providing high-quality
instruction to math and science students in rural high schools in the South
Plains region of Texas. Prospective teachers will receive scholarship support
during their final two years of college, including STEM transfers from a nearby
community college. The project will develop a professional-learning community in
the local area that will work together to support STEM educators in both high
schools and colleges. Prospective teachers will participate in mentoring
engagements with practicing secondary STEM teachers who are working in rural
districts and will attend workshops to prepare them to teach in rural settings.
Their education will be enhanced through participation in undergraduate research
experiences. Graduates of the program will receive ongoing mentoring from
college faculty during their first few years as practicing teachers and will
have access to small grants to develop engaging classroom experiences for
students in grades 7-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Wayland Baptist
University (WBU) includes partnerships with Plainview High School and South
Plains College, a rural community college. Project goals include developing
effective processes and practices for recruiting and selecting 25 Noyce scholars
from diverse backgrounds over the five-year funding period. Project goals also
include graduating 25 WBU Noyce scholars and retaining them as STEM educators in
high-need districts using a variety of interventions, including additional
mentoring from undergraduate STEM faculty during the clinical teaching
experience and induction years. The project has the potential to determine the
impact of the newly formed professional learning community on the local STEM
education ecosystem. The project also has the potential to determine the impact
of the STEM undergraduate research experiences on STEM Education majors at a
small liberal arts college in the rural South Plains region of Texas. The
project's theoretical basis is the importance of professional learning
communities and STEM undergraduate research experiences for pre- and in-service
STEM teachers. The mixed-methods evaluation for this program will be conducted
using the Context, Input, Process, Product (CIPP) methodology. Project results
will be disseminated in peer-reviewed conferences and journals, as well as in
the local community. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.