* 2151662
* SBIR Phase II:  Use of ultraviolet light as a treatment for pathogens in strawberry fields
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Adam Stager, TRIC ROBOTICS LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2024
* USD 965,770.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to accelerate the transition from
chemical pesticides to non-chemical alternatives by providing farmers with a
sustainable, long-term solution for managing pests, while reducing agricultural
impacts on human health and the environment. Today, strawberry farmers are
reliant on chemical pesticides, spending $2,500/acre on over 60,000 acres/year
to support the $3.6 billion U.S. strawberry industry. Organic farms,
representing 10% of the industry, lack effective treatment methods resulting in
high labor costs and increased risk of yield loss. This project seeks to develop
a system for using ultraviolet light as an efficient and equally effective
alternative for chemical pesticides, disrupting the pesticide manufacturing
industry by providing farmers with a healthier and more environmentally
conscious method for treating crops. The solution may eliminate uncertainty
associated with chemical applications, reduce labor requirements, and increase
profitability for farmers. Additionally, technologies developed as part of this
project will minimize human exposure to chemical pesticides and reduce the
ecological damage caused by existing agricultural treatment
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to further develop a novel, non-chemical
treatment system for commercialization of agricultural pest control. This system
will provide a cost competitive alternative to chemical pesticides, a global $84
billion market. Existing pest controls are ineffective due to insect resistance,
cause uncertainty, and result in reduced yield and profitability. This project’s
objective is to create a reliable, non-chemical treatment alternative that uses
ultraviolet (UV-C) light to control multiple pests effectively and sustainably.
The project team will build a UV-C treatment device with a dosing control
algorithm for achieving reliable pest control in minimum treatment time. This
dosing controller will use novel volumetric irradiance profiles to characterize
the effectiveness of a treatment and adjust treatment time and/or distance to
account for field uncertainties. The goal of this research is be a commercial
UV-C treatment system integrated into an automated pest control
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.