* 2151059
* Northern Illinois Noyce Science Teaching Scholarship and Internship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Michael Eads, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2027
* USD 919,638.00

The project aims to meet the national need to prepare exemplary science teachers
by recruiting and retaining prospective teachers who are trained and supported
to teach in high-need schools in northern Illinois, where there is a documented
STEM teacher shortage. This project looks, in part, to address this need through
a strong partnership between a two-year and four year institution. Students from
Waubonsee Community College (WCC) will receive training and serve as instructors
for the Northern Illinois University STEAM camp in the summer. To explore
teaching as a potential career path, the students will also serve as WCC peer
tutors. This project has the potential to reduce attrition by enhancing support
for prospective teachers through scholarships, early clinical experiences in
high-need schools, and mentoring from practicing teachers from high-need
schools. Graduates will receive ongoing peer support during their first two
years as practicing teachers. As a result of this project, twenty new science
teachers will be prepared to teach in high-need schools, which has potential to
enhance science learning for thousands of students in northern Illinois.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Northern Illinois University includes
partnerships with Waubonsee Community College, a Hispanic-Serving Institution,
and West Aurora High School, an ethnically and socio-economically diverse high
school. Over five years, twenty biology, chemistry, earth and space science,
environmental science, and physics majors entering their junior year will be
selected as Scholars. The project has three main goals: (1) to recruit and
retain high achieving, diverse STEM majors to become science teacher educators;
(2) to build culturally competent teachers; and (3) to provide embedded social
and professional supports to Scholars through their teacher licensure and into
their early classroom years. This project will develop and test a model of
recruitment and retention of diverse candidates in university-based teacher
preparation programs (TPP) through its partnerships with an HSI community
college, regional state university, and a high-need school in the same
community. Project outcomes will contribute to the knowledge base about
supporting nontraditional TPP candidates who experience barriers that impact
their success (e.g., financial insecurity, childcare, health challenges).
Evaluation data will highlight the effectiveness of building a clinical learning
community through a cohort model, community building activities, mentoring from
teachers of color, and social support on retention of nontraditional prospective
teachers, including those from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
Project outcomes aim to inform best practices in recruiting, retaining,
developing, and supporting secondary science teachers committed to culturally
responsive teaching and leadership. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experience, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.