* 2151134
* Developing 21st Century Inclusive- and Mathematical Literacy-Driven Middle School and High School Mathematics Teachers: SJSUâ€™s Mathematics Integrated Teacher Preparation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Ferdinand Rivera, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2027
* USD 778,840.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality
mathematics teachers who have the knowledge and skills to improve mathematical
outcomes for all middle and high school students. Current approaches to
preparing prospective secondary mathematics teachers, such as building an equity
mindset, implementing culturally relevant pedagogy, and developing academic
literacy are typically pursued in silos. This project aims to transform a
traditional teacher credential program into a subject matter-driven integrated
program in which prospective mathematics teachers simultaneously undertake
mathematics content and mathematics specific pedagogy while also learning
evidence-based intervention strategies both for typically developing students
and students with mild to moderate disabilities. This approach has the potential
to revolutionize mathematics teaching and learning in high-need urban schools.
Considering the reported number of students who do not meet standards in
mathematics, especially students from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds and with disabilities, this project's innovative approach to
mathematics teacher preparation is critical to disrupting the status quo. This
project will support 30 mathematics majors over a period of five years who will
develop, implement, and refine integrated instructional practices as they
complete a B.A. in Mathematics with a minor in special education and a single
subject credential in mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at San
Jose State University includes partnerships with East Side Union High School
District and Campbell Union School District. Three goals guide this project.
First, the project will produce 30 new secondary mathematics teachers over five
years with deep integrated instructional skills to serve the needs of all
students. Second, the project will establish a STEM content-driven and
integrated-by-design teacher preparation program. Third, the investigators will
identify integrated strategies and examine outcomes of these strategies for
effectively implementing mathematical literacy-driven instructional practices
using culturally-relevant and social-justice oriented performance tasks. The
underlying theoretical framework for organizing prospective mathematics teacher
learning incorporates a formative-assessment design teaching cycle process along
with the research-derived Pathway to Equitable Math Instruction resource guide
and toolkit for supporting all learners. The project will advance knowledge of
how to prepare 21st century secondary mathematics teachers who possess the
mindset, skills, and knowledge to create and support high-impact mathematical
literacy-driven instruction and learning in inclusive mathematics classrooms.
Formative evaluation including surveys and interviews will provide ongoing
feedback for continuous improvement in the following areas: how well the project
attracts participants; how well prospective mathematics teachers are prepared
for the work of teaching in high need schools; and how well the project is able
to retain beginning teachers in high-need schools. The project team, Advisory
Board, and external evaluation team will generate summative assessments, gauge
success, identify concerns, and provide recommendations for implementing timely
change. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and
experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM mentor teachers in high-need
school districts. It also supports research on the retention and effectiveness
of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.