* 2151516
* SBIR Phase I:  Automating Element-Level Inspection of Civil Infrastructures through Computer Vision
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ali Khaloo, AREN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop a damage detection analysis software platform to reduce
the risk of failure for heavy civil infrastructure assets (e.g., bridges and
dams) while optimizing the capital allocation for these vital systems using a
unique combination of artificial intelligence (AI) and civil engineering. The
public utilities responsible for civil infrastructure upkeep and assessment need
fast, reliable solutions to collect massive amounts of data and rapidly assess
the status of large amounts of heavy civil infrastructure. They also need to be
able to make accurate and timely reports to stakeholders on the structural
integrity of these assets. This project aims to facilitate data-driven decision
making for civic leaders regarding infrastructure investments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop and commercialize technologies to increase the automation
of the infrastructure asset management process and reduce the costs of this
process for asset owners. This increase in automation may also lead to improved
conditions and temporal change assessment through AI-powered analytics. The
resulting analytics would improve inspection practices by increasing accuracy
and objectivity, leading to safer infrastructure systems and fewer
infrastructure failures. The technical innovation of this Phase I project is a
3D computer vision pipeline designed to process remotely sensed data and
automatically transform it into a format that meets the reporting needs of
engineers. The technology addresses long-standing challenges associated with
using 3D remote sensing data for infrastructure asset management by developing
the foundational technical capabilities to automatically segment and transform
3D point clouds into high-resolution 2D orthomosaics of infrastructure
components. Existing approaches are not flexible or generalizable, either
employing highly constrained geometric approaches or statistical deep learning
models, for which relevant infrastructure data sets do not exist. The proposed
approach will utilize computational geometric analysis to isolate and segment
point clouds into individual structural components. The process will be
prototyped and revised through user pilot studies and ongoing customer discovery
and validation activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.