* 2151150
* Investigating the Impact of a District-Wide Implementation of Science Curricula on Science Teachers Effectiveness and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Erica Marti, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 738,223.00

The project aims to serve the national need of science teacher effectiveness and
retention. For over a decade, educational reform documents have highlighted
important and innovative features to be incorporated into science teaching
(e.g., three-dimensional science learning, prioritizing science phenomena,
having cohesive science narratives, incorporating engineering). However, given
the complex educational landscape, science teachers are still grappling to
understand and implement these concepts into their classrooms. Additionally,
administrators also struggle to assess how teachers engage and create
opportunities for students in line with these features. These challenges can
lead to lowered effectiveness and teacher attrition in science. This project
seeks to investigate how middle grade science teachers and administrators
support the uptake of an open-source curriculum and how those actions could be
related to science teacher effectiveness and retention. Investigation of how a
large high-needs school district and multiple levels of its administration seek
to support science and STEM teachers to grow and persist using an open- access
science curriculum (i.e., OpenSciEd) will occur. Researchers will work to link
these ideas to teachers’ retention and movability rates within the district.
These outcomes will inform research and practice on retaining highly effective
science teachers within a high-needs district. Given the increased need for a
science-literate society, ensuring the retention of effective science teachers
benefits everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, includes a partnership with Clark County School District.
Project goals include (a) exploring and understanding how a large high-needs
district engages with and potentially shifts teachers’ practice and vision of
science instruction for students through an open-access science curriculum, (b)
investigating the role that administrators play when supporting teachers’
shifting science praxis, and (c) conducting research on the influence of
district-wide curricular implementation on science teacher retention and
effectiveness. Along with these goals, researchers will conduct a multi-phase
parallel-converged mixed-methods study. This work includes three sets of
research questions investigating how (1) the school district and administration
support teachers to integrate their current curriculum with the open-access
materials, (2) teachers engage with the materials, and (3) these factors impact
teacher retention and attrition. This project will contribute to the larger
academic conversation of how to provide extensive support to science teachers to
encourage effectiveness and retention. Additionally, materials will be developed
to help administrators assess effective science teaching. This work will be
evaluated by an expert advisory board whose skill set speaks to the larger needs
within STEM education (e.g., science teacher leadership and professional
development, equity in science education, high-quality open-access science
materials). Research derived from this work will be disseminated across academic
and practitioner audiences. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.