* 2151571
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Robust Control and State Estimation of Converter-Based Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ahmad Taha, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2024
* USD 260,291.00

Future power grids, the nationâ€™s most critical infrastructure, will be extremely
difficult to manage due to large-scale integration of renewable energy
resources. The strategy proposed in this project is aided by new grid
technologies (converter-based assets in wind/solar farms and high-frequency
sensing devices) that are developed and deployed to allow new real-time control-
theoretic algorithms to be implemented with little overhead---while guaranteeing
grid stability and resilience. The literature in this area had addressed various
scientific research questions, but mostly adopted simplified models that cannot
adequately capture the real-time operation of future grids. This project
addresses this science gap by developing a new set of real-time algorithms,
leading to a more robust operation of future power grids characterized with high
penetration of renewable energy resources. These control algorithms can be
implemented by grid operators throughout the nation. The project will also
include: a) hosting an outreach workshop on renewable energy systems for a low-
income, minority-majority, and female-only high school in San Antonio; b)
organizing a technical industry workshop that showcases the created algorithms
in the state of Iowa; c) disseminating the created scientific methods within the
curricula at the University of Texas at San Antonio and Iowa State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at modernizing
grid control methods which has traditionally relied on linear systems theory. In
particular, the control-theoretic literature addressed a plethora of grid
challenges with a focus on linearized, differential equation models whereby
algebraic constraints (i.e., power flows) are eliminated. This is in contrast
with the more realistic, complex nonlinear differential algebraic equation
(NDAE) models. Linearizing grid models around operating points and eliminating
algebraic constraints have proven to be a reliable strategy---a trade-off
between complexity and tractability. Yet as grids are increasingly pushed to
their limits via intermittent renewables, their physical states risk escaping
operating regions due to a poor prediction of wind or solar. In lieu of linear
differential equation models, control of NDAEs is highly beneficial for grids
that are characterized by highly uncertain renewables. This guarantees grid
stability for larger operating conditions. Given the limitations of present
power system models and the lack of theoretical foundations for control and
dynamic state estimation of grid NDAEs, this project will: 1) create a
physically representative NDAE model of a power system with a mix of
conventional machines and a variety of converter-based technologies; 2)
investigate a general theory of dynamic state estimation and robust feedback
control algorithms that consider the uncertain nature of power grids modeled via
higher-order NDAEs; 3) obtain computationally tractable routines that can be
implemented in control centers of power grids. The created theoretical
foundations have applications in wide area control, converter-based control,
centralized and decentralized and robust dynamic state estimation. This research
is critical to guarantee acceptable performance of modern and future power
systems and will lead to advancing the state-of-the-art of grid control
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.