* 2151532
* SBIR Phase I:  AI-based system for analyzing multiparametric MRI scans for prostate lesion detection
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Thomas Sanford, TAURUS DIAGNOSTICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve prostate cancer diagnostics.
This project proposes an artificial intelligence (AI)-based platform that
overcomes current shortcomings with manual magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
assessment, currently conducted on high-quality machines with results read by
expert radiologists at a few locations around the country. AI enables MRI
analysis that is automated, standardized, and more accurate. This will reduce
unnecessary and invasive biopsy and/or treatment for low-risk prostate cancers,
as well as physician time and effort to run and read MRIs. Furthermore, it will
enable non-expert centers to accurately diagnose patients without requiring
extensive testing, top-tier MRI equipment, or invasive surgery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project develops a novel prostate cancer diagnostic platform that leverages the
power of AI-based image analysis for high sensitivity and specificity. While
prostate cancer diagnostics rely heavily on MRIs, the accuracy of these
assessments depends on both expert experience and MRI quality. The machine
learning solution is able to make global assessments on the likelihood of
detected lesions being clinically significant (i.e., Gleason 3+4/grade group 2
or higher), better informing clinicians on appropriate treatment. This project
proposes the following technology development objectives: 1) Develop a method to
measure MRI quality, 2) Create a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) Framework
to repair images from poor to higher quality, and 3) Prospectively evaluate new
framework to measure the overall performance of the AI
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.