* 2151713
* SBIR Phase I:  High-throughput Nanocatalyst Synthesis and Screening for Broad Decarbonization
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Jordan Swisher, STOICHEIA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2023
* USD 255,904.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an acceleration in how new materials are
discovered, designed, and commercialized in the transition to a carbon-neutral
economy. One aim is to increase the use of renewable electricity in the chemical
and energy industries. A major hurdle is the lack of efficient electrocatalysts
that enable renewable processes, such as green hydrogen production, carbon
dioxide (CO2) conversion into carbon-neutral chemicals and fuels, or other
processes that can broadly decarbonize various industries. Traditional discovery
methods are slow and serial, which limits the development of novel, commercially
viable electrochemical processes demanded by the climate crisis. This project
will enable a more rapid and exhaustive search for electrocatalysts, resulting
in a deeper understanding of the nature of catalysts, and facilitating the
decarbonization of the chemicals and energy industries by displacing traditional
fossil fuel-based processes with a transition to electrification which utilizes
increasing levels of renewable energy. The proposed platform will expedite the
discovery and development of enabling materials, which can be brought to market
and deployed globally to enable more renewable chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
generalizable platform that can rapidly search through vast materials spaces for
higher performance electrocatalyst materials, displacing the current materials
which are simply the best amongst the limited candidates tested to date. Using
this project’s proprietary Megalibrary technology, which enables the rapid
synthesis of libraries of tens of thousands of unique, well-defined,
monodisperse, and complex metal nanoparticles in a single experiment, coupled
with high-throughput screening technologies, it is possible to quickly probe
hundreds of thousands of unique catalyst candidates to find electrocatalysts
optimized for performance. To accomplish this goal, the project must adapt
protocols to allow the synthesis of electrocatalyst Megalibraries on electrodes
and enable electrocatalyst screening. Additionally, the approach requires robust
and high-throughput screening methods that can site-specifically interrogate the
electrocatalytic properties of the catalyst candidates. Using these two
innovations, it will be possible to then demonstrate the power of the platform
by searching the entirety of a three element platinium and materials (Pt-M1-M2)
space for the best hydrogen evolution reaction catalyst on a per platinum-atom
basis. This demonstration will solidify the ability to translate this platform
to a much broader materials space and set of reactions, which can impact
businesses and industries globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.