* 2151499
* SBIR Phase II:  Long Stroke Micromachined Arrayed Cell Electrostatic Actuators for Highly Integrated Micro-Positioning
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Sepehr Sheikhlari, SILICON DYNAMIX, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2024
* USD 926,538.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase II project is further
advancement and maturation of a recently devised miniature electromechanical
actuator technology with potential applications in the consumer electronics,
automotive and biomedical industries. Any electrically powered system with
moving parts requires actuators converting electrical energy into mechanical
motion. This includes robots, surgical/medical micro-devices, precision
micro/nano-positioning systems, and optical and ultrasonic imaging systems among
others. The market size for millimeter-scale electromechanical actuators
embedded in compact camera modules (CCM) for Optical Image Stabilization (OIS)
and Auto-Focusing (AF) alone is currently over $3B and expected to reach over
$5B by 2025. The same actuator technology can also be applied to a variety of
other applications such as compact speakers, ultrasonic transducers, and light
detection and ranging (LIDAR) devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project utilizes the newly
established cellular electrostatic actuator technology to demonstrate a low
cost, power efficient, high-performance solution for auto-focusing and optical
image stabilization in compact camera modules. Physical movement of the lens
stack with respect to the image sensor is essential in cameras for Auto-Focusing
(AF) as well as shake cancellation via Optical Image Stabilization (OIS). Voice
Coil Motors (VCM) currently used to address such functionalities are relatively
bulky, slow, power hungry, and costly. Enabled by the state-of-the-art
micromachining techniques, force generating ultra-narrow electrostatic gaps
within the proposed actuators offer high work output per volume with close to
100% energy efficiency. Under this project, for realization of a viable product
prototype, mechanical displacement amplifiers and shock absorbing structures
will be designed and integrated within the silicon chips along with the
actuators. Comprehensive mechanical shock tests on loaded actuators as well as
long-term electrical reliability and mechanical durability tests will be
performed on the fabricated prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.