* 2151127
* Stress Response Mechanisms in Vibrio
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Jyl Matson, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Stress leads to profound changes in bacterial behavior and physiology. Some of
these changes have economic and health implications, as stress responses have
been linked to the formation of stress-resistant biofilms, virulence, antibiotic
tolerance/resistance and persistence. The overall goal of this project is to
characterize the Vibrio cholerae SipA pathway, with an emphasis on understanding
how the pathway helps this pathogen and other bacteria survive in the presence
of stressors such as antimicrobial peptides. This project will support the
training of a Ph.D. student who is interested in science education. In addition,
science education graduate students, high school science teachers and high
school science classes will participate in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrio species must detect and respond
appropriately to stresses they encounter to survive in the diverse environments
they inhabit. SipA is a highly conserved stress-responsive protein that plays a
major role in V. cholerae survival in the presence of several stress-inducing
agents. Dedicated regulators of sipA expression and protein interaction partners
have been identified, but little else is known about this essential stress
response mechanism. Due to the conservation of SipA, it may be a key stress
response protein in numerous bacteria. Therefore, the goals of this proposal are
to fully characterize the regulation of this stress response system, establish
the mechanism(s) by which SipA contributes to stress survival, and determine how
this system is integrated with other biological processes in V. cholerae. Other
stress response mechanisms in environmental Vibrios of ecological importance
will also be characterized as a part of the educational goals of this proposal.
There are likely to be significant differences among these genetically diverse
environmental species and this work will distinguish between broadly-conserved
and species-specific survival mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.