* 2151966
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Modeling of Respiratory Muscles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Yi-Chao Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 228,806.00

The process of breathing is driven by respiratory muscles that include the
diaphragm, the rib cage muscles, and the abdominal muscles. Better understanding
of the role of respiratory muscle in healthy and pathological conditions is
expected to lead to improved patient outcomes. This collaborative research will
develop comprehensive mathematical models for respiratory muscles, with a
special focus on diaphragm, the major muscle of respiration. Computational
methods will be developed to describe the motion and the mechanical loading
conditions of the diaphragm during respiration. The project aims to improve
understanding of diaphragm mechanics and will generate analytical tools to
quantify the performance of the diaphragm. In particular, the project will
provide quantitative relations between the level of muscle activation and the
amount of air displaced by the diaphragm during normal breathing or intense
physical activities. By providing a foundation for basic understanding of
functionality of respiratory muscles, the research project could improve the
management of patients in hospital intensive care units leading to a long-term
positive impact on public health. The project will provide training, education
and learning opportunities for students at the University of Houston and Baylor
College of Medicine with a focus on training underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take an innovative approach to explore
fundamental mechanics of diaphragm function and to develop computational methods
that are capable of simulating and predicting the complex shape, kinematics, and
the mechanical stress field in the diaphragm during respiratory efforts. The
main objectives are to: (1) Develop a constitutive theory for respiratory
muscles, especially diaphragm muscle fibers which have complex microstructures
with sarcomeres as the basic motor unit. The constitutive function relates the
stress to the deformation in response to activation of the diaphragm muscles.
(2) Develop a continuum mechanics theory for active material surfaces to model
the diaphragm function. The model will accurately account for large deformations
of the diaphragm muscle fibers. (3) Derive the equations of motion for the
diaphragm, which, in corporation with the constitutive theory, will lead to the
differential equations governing the motion of the diaphragm under the actions
of the muscle activation and the transdiaphragmatic pressures. Novel computer
programs will be developed to facilitate the solutions of the differential
equations. (4) Perform in vitro experiments to supply the experimental data
needed for the constitutive functions of the diaphragm. (5) Validate the theory
and the computational models by comparing the predicted behavior of diaphragm
with experimental measurements. Refined computational models will allow
researchers to predict the motion of diaphragm with user-input constitutive
functions, geometry, and loading conditions. Project results are expected to
increase physiologic understanding of respiratory muscle function in health and
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.