* 2151368
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a Continuous, Wireless, Intra-Oral Salivary pH Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Weinstein, UCHU BIOSENSORS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to manage the risk of tooth decay, or caries
disease, the world’s most prevalent chronic condition. Tooth decay results in
severe pain, devastating financial issues, lost work, loss of confidence,
embarrassment from appearance and speech, and broad systemic health problems. It
disproportionately affects minorities and lower-income individuals. Controlling
acid levels of high-risk patients is an effective decay prevention strategy. An
oral acidity monitor for caries prevention will allow patients at high risk of
caries disease to receive alerts to neutralize intraoral acidity before it
causes permanent damage, and work more effectively with their dentists to follow
and evaluate the effectiveness of prescribed caries prevention protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project focuses on the commercialization of the world’s first continuous
intraoral acidity monitor. This project advances sensors providing long-term
data readings of salivary pH and its response to environmental conditions. As a
platform technology, intraoral sensors have more applications in a broad range
of markets in addition to dental caries; future sensors include sodium and
potassium monitors for heart disease, hypertension, and renal failure, and
glucose monitors for diabetes. Long-term plans include biologic sensing such as
allergen, viral load, and drug compliance monitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.