* 2151870
* Collaborative Research: A New Multiscale Framework for Integrating Socio-Economic Processes, Vector-Borne Disease Control, and the Impact of Transient Events
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Calistus Ngonghala, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 90,551.00

Mathematical models for infectious diseases are critical tools for informing
effective disease interventions. The disease management strategies informed by
models of vector-borne diseases (such as diseases spread by mosquitoes) led to
the elimination of malaria from the United States and other countries. However,
malaria continues to have an enormous impact on resource-challenged regions of
the world, while other existing and emerging vector-borne diseases such as West
Nile Virus, Dengue Virus, and Zika Virus continue to impact both advanced and
resource-challenged economies. A shortcoming of many existing modeling
approaches is the absence of an explicit connection between economic factors and
disease transmission – two factors that influence each other. In an increasingly
connected and complex world, accounting for the synergistic effects of these
factors is essential for effective disease control. For example, the COVID-19
pandemic caused sudden economic shifts that affected the progress of malaria
control programs, resulting in increases in malaria-related deaths. In
collaboration with an ecologist/economist and with an entomologist and a
biostatistician from Africa, the investigators will build mathematical tools to
bridge this gap, which will be used to inform public health and economic growth
policies. The project will train graduate students through involvement in the
research. Workshops on feedback between economic and disease systems will train
a new generation of undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds on this
important topic. This work will also involve students from Africa, a continent
that is highly affected by vector-borne diseases. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating socio-economic factors into vector-borne disease (VBD)
systems is key to identifying new interventions, by unraveling the intertwined
relationship between VBD, socio-economic conditions, and transient events. The
investigators aim to develop a new mechanistic framework for transient disease
dynamics that accounts for feedback between VBDs and economic systems, the
impact of fast-slow time scales, and sudden endogenous and exogenous events that
shift the economic landscape. Factors including heterogeneous mosquito-biting
and insecticide-treated-net (ITN) replacement times, demographic structure, and
human behavior in relation to ITN use will be included. For even the simplest
economic-VBD model, standard methods for computing basic epidemiological metrics
and performing structural identifiability analysis break down. Hence, the
investigators also plan to build the mathematical toolbox required to analyze
and simulate these coupled systems. Although the framework will be applied to
malaria as a prototype VBD using socio-economic and epidemiological data from
Kenya, Madagascar, and West Africa to calibrate the parameters and validate the
outcomes of the models, it is intended to be robust enough to be applicable to
other VBDs. Furthermore, the framework will allow the investigators to
realistically answer important public health and economic growth questions,
including how to distribute ITNs across connected populations, and how to
respond to spontaneous events affecting the economic
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.