* 2151555
* STTR Phase I:  Feasibility Study of a Reduced Order Model for Calculating Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR) Using Angiographic Data
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Krishnakumar Garikipati, ANGIOINSIGHT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve the clinical care of patients suffering from coronary
artery disease (CAD) and to reduce the associated costs. CAD remains the most
common form of heart disease, afflicting more than 18 million adults and costing
the U.S. healthcare system over $90 billion annually. Advances in diagnostics to
improve treatment decisions have lagged behind advances in therapies. The
proposed research will explore novel computational modeling methods within an
artificial intelligence (AI) software platform to improve diagnosis and optimize
patient-specific treatment decisions. Value propositions are to improve clinical
outcomes, reduce healthcare costs, and save lives. The software will provide
competitive advantages as a more user-friendly and non-invasive diagnostic
method capable of faster and more accurate clinical assessment of CAD than
existing alternatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will advance the diagnosis of coronary artery
disease (CAD) to optimize patient-specific treatment decisions. CAD patients
typically undergo an angiography procedure whereby coronary arteries are
visualized to estimate stenosis severity and make subjective treatment decisions
on whether to perform revascularization procedures (e.g., stenting or bypass
graft surgeries). More recently Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR), a measure of the
pressure gradient across the vessel stenosis, has demonstrated improved outcomes
when guiding treatment decisions. However, adoption of FFR remains modest given
shortcomings of available interventional devices and cost. Recently, commercial
efforts have developed computer-based methods to estimate FFR non-invasively,
although with limited accuracy in borderline values of FFR. The proposed
research will develop and calibrate a Reduced Order Model (ROM) using novel
machine learning and computational methods to provide FFR measures in a faster,
more accurate, and more integrated manner with clinical workflows than existing
solutions. The ROM will rely on recent advances in Graph Theory to enhance a 1D
nonlinear formulation of blood flow. The method will be calibrated using
synthetic data generated with ground truth 3D Navier-Stokes solutions and
validated against clinical measurements of FFR from a cohort of 20
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.