* 2151804
* Nanosheet-Biomolecular Hybrid Films Synthesis, Structure, and Controlled Release
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Robert Hurt, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2025
* USD 267,735.00

Two-dimensional materials are a broad class of atomically thin, sheet-like
solids with novel properties. These two-dimensional materials, or “nanosheets”,
can be stacked together in various configurations to make macroscopic materials
with internal layered structures. Such macroscopic layered materials find use in
emerging technologies that include textile barrier layers for personal
protective equipment, coatings to stabilize or protect surfaces, drug delivery
patches and implantable biomaterials. This project seeks to enhance the
functions of these layered materials by incorporating biologically active
molecules to make hybrids. A major focus is to measure and predict the rates at
which those imbedded biomolecules are released, and become active and functional
on the outer surfaces and nearby fluid phases. This controlled release can be
used to create long-lifetime antibacterial and antiviral coatings for surfaces,
textile layers that release insect repellants, or biomaterials that provide
timed delivery of drugs. The research will identify methods for controlling the
release rate and thus controlling the active lifetime of these devices by
manipulating the methods of synthesis and processing. The research team will
also be engaged in activities that motivate and prepare underrepresented groups
for studies and careers in engineering and science. The principal investigators
will collaborate with societies promoting engineering career choices and
advancement for women, Hispanics, and Native Americans and will host a Rhode
Island Science Day event featuring tours, demonstrations and hands-on activities
for upper elementary and middle school tribal youth in the state to introduce
and promote opportunities in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create, characterize and apply a new set of hetero-structured
layered materials with active biomolecular species intercalated in the van der
Waals gaps between stacked two-dimensional nanosheets. These frontier hybrids
combine the novel properties of atomically-thin nanosheets with the targeted,
chemically specific functions of biomolecules. The project will pursue the
hypothesis that molecular release kinetics are governed by internal transport
processes involving molecular diffusion through nanochannels. Nanochannel
transport phenomena are poorly understood, as are the implications for the
timing, location, and direction of molecular release from films or macroscopic
layered monoliths. The research plan has three Objectives: (1) to synthesize and
characterize a panel of hybrid layered materials; (2) to measure biomolecular
release kinetics and elucidate release mechanisms to identify design strategies
for control; and (3) to demonstrate multifunctional 2D hybrid devices and
characterize their dynamic expression of biochemical surface activity in case
studies focused on antibacterial and antiviral function. Scientific outputs from
this project will include a suite of new hybrid materials with information on
their structures and properties, the first quantitative models for release rate
prediction and control, and values of nanochannel diffusion coefficients for a
range of molecules obtained by model-based extraction from molecular release
rate data. The investigator team will also engage in educational outreach to
motivate and prepare students from underrepresented groups for studies and
careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.