* 2151707
* SBIR Phase I:  Methane Pyrolysis for High Quality Carbon Black and Low-carbon Hydrogen Production
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Caleb Boyd, MOLTEN INDUSTRIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide low-cost hydrogen (H2) with a very
low or even negative carbon dioxide (CO2) footprint at a commercial production
cost reaching $1.50 per kg of H2 alongside a valuable solid carbon by-product,
representing a technology advance for the American public and economy. The
United States produces 10 million metric tons of hydrogen per year - 95% of it
via steam methane reforming (SMR). SMR emits 100 million tons of CO2 in the
process. This represents a &gt;$10 billion market in the US alone and an
important opportunity to reduce CO2 emissions. Methane pyrolysis promises green
hydrogen with &gt;5 times less energy than water electrolysis at costs
competitive with steam methane reforming by producing solid carbon instead of
gaseous carbon dioxide. The solid carbon, if produced correctly, can be used in
tires, batteries, and concrete. The research in this project could increase the
value of the solid carbon by-product produced alongside clean hydrogen in
methane pyrolysis. If successful, this technology could lead to expanded
domestic production capabilities with net-zero emissions from sectors such as
fertilizer, transportation (batteries, fuel cells, synthetic fuels, and tires),
and heavy industry (steel and cement).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop a novel method to tune the production of high-
quality solid carbon using methane pyrolysis. Carbon black forms in pyrolysis
reactors both homogeneously in the gas phase and heterogeneously on catalysts,
reactor walls, and on seed particles entrained in the gas. By tuning
temperature, residence time, flow profile, and seed materials, this project will
result in an improved understanding of carbon precipitation and formation in
methane pyrolysis reactors. This improved understanding and the development of a
reactor thermochemical model will ultimately lead to better control of a process
to produce high quality solid carbon that can be used in tires, batteries, and
concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.