* 2151945
* Nanoscience Connected to Life: An Interdisciplinary Traineeship Program in Bioinspired Nanotechnology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Ruth Stark, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The living world provides many fascinating examples of highly evolved,
sophisticated machinery working in synergy to sustain life. A fundamental
understanding of nature’s architectures and processes can be applied to create
new biology-inspired and green technologies for the benefit of human and
environmental health. However, this challenging task requires integrating
aspects of research in biology, chemistry, and physics focused down to the
smallest functional scale: the nanoscale. This NSF Research Traineeship (NRT),
"Nanoscience Connected to Life: an Interdisciplinary Traineeship Program in
Bioinspired Nanotechnology," will provide education, research, and career
development to help build a new workforce in the emerging field of bioinspired
nanotechnology. As this field undergoes rapid expansion and industry embraces
these new approaches, society needs a uniquely trained and diverse workforce.
Building on the City University of New York’s (CUNY) reputation as an engine for
upward mobility of a diverse student population, this traineeship will provide a
novel and comprehensive graduate education for 125 graduate students. The
program will serve 25 directly funded trainees, including individuals from
minority populations underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM fields of study,
women, and members of the LGBTQ+ community. Graduates will become effective
leaders who will be able to solve complex problems facing the U.S. and provide
new scientific breakthroughs in energy harvesting, agriculture, medicine, and
environmental remediation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broad educational vision
of this project is to train a generation of STEM Ph.D. students as
collaborative, systems-level thinkers who can translate concepts across scales
and disciplines. The project strengthens and integrates chemistry, biochemistry,
and physics Ph.D. programs at CUNY through convergence around common goals.
Students will become well-positioned to work on convergent teams to address
urgent societal challenges related to environmental instabilities and health
crises. At the heart of each student’s experience is a use-inspired project in
one of several different areas of research employing biology-inspired
approaches. These include: i) harvesting and conversion of energy, ii) designing
nanoscale interfaces to measure and influence living systems, iii) newly
designed sustainable green materials, and iv) development of adaptive metabolic
systems and functional materials for therapeutic and industrial use. These
investigations will span theoretical, computational, and experimental
approaches. The project will prepare CUNY Ph.D. students for STEM careers in
industrial, government, academic, and entrepreneurial tracks by integrating
career awareness throughout the training period. The training plan is based on
an innovative Integrating Mental Models and Experimental Research in Scientific
Education (IMMERSE) training model, designed to create a learning community of
systems thinkers. In this model, participants exchange knowledge and communicate
across unfamiliar concepts, cultures, and methods. The IMMERSE training model
can be replicated at other universities and in other convergent research areas.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.