* 2151454
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Efficiency, Refrigerant-Free Space Cooling
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Jacob Miller, ZEPHYR INNOVATIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,965.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the commercialization of a new air
conditioning (AC) technology that will reduce AC power consumption by two-
thirds. If broadly adopted, this solution will reduce annual carbon emissions by
about 0.5 gigatons annually and bring air conditioning to the point of
affordability for many of the two billion people who increasingly need it, but
can’t afford it. The global AC market is about $120 Billion annually and the
industry has been served essentially by the same vapor compression technology
invented over a century ago. That technology is inefficient and, for vast
numbers of people around the world, unaffordable due to its large electricity
expense. The proposed technology has the potential to disrupt this market by
providing a two-thirds reduction in power use. This project also has the
potential to lead to the commercialization of a new class of membranes that can
increase the efficiency and decrease the cost associated with high-salinity
fluid treatment applications such as lithium recovery, wastewater treatment, and
water desalinization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop a novel, hollow-fiber membrane technology tailored to operate with
high flux in a liquid desiccant AC system. Commercial off-the-shelf membranes
are not designed for this high-concentration environment and, if used in a
commercial implementation of the system, would drive its size and cost to the
point which would limit the product’s marketability. This project’s objective is
to demonstrate a customized membrane design and quantify the membrane’s impact
on the proposed AC system’s efficiency, size, and cost. The proposed research
will accomplish this by a series of design/fab/test iterations followed by an
update to the system and techno-economic models using the measured
characteristics of the final membrane. This solution will broaden membrane
developers’ understanding of the design and potential of high-concentration
membranes. Beyond its applicability to the liquid desiccant cooling technology,
a high-concentration membrane would have broad applicability to multiple high
brine concentration applications, including mineral recovery operations such as
performed during lithium mining, zero liquid discharge wastewater treatments,
and high-brine water desalination pursued in arid regions of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.