* 2151046
* Preparing Mathematics and Science Teachers for Computer Science Teacher Certification and Expertise
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Dennis Brylow, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 02/28/2027
* USD 905,426.00

The project aims to serve the national need for high-quality mathematics and
science teachers who also have knowledge and certification to teach computer
science, addressing serious shortages in the United States STEM teaching force.
The unique contribution of this graduate program will be to combine a field-
embedded introduction to ambitious STEM instruction with extensive pedagogical
content knowledge in computer science education, producing highly qualified
mathematics and science teachers who can also teach computer science courses in
high-need schools. Graduates of the program will complete requirements for
middle and secondary level teacher certification in mathematics or science and
requirements for computer science education certification. Graduates will then
serve as teachers in high-need schools, equipped with pedagogical skills and
qualifications in computer science and mathematics or science, and prepared with
a highly desirable combination of skills to serve in high-need environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Marquette University includes partnerships
with Milwaukee Public Schools, Milwaukee area charter schools, the Shorewood
School District, and schools in the Archdiocese of Milwaukee. Project goals
include recruiting 24 highly qualified STEM professionals and preparing them to
enter high-need school environments with a Master of Education and teacher
certifications. The project will develop a multimodal (in person and online)
pathway that will lead to computer science teacher certification alongside
mathematics or science teacher certification. The project is theoretically
grounded in practice-based teacher preparation, ambitious instruction, and
pedagogical content knowledge for computer science instruction. In keeping with
current reforms in K-12 STEM education and teacher education, ambitious
instruction supports all students, regardless of race, socioeconomic status,
ethnicity, gender, and identity, in rigorous and conceptual learning of STEM
content. Additionally, the project will support graduates in their early
professional practice. Research questions will address effective pedagogies for
developing ambitious teaching practices in mathematics, science, and computer
science, particularly focused on pedagogies of enactment and scholar development
of ambitious teaching across STEM fields through qualitative and observational
research methods. The project will contribute to the empirical knowledge base by
advancing intersectional research on computer science education, ambitious STEM
instruction, and practice-based teacher preparation. The main impact of the
project is to improve the quality of STEM instruction and expand computer
science programs in area secondary high-need schools. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.