* 2151512
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a new ELISA for detection of PFAS in soil and water
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Sejal Patel, AQUA SCIENCE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,751.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I Project is to improve environmental
testing. Once class of contaminants is PFAS (Per- And Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances), associated with high cholesterol levels, thyroid disease, certain
cancers, and pregnancy-related problems. Current testing costs $300 per sample
and offers low throughput is low at 30 samples per day. The proposed project
develops a test that would cost $50 per sample (6X reduction) and could test
about 120 samples per day (4X increase). It could initially offer a rapid, low-
cost qualitative screening tool, allowing users to determine areas of concern,
hot spots, detection during emergency response and testing during mitigation
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a novel
immunoassay in the form of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) for the
detection of PFOA (perfluorooctanoic acid) and PFOS (perfluorooctane sulfonic
acid), two of the most abundant PFAS in soil and water. Currently, PFAS testing
involves laboratory-based, costly LC-MS (Liquid chromatographyâ€“mass
spectrometry) methods. An antibody test such as an ELISA has specificity to the
target compound as well as any similarly structured compounds. Thus, the test
will detect multiple species of the perfluorinated compounds. During the
development of PFAS ELISA, verification testing will be done in an EPA lab using
LC-MS to verify the species that can be detected by the ELISA test along with
the accompanying levels of detection. The research will include determination of
the appropriate immunogens and haptens for this application, antibody
production, and screening of antibody for specificity and sensitivity. The goal
is to improve PFAS detection sensitivity to 50 ppt. Once technical feasibility
of detection is demonstrated, the antibodies can be used to develop more
complete assays using test strips or magnetic
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.