* 2151029
* Collaborative Research: Strategies to Improve the Recruitment and Retention of Black Male STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Minar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2024
* USD 516,478.00

The project serves the national need of recruiting and retaining highly
effective Black male high school STEM teachers. This research project will
investigate factors influencing the effectiveness and retention of Black male
STEM teachers in high-need school districts. The study will examine the academic
and career decision-making processes and experiences of Black male STEM teachers
as well as the culturally responsive practices they use in their classrooms to
motivate and engage ethnically and racially diverse students. Using a mixed
methods approach, the first phase will examine how Black male teachers’
educational backgrounds, professional characteristics, dispositions, and
experiences, and school environments lead to their academic and career
persistence as STEM educators as well as what contributes to their effectiveness
as teachers. The second phase will examine the influences that Black male STEM
teachers have in the classroom with their students. The project outcomes will
highlight the voices, knowledge, and experiences of both Black male STEM career
academy teachers and ethnically and racially diverse students to provide
critical insights and perspectives into how instructional strategies may engage
diverse learners and promote their STEM college and career
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Florida State University and The
Ohio State University will focus on a national network of 211 Engineering and
Information Technology career academies through collaboration with NAF (formerly
known as the National Academy Foundation). The network involves 173 urban high
schools, serving 46,719 students. A subset of Black male teachers and students
from these academies will serve as the research subjects. Project goals include
uncovering the pedagogical practices of Black male STEM teachers and their
impact and effectiveness with ethnically and racially diverse STEM learners’
achievement, engagement, interests, learning, and persistence in STEM. The
project will be informed by culturally responsive pedagogies and ethnic matching
frameworks. Using a mixed methods approach, the project will investigate seven
research questions: factors that contributed to Black males’ decision to pursue
a career in teaching STEM; practices for improving the recruitment of the next
generation of Black male teachers; challenges and barriers that Black male STEM
teachers face in the school/classroom; culturally responsive pedagogical
practices used by Black male STEM teachers to effectively engage ethnically and
racially diverse students; perceptions of Black male students of their Black
male STEM teachers; experiences, interactions, connections, and opportunities
that have the most positive influence on ethnically and racially diverse
students’ academic engagement and experiences in the STEM classroom; and
effectiveness of Black male STEM teachers in high-need school districts
associated with improving the student learning of ethnically and racially
diverse students. Findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals, policy
briefs, research zines, and infographics to participating schools as well as
interactive webinars. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high- need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.