* 2151469
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved memory during sleep at home with a wearable EEG device for tailored stimulation of slow oscillations
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jason Worchel, NEUROGENECES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,732.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project improves memory
for the elderly. Memory loss is a major concern of an aging population. The $29
B global memory enhancement market comprises supplements, training software, and
drugs, although evidence of efficacy is limited. This project will create a
user-friendly sleep headband with audio stimulation to improve memory. The
solution will create a new category of non-invasive medical devices to benefit
people in clinical, home, and professional settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates the
feasibility of a wireless electroencephalogram (EEG) headband that increases
memory consolidation during slow-wave sleep activity at home. Audio stimulation
during slow-wave sleep activity using polysomnogram equipment has been
previously demonstrated to enhance memory retention by facilitating memory
consolidation. The envisioned headband acquires high quality EEG data to sense
slow-wave brain wave activity and provide synchronous audio stimulation. The
anticipated project outcomes are: a) a wireless sleep headband designed for
comfort and usability, b) demonstration of enhanced slow-wave brain activity
during sleep, and c) evidence of meaningful improvements to memory retention
measured by standard clinical assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.