* 2151734
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanofilters for Selective Gold Extraction
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Daniel Sun, SUNCHEM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve gold extraction by improving metal ion capture. Many
industries discharge increasing amounts of toxic heavy and valuable metals into
different complex water sources. These metals of interest tend to be at trace
amounts in water mixtures containing high concentrations of inorganic and
organic interferents. It is extremely difficult to extract and concentrate such
species in these conditions. This project employs novel hybrid materials to
selectively and rapidly extract different toxic, rare and/or valuable metal
species at trace concentrations from water in a high-capacity, rapid, cost-
effective process. These new materials could impact mining of valuable metals
like gold, generating new sustainable supply sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is to implement a hybrid nano-porous material into filter
devices and evaluate its gold extracting performance under a continuous flow
operation typically seen in industry. Although batch adsorption experiments can
provide information to initially assess adsorbents, continuous fixed-bed
adsorption experiments must be conducted to obtain other crucial information
such as breakthrough time, length of mass transfer zone and maximum capacity of
the column under those continuous dynamic conditions. Currently, the hybrid
materials are synthesized as nanoparticles (between 250 nm and 500 nm), too
small to be implemented in a traditional filter device so that the materials
must be optimally shaped and structured first to prevent pressure drops and loss
of materials in the continuous flow operation. Next, continuous flow experiments
will be conducted to study parameters such as column bed length, column bed
diameter, adsorbent mass, flow rate and analyte concentration. The project will
conduct verification and validation of a model for prototype
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.