* 2151349
* SBIR Phase II: Facilitating Early Childhood Teacher and Family Engagement During COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Tammy Kwan, Cognitive ToyBox
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 964,915.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to ease the burden on early childhood
teachers and ensure they have the information needed to support children’s
learning. COVID-19 has upended the lives of millions of children and families
and disproportionately affected low-income children. The incoming class of
preschoolers have increasingly variable levels of development and skills than
ever before, and educators need to assess their need and help them to catch up
academically. The industry leading tools in early childhood assessment rely
solely on observation-based assessment, in which teachers make judgments about a
child’s performance based on observations made in the classroom. Observation-
based measures have limitations, including time burden, teacher bias, and
variability in scoring due to differences in teacher education and training.
Observational assessment is especially challenging in the remote context, since
teachers were not able to physically monitor children’s development. Even when
children are back in the classroom, face masks may shield some of the more
subtle cues around learning and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to ensure an accurate
assessment of child development, so that teachers can leverage the data for
tailored instruction to help children catch up from the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic. Child assessments are typically observational or direct. This Phase II
project collects both observational and direct data, providing an opportunity to
compare the data and help teachers understand areas where there may be
assessment error due to teacher bias or other factors. At the end of Phase II,
it is anticipated that teachers will have access to a self-led teacher training
and reliability certification, which may help to ensure a more consistent
assessment experience in the classroom. Moreover, educational programs will have
access to an assessment quality monitoring dashboard that seeks to highlight
differences between observation and game-based assessment scores and provide a
path towards reconciliation. Educational programs may be able to customize this
technology to fit the needs of English language learners, who are often subject
to assessor bias. Finally, teachers may be able to leverage the game-based
assessments to understand both academic and “soft” skill development. Overall,
the technology may\provide teachers with a robust child assessment system that
helps them to accurately and efficiently assess whole child
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.