* 2151599
* SBIR Phase I:  Enzymes for Accelerated Plastic Recycling
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Johan Kers, BIRCH BIOSCIENCES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,840.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable a more efficient, profitable, and sustainable plastic
recycling process. In the United States less than 10% of plastics are currently
recycled, and the remainder are incinerated (15%) or placed in landfills (75%).
Emissions from global plastics production and incineration could reach 56
billion tons of carbon between now and 2050, accounting for 15% of global
greenhouse gas emissions. The economics of conventional plastic recycling are
poor, because the high temperatures used in recycling cause quality degradation
that greatly reduces the economic value. This project develops a low-temperature
system for high quality, high-value plastic products in closed-loop
recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will apply synthetic
biology and related biotechnologies to identify, engineer, and optimize new
enzymes and enzyme cocktails to break down polyethylene (PE) and polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) plastics. These enzymes will enable closed-loop plastic
recycling in an economically viable, low temperature, low CO2 emission process.
The first objective is to sample plastic contaminated environments for naturally
occurring enzymes that have evolved to depolymerize PE and PET synthetic
polymers. Candidate PE and PET enzymes will be engineered to accelerate their
ability to efficiently target and cut complex PE and PET polymers under scalable
process conditions. Millions of enzyme variants will be constructed, tested, and
analyzed using synthetic biology, high-throughput screening, and machine
learning technologies. A primary goal of this effort is to demonstrate a 10-fold
increase in PE and PET depolymerization rates compared to naturally occurring
plastic degradation proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.