* 2151731
* UC Davis-Nature Conference: Harnessing the Plant Microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2022
* USD 14,548.00

In recent years, advances in plant microbiome research have engaged a diverse
global community of researchers. NSF funds will be used to support the
participation of students and early career investigators in the UC Davis-Nature
Conference: Harnessing the Plant Microbiome, to be held virtually on October
22-24, 2021. The conference will cover a wide range of topics, including cross-
kingdom interactions, molecular signals and communication, plant microbial
ecology, microbiome analytics, and biotechnology and agricultural management.
Invited speakers will include leading international experts, providing an
exceptional opportunity for conference participants to hear about advances and
concepts at the cutting edge of this rapidly growing field of research. In
addition, opportunities to network with industry representatives, some invited
speakers, and journal editors provide added benefits for students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career researchers. It is expected that this conference will
have a significant impact on agricultural biotechnology, and consequently on the
ability to meet societal challenges such as food security and environmental
sustainability in an era of increased need for crop productivity due to the
pressures of population growth, economic development, and climate change.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;New methodological innovations have enabled major
advances in understanding the complexity of plant microbiomes and their cross-
kingdom interactions and establishing a basis for sustainable development of
agroecosystems. Harnessing the plant microbiome towards these goals holds great
promise to expedite solutions to the challenges facing humanity, such as food
security, food safety, and environmental sustainability. UC Davis and Nature
Conferences (https://conferences.nature.com/) have partnered to host the
“Harnessing the Plant Microbiome” virtual conference which aims to foster
interdisciplinary discussions and collaborations and public-private partnerships
on the current and emerging themes in this exciting research area. Conference
proceedings that include the final program agenda and presentation abstracts
will be made publicly available through the conference website and will be
associated with the Nature Conferences media outlet for a global
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.