* 2151566
* Mathematical Investigation of Cell Dynamics in Development and Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Tracy Stepien, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 279,550.00

Biological systems are extremely diverse, whether on an individual-to-
individual, tissue-to-tissue, or cell-to-cell level, and experimental studies
inherently have a high degree of variability and heterogeneity between different
specimens. There is a growing need for reliable methods of developing accurate
mathematical models and comparing them against multiple experimental data sets
to make predictions and tailor experiments dynamically. The goal of this project
is to develop mathematical models and directly assess and validate them against
data from experimental collaboratorsâ€™ studies of cell migration of two layers of
different cell types during embryonic development and the interaction of immune
and tumor cells in cancer. Identifying the mechanisms by which two cell layers
migrate together will inform the understanding of other types of non-monolayer
migration of arbitrary cell types, and testing combination immunotherapies using
the tumor-immune cell dynamics model will fill gaps in knowledge regarding the
role of the tumor microenvironment that experimental studies are incapable of
providing. Graduate and undergraduate student researchers will be trained in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a data-driven, mechanistic
approach to the modeling and subsequent analysis of two systems of interest that
involve the interaction of two or more cell types will be developed. Reaction-
diffusion and diffusion-like frameworks will be tightly integrated with data to
model epithelial and mesenchymal cell migration during embryonic development and
tumor-immune cell dynamics in the tumor microenvironment in cancer. Techniques
of analyzing the suitability of the model components, including methods for
model selection and validation, will be implemented to compare with multiple
experimental data sets in close collaboration with biological experimentalists.
The hypotheses to be tested include (1) when mechanically linked to the
epithelial layer, mesenchymal cells behaviorally act as an extension of the
epithelial layer, and (2) administration of combination immunotherapies will
spatiotemporally impact the influx and presence of myeloid derived suppressor
cells in the tumor microenvironment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.