* 2151674
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of AI and Software Platform for Cost-Effective Soil Carbon Measurement and Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Christopher Tolles, YARD STICK PBC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,858.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable accurate soil health measurements.
The proposed project will develop new machine learning (ML) models for accurate
soil carbon predictions. The system will generate a statistically- and
agronomically-significant soil carbon sampling design customizable for landowner
preferences and the parcelâ€™s characteristics. The envisioned system will
integrate a handheld measurement probe and a cloud-based data analysis and
management platform for automated, scalable, cost-effective, and authoritative
soil carbon sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a
novel machine learning (ML) model for the in-situ prediction and analysis of
soil carbon and development of automated sampling plans. The proposed system
integrates a soil stratification and sampling plan design algorithm; software
integrated with a handheld probe; and an integrated cloud-based analysis and
data management platform. The research will address technical challenges
including: (1) detecting complex covariates; (2) aligning stratification with
soil carbon verification protocols; (3) developing novel digital pedology
techniques; and (4) developing machine learning tools able to iterate
measurement plans in near real-time. The system's outputs will enable parallel
regional models and adaptive sampling plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.