* 2151120
* Deconvolving Magmatic, Crustal and Atmospheric Gases in Yellowstone using a Coupled Noble Gas and Nitrogen Isotope Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Peter Barry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2025
* USD 452,260.00

The Earth’s surface is rich in volatile elements (e.g., H, C, N), providing the
unique conditions that sustain life on our planet. However, the origin of
terrestrial volatiles remains enigmatic, with considerable debate and
uncertainty surrounding regarding volatile source(s) and the overall timing of
planetary accretion. Analyzing the composition of primordial gases emanating
from Earth's mantle represents one of the best avenues to determine the origin
of terrestrial volatiles. The Yellowstone–Columbia River volcanic mega-province
is one of the few volcanic localities on Earth where pristine, plume-derived
magmatic gas reaches the surface and can be easily collected for analysis.
Geochemical data from previous studies in Yellowstone suggest that gas vents are
sourced from a deep-seated mantle plume, that is dominantly chondritic in
origin. In this project, a comprehensive study of gas emissions from Yellowstone
National Park (YNP) will be conducted. The aims are to: (i) investigate the
nature and extent of the Yellowstone plume's interaction with the Archean-aged
crustal basement, which will provide further insight into (ii) the source of the
YNP plume, and the (iii) processes acting to obfuscate mantle source signals.
Specifically, the proposed research will constrain the composition of YNP
magmatic gases and their parental plume mantle source with unprecedented spatial
and analytical resolution. The PIs will employ static noble gas mass
spectrometry techniques, clumped N isotope measurements and the first ultra-
high-precision (sub per mil (‰) precision) dynamic mass spectrometry
measurements of magmatic gas to deconvolve mantle, crustal and atmospheric
endmembers and to place firmer constraints on the origin of volatiles in the
Yellowstone plume, which will help pinpoint the origin of volatiles on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Questions pertaining to the origin of volatiles on
Earth are of broad interest to the scientific community. Results from this study
will provide insight into the relationship between mantle volatiles and Earth’s
atmospheric composition, which is of direct relevance to understanding the
drivers of Earth’s habitability and the subsequent evolution of life. Findings
will be communicated to the scientific community through peer-reviewed
publications and to the public through a multi-faceted outreach approach,
including newsletter publications and field-based lectures that will be
simulcast as a Facebook Live Event in coordination with YNP rangers. Further,
the PIs will work with the YNP Exhibits Specialist to incorporate geochemical
findings from this and other studies into a permanent “wayside exhibit” within
the park. If possible, a short geochemical synopsis will also be included in the
YNP welcome packet (distributed to the &gt;4 million annual visitors).
Additionally, an interactive website presenting a “Yellowstone Geochemical Trail
Map.” will also be constructed and linked to the aforementioned wayside exhibit
and entry brochure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.