* 2151500
* Cyber-Physical Systems Virtual Organization: CPS Community and the Data Revolution
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jonathan Sprinkle, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,451,986.00

The goal of this next phase of the Cyber-Physical Systems Virtual Organization
(CPS-VO) is to continue to support and renew the CPS-VO infrastructure, while
embracing the data revolution. The project will expand the CPS-VO's capacity to
disseminate and collect data, models, and results from existing CPS research
projects. This will increase the impact of those projects by making their
research more readily accessible to others, as well as providing a means by
which issues of repeatability and replicability can be demonstrated. Outreach
activities within the research community include workshops to gather research
project results, and advanced tutorials that enable CPS researchers to address
issues of repeatability and reproducibility. The project will empower the
hundreds of authors of tools, experimental validation data sets and education
material from the last decade of CPS research to appropriately capture, archive,
and make their results broadly accessible from within the Virtual Organization.
The project will provide research supervision and mentoring opportunities to
undergraduates from underrepresented groups. These undergraduates will be
trained in techniques for reproducibility of CPS data results, preparing them
for a career in industry or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Challenges addressed by this new phase of the CPS-VO include: (1) accelerating
the pace at which the results of experimental validation of CPS research can be
leveraged by other researchers, whether through physical system experiments or
design studios; (2) using and replicating active resources and CPS design
studios in the virtual era that is embraced by education and research groups;
(3) expanding active resources to include data and data analysis resources,
empowering CPS researchers to embrace the data revolution; (4) creating highly
configurable service bundles that minimize the time investment for publishing
tools, design studios, data and models on the CPS-VO platform; and (5) providing
use case demonstrations at multiple scales of the CPS-VO modules, accelerating
the pace at which adoption of the resources can occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.