* 2151548
* SBIR Phase II:  Utilizing Carbon Dioxide (CO2) as a Feedstock to Produce Commodity Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Chern-Hooi Lim, New Iridium
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is abating carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in the
production of terephthalic acid, a large-scale commodity chemical. Development
of this technology will provide a pathway for direct utilization of CO2 in
everyday products. For example, implemented at scale, the proposed process has
potential to sequester about 20 million metric tons of CO2 annually, equivalent
to the emissions from 4.3 million cars. This project also has significant
commercial potential. By delivering a lower-carbon product at lower cost than
the current technology, the proposed innovation has the potential to become the
de facto standard for manufacturing this commodity chemical. Annual licensing
and ancillary revenue from a single plant is estimated at $30 million, and at
70-80% market share, typical for the dominant process, annual revenue could grow
to over $1.5 billion. The success of this project will also provide a scientific
and entrepreneurial blueprint to spur similar efforts thus advancing the state
of the art of CO2 utilization technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
II project proposes to develop a light-driven chemical technology that enables
the use of CO2 as a raw material in large scale chemical production of
terephthalic acid. This project abates CO2 emissions by converting CO2, captured
from point sources such as industrial flue stacks or direct air capture, to
useful chemical and consumer products. Carbon dioxide is a stable compound and
is typically unreactive and therefore incompatible with traditional heat-driven
processes. The proposed project will help mature the technology of CO2
activation by photocatalysis, which has been shown to be effective in inducing
CO2 reactivity. The first step is to demonstrate the feasibility of using CO2 to
produce the target chemical at bench scale. Next, the reaction performance will
be optimized using high-throughput experimentation techniques. Finally, the
process will be scaled up in a photo flow photoreactor. In this part of the
project, engineering scale up issues will be addressed as a precursor to
realizing a production plant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.