* 2151045
* Collaborative Research: Research on Integrated STEM Self-Efficacy: A Study of Elementary Preservice Teachers including Noyce Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Jeanna Wieselmann, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2027
* USD 552,999.00

This project aims to serve the national need of supporting the development and
retention of highly effective elementary (K-6) STEM teachers. Elementary
teachers are often uncomfortable teaching science, mathematics, and engineering
as independent subjects, and STEM integration poses new challenges. Previous
research has explored links between confidence (or self-efficacy), teacher
effectiveness, and teacher retention, but self-efficacy for teaching integrated
STEM (iSTEM) is largely unexplored. This project will include approximately 700
teachers who experienced ten different teacher preparation programs. It aims to
identify programmatic features that support early career elementary teachers’
self-efficacy in teaching integrated STEM within high-need school districts. It
will examine relationships among self-efficacy, iSTEM teaching effectiveness,
and teacher retention. The findings that result from this project have the
potential to inform the design of teacher education programs and may contribute
to the development of more highly qualified elementary STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Southern Methodist University,
University of Nebraska - Lincoln, Towson University, and Indiana University
Southeast includes partnerships with the University of Massachusetts - Boston,
Sacred Heart University, Alcorn State University, Bridgewater State University,
Montclair State University, and University of Rhode Island. Project goals
include to: (1) track changes in prospective elementary teachers’ integrated
STEM teaching self-efficacy as they shift from teacher preparation programs to
teaching positions; (2) identify and describe key elements of teacher education
that support the development of integrated STEM teaching self-efficacy among
early-career teachers; (3) identify the relationships among integrated STEM
teaching self-efficacy, teaching effectiveness, and teacher retention; and (4)
build and support a community of elementary teachers focused on improving their
STEM teaching. Grounded in self-efficacy theory, this project will use a
sequential explanatory mixed methods design and include undergraduates, Master’s
students, and current teachers who are within their first five years of
teaching. The project’s longitudinal design, innovative focus on integrated STEM
teaching self-efficacy and effectiveness, and investigation of links between
integrated STEM teaching self-efficacy and teacher retention reflect its
intellectual merit. Research findings will be published in research and
practitioner journals and shared widely at international conferences to impact
researchers, administrators, and educators beyond the immediate scope of this
project. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness
and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.