* 2151032
* Research-PGR: Decoding the Volatile Aroma of Tomato Fruits
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Denise Tieman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,499,986.00

Tomatoes are an important source of nutrition worldwide, providing vitamins and
minerals to the diet. Although tomatoes are a critical part of a balanced diet,
consumers are often displeased with the flavor of modern tomatoes purchased from
supermarkets. Better tasting tomatoes result in increased consumption and
improved overall consumer health. Different tomatoes vary tremendously in
flavors with some that are highly liked or not at all by consumers. This natural
diversity is largely found in tomatoes that are unsuitable for large-scale
production because of reduced fruit size, yield and plant appearance that
negatively impact profitability for growers. Key components of tomato flavor are
the volatile aroma compounds. However, the genetic inheritance and the
biochemistry of many aroma compounds in tomato are unknown. This project will
aim to find novel characteristics of volatile production in ripe fruit which
will ultimately lead to better tasting tomatoes. Identifying these missing
components will facilitate breeding efforts for modern varieties with improved
flavor. In addition, the next generation of scientists will be trained in
current methods of biochemistry, genetics and genomics. Bioinformatics workshops
for high school biology and math teachers will improve education and create
interest in careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survival of the species
in terms of seed dispersal is critically dependent on the metabolic pathways
that regulate specialized volatile accumulation in ripening fruits. In tomato,
genes affecting these pathways often encode metabolic enzymes that differ in
gene structure and activity among related red-fruited species. A subset of these
are also targets of selection during domestication and improvement of tomato.
Yet, key enzymes and regulatory genes in pathways to volatiles that are derived
from branched chain amino acids, phenylalanine, and those that belong to the
acetate ester category are not well known. The main goal of this research
project is to validate, characterize and valorize novel genes in tomato fruit
volatile production in the selected pathways by applying integrative genetic,
molecular, and biochemical approaches. The information from improved GWAS and
bi-parental mapping studies will be used to prioritize candidate genes for
specific fruit volatile loci. Candidate genes will be validated by enzymatic
assays, CRISPR knockouts and fine mapping of loci in segregating populations.
Outreach to high school math and biology teachers will include a workshop on
bioinformatics methods. High school students will be exposed to bioinformatics,
creating interest in careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.