* 2151904
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure Circular Economy for Textile Fiber Through Efficient Recovery of Cellulosic Raw Materials from Clothing Waste
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,04/30/2023
* John Goods, Regenerated Textile Industries, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 275,030.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to remediate the 17 million
tons of textile waste that ends up in landfills annually. Working within the
existing economic drivers of the clothing industry, this project aims to deploy
technology that can profitably transition the USA away from a wasteful zero-sum
linear raw materials model into a resilient local and sustainable circular
economy. This project will enable local communities, urban and rural alike, to
create economic value (raw materials and jobs) out of textile waste, with a
drastic reduction in carbon footprint and greenhouse gas emissions compared to
business as usual. This project will develop technology that has an impact on
the security and sustainability of the US textile raw materials marketplace, by
enabling a re-shoring of an industry in a distributed way that can affect every
single American through their clothing purchasing options. If successful, the US
could lead the world into a new era of a truly sustainable circular economy for
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance knowledge and develop
the core technologies required for widespread adoption and commercialization of
cellulosic textile recycling within the American textile manufacturing industry.
By leveraging core competencies and innovative models for polymer science and
continuous process design, this project will develop a non-destructive
extractive process that will locally and domestically convert end-of-life
textile waste into high-value cellulosic circular economy feedstocks of equal or
greater quality to virgin material at kilogram scale. As part of this project,
the focus will be on extracting cellulose from mixed material textile waste that
contain other contaminant components that often hinder its recycling. This
approach involves innovative mixtures of green chemistry that enable the rapid
extraction of cotton, the spinning of novel fibres, and the efficient recovery
of the process chemicals. This project will optimise and further develop this
core technology and conduct the prototyping and engineering design required for
reproducible cellulosic material (cotton) extraction from clothing waste and its
demonstration at multi-kg scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.