* 2151541
* STTR Phase I:  A Multimodal Integrated System For Improved Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Henry Halperin, CPR THERAPEUTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 256,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to improve the outcomes of patients suffering
sudden cardiac arrest. Approximately 650,000 cardiac arrests occur each year,
representing the top reason for mortality and morbidity in the US and an
estimated $33 billion a year for out-of-hospital costs. Overall survival remains
generally below 10%, and patients are often left with significant neurological
injury. Manual cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) still remains one of the most
effective treatments, resulting in better outcomes than current technologies.
This project will develop a novel medical device that provides a novel superior
automated CPR therapeutic system. It combines multiple methods of mechanical
chest compression to improve patient blood flow during
resuscitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance preclinical
research for developing the first clinically effective noninvasive automated CPR
device. The system integrates a multimodal approach for delivering mechanical
CPR, and therefore represents a significant advancement to current systems that
only deliver a single mode of CPR. The automated and programmable prototype will
determine the optimal combination of methods and timing, to control multiple
pump mechanisms for applying mechanical chest compressions to improve patient
outcomes. This Phase I project will conduct optimization studies in a swine
model of cardiac arrest and develop a proof-of-concept model. These results will
provide the foundation for the next generation system suitable for human use, as
well as advance research results on the hemodynamic interactions of pump
mechanisms and cardiac electrophysiology during CPR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.