* 2151043
* Increasing the African American STEM Teacher Workforce with Community Coaching, Mentoring, and Wellbeing Support
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2028
* Sean Warner, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,980,550.00

This project aims to serve the national need of recruiting, preparing,
retaining, and supporting high-quality mathematics teachers of color. Using a
robust social media recruitment strategy, the project will focus on the
recruitment of graduates from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) who have graduated with at least a STEM baccalaureate degree. Through a
year-long Master's program, prospective teachers will receive the preparation
and support needed to become mathematics teachers in high-need school districts.
In their first years of teaching, the project will also provide community-based
coaching, mentoring, and health tools related to social and emotional wellbeing.
Located in Georgia, the project will study the problems that have historically
hindered African American mathematics teacher recruitment, preparation, and
retention in urban schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Clark Atlanta
University (CAU) includes partnerships with Clayton County Public Schools
(CCPS), Genesis Innovation Academy (GIA), the Atlanta Algebra Project &amp;
Young People’s Project (Atlanta APYPP), and Quality Education for Minorities
(QEM). Nineteen STEM degree-holders will be recruited in two cohorts using
multiple social media platforms and a network of HBCUs. A social media
consultant will advise this effort. Each cohort of Teaching Fellows will earn a
Master of Arts degree through CAU’s new online-hybrid accelerated mathematics
program. Upon completion of the degree program, Fellows will become full-time
teachers in partner high-need districts. CCPS and GIA, along with CAU faculty,
will provide mentoring. The Atlanta APYPP will offer mathematics literacy
coaching for the Fellows as they progress through their first years of teaching.
Fellows will participate in community-school based activities for leadership
development. The project will investigate the following research questions: (1)
what impact did the marketing strategy have on attracting STEM degree-holders;
(2) to what degree did social and emotional health coaching and mathematics
literacy coaching impact teacher preparation; and (3) to what degree did the
coaching influence retention in teaching? Each cohort will be surveyed in the
first and third years of their experience. This Track 2: Teaching Fellowships
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.