* 2151711
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Manufacturing of Supramolecular Polymers for Regenerative Medicine
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Charlotte Chen, AMPHIX BIO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 252,906.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a safe and effective therapeutic
for spinal fusion surgeries. Over 500,000 people undergo spinal fusion surgery
in the U.S. every year to treat debilitating back and neck pain. Compared to
harvesting bone from a donor site on the patient, spinal biologics are popular
among surgeons because they offer a synthetic, off-the-shelf implant requiring a
single surgical site and offering consistent clinical outcomes. However, safety
concerns surrounding these therapeutics have limited its approval for use only
to the lumbar region of the spine, and high manufacturing costs of recombinant
proteins can be prohibitive for widespread adoption. This project advances a
technology that is safer and less expensive than the currently used biologics in
spinal surgeries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project develops large-scale manufacturing methods for peptide
amphiphile (PA) molecules, which self-assemble into supramolecular polymers that
can reduce the dose of the biological necessary to achieve successful spinal
fusion as demonstrated in preclinical large animal models. While highly
promising, manufacturing supramolecular polymers at large scale presents
challenges because supramolecular self-assembly is highly sensitive to
processing steps and conditions. The project goal is to develop a scalable
manufacturing method that results in PA assemblies with efficacy equivalent to
PA assemblies produced in the research laboratory setting. To achieve this, PA
molecules will be synthesized using industry-compatible methods to improve the
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.