* 2151576
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering Scalability of Durable Low-Noble-Metal-Content Fuel Cell Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2023
* Dominic Caracciolo, DOMCAT TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,551.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the demonstration of a commercially
viable catalyst technology for hydrogen fuel cells. In the existing energy
market, customer needs arise from the specific requirements of sustainable
energy grids in terms of storage and conversion modules that manage the energy
efficiency and meet stringent regulations for pollution. Hydrogen fuel cells
have the potential to address most of those requirements. The potential
commercial impact of the proposed project stems from increasing societal
interest and market needs in clean energy and a sustainable environment. The
technology will contribute to the replacement of fossil fuels and reduce
emissions from stationary power plants and on-road/off-road transportation. The
proposed technology development will benefit the manufacturers of fuel cell
stacks or parts which currently suffer from high manufacturing costs associated
with high-cost catalysts and short lifetimes of the catalyst in fuel cell
operation. The technology also has the potential to benefit the agriculture
drone manufacturers seeking an alternative lightweight, highly efficient energy
package with long flight duration and low/zero pollution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop a new technology
that enables hydrogen fuel cells with catalysts containing a low percentage of
platinum group metals and a membrane electrode assembly with high activity and
durability. Key pain points in the fuel cell market are the high loading of
platinum group metals in the catalysts and the poor durability of the current
catalysts during operations. The goal is to develop a commercially viable route
to the durable and low-platinum-content catalyst and membrane electrode assembly
by nano-engineering the metal composition and synthesis scalability. The
proposed research and development will accomplish three major tasks including
the development of a scalable synthesis route for the production of the targeted
catalyst, the preparation of the membrane electrode assembly, and the evaluation
of the performance in the hydrogen fuel cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.