* 2151149
* SBIR Phase I:  An Easy RNA-Adenylation Method for Deep Sequencing of Picogram RNA Samples with High Resolution
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Xin Shu, EZRABIO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to advance personalized medicine for improved treatment and prevention. This
project advances a technology to identify novel cancer-specific antigens and
advances cancer immunotherapy. The proposed technology can be applied to cells
in culture and solid tissues obtained by needle biopsy. Furthermore, it can be
engineered into an easy-to-use system for a wide range of scientists and
healthcare professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
develop a versatile and cost-effective library construction technology that
enables protein translation monitoring on a variety of biological samples. High
throughput sequencing of RNA molecules requires the preparation of libraries.
Current methods for library construction utilize adaptor ligation to the 5'- and
3'- ends of the target RNA molecules. However, ligation of adaptors is time-
consuming and low-efficiency, and the resulting cDNA libraries are contaminated
with cross- and self-ligation adaptor byproducts and require additional
purification steps. The proposed technology relies on a novel enzyme system
capable of 5’ adenylation and 3’ polyadenylation of RNA fragments. To increase
the efficiency of RNA adenylation at both ends, a fusion enzyme with high
enzymatic efficiency is engineered. Moreover, to reduce ligation time and
increase efficiency, pre-orientated oligonucleotide adaptors will be specially
designed. This project focuses on the removal of the sucrose-based
centrifugation and the automation of the proposed technology, which have not
been conducted previously in ribosome profiling. The proposed technology can
become a method of choice for broad ribosome profiling in both laboratory and
clinical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.