* 2151088
* Learning to Lead (L2L): Building STEM Teacher Leaders that Broaden Participation in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Jennifer Albert, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2027
* USD 984,383.00

This Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program Track 3: Master Teacher Fellows
(MTF) project aims to broaden participation by connecting rural teachers to
professional development and one another. Teachers will experience and reflect
on effective pedagogies via graduate coursework culminating in two South
Carolina Add-On Certification Endorsements (Problem Based Learning and Online
Teaching and Teacher Leader), as well as 30 additional hours of graduate credit.
While teacher education programs have prepared teachers for the content and
pedagogies of the traditional school, few, if any, have prepared teachers for
the unanticipated immersion into the online space that occurred during the first
18 months of the COIVD-19 pandemic. The Project Based Learning certificate will
help MTFs explore ways to leverage their enhanced pedagogical content knowledge,
including new and exciting forms of student engagement, student-to-student
interaction, and assessment. Through the Teacher Leader certificate, the MTFs
will learn research-based strategies that have been shown to promote quality
teacher leader outcomes, including balancing teaching and leading, attending to
equity-based norms of teaching, and knowledge of adult learning and career
development. Teachers will connect with one another as they collaborate with
project staff to create a statewide rural math teacher network, a teacher-driven
professional community focused on addressing the unique challenges and
opportunities faced by rural mathematics teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Citadel’s Learning to Lead (L2L): Building STEM Teacher Leaders that Broaden
Participation in High-Needs Schools project is a collaboration between The
Citadel’s Zucker Family School of Education and Swain Family School of Science
and Mathematics (higher education), as well as Georgetown County School District
(high-need local education agency) and the Lowcountry STEM Collaborative (non-
profit). This project seeks to develop 18 teachers (with at least a Master’s
degree) into Rural Teacher Leaders over five years. The L2L project strives to
stimulate sustainable improvements in the quality of mathematics teaching and
learning in rural high-needs schools through the following four goals: (1)
building MTFs’ pedagogical content knowledge and skills, (2) building MTFs’
teacher leadership knowledge and skills, (3) collaborating with MTFs to create
the SC Rural Math Teacher Network (SC-RMTN) with associated PD resources, and
(4) supporting teachers to continue the SC-RMTN into the future. The L2L project
incorporates an intentional form of gradual release in which MTFs take ownership
of the knowledge, resources, and communities they have helped to create, greatly
increasing the likelihood of project continuation long after its initial 5 year
period. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.