* 2151637
* STTR Phase I:  Machine learning and video-based sensor for measuring sewer flows
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Spencer Sebo, WATER INTELLIGENCE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to provide water reclamation facilities with accurate and
reliable data across all pipe flow conditions in order to make infrastructure
and operational decisions. This decision-making capability is important as many
facilities spend millions of dollars each year on improving sewer system
function, yet are constrained by lack of quality data on sewer flows. Improved
sewer flow data may help to optimize infrastructure improvements and reduce
costs to taxpayers. In addition, this work may directly advance the health and
welfare of the American public through improved wastewater collection systems
operations and reduced overflows and basement backups. This technology has
broader social implications as low-income and minority communities are
disproportionately affected by flood impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to advance a novel,
non-contact sensor that collects video of wastewater flow in sanitary sewer
systems to measure flow rate and detect critical sewer events. Specifically, the
technology collects video of sanitary sewer flows and processes it in real time
using a machine learning algorithm to measure the velocity and water level of
the flow. This technology also evaluates images of sewer flows to identify
illicit discharges into the system. Several key technical hurdles crucial to
successful commercialization of this innovation will be addressed in the
proposed project, including the use of artificial illumination systems in closed
pipe environments, the development of strategies to account for rapid variations
in flow rates, and the development of data analytic methods to identify critical
sewer events. Given these technical hurdles, the objectives of this project will
be to develop a video-based flow sensor that can accurately capture velocity and
water level under expected environmental conditions and to analyze data from the
proposed sensor to accurately identify critical sewer events such as blockages
and illicit discharges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.