* 2151540
* Dimensions US-BIOTA-Sao Paulo:  Collaborative Proposal:  Traits as predictors of adaptive diversification along the Brazilian Dry Diagonal
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Kelly Zamudio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,999.00

The Brazilian Dry Diagonal (BDD) is a broad region of diverse and unique
habitats sandwiched in between the wetter Amazon basin to the west and the moist
tropical and subtropical Atlantic Forest to the east. Although the BDD can
appear superficially to be wasteland with little variety, in fact it harbors
many unique species, comprise the most endangered set of habitats in Brazil, and
is being rapidly being lost to agriculture and other human encroachment. This
research will be the first to synthesize information from species' traits,
communities, and genetics to understand how the unique traits and communities of
organisms living in the BDD evolved. Using a diverse set of approaches to study
in detail a variety of animals, plants and fungi that today inhabit this broad
swath of dry habitats in central Brazil, the researchers will evaluate: 1) what
sorts of traits - such as body size, shape or specific behaviors - allow a group
of organisms to succeed in a novel environment? 2) how the novel environment
determines the set of organisms - the community - that we see today? 3) how
organisms adapt genetically and morphologically to that novel environment? and
4) how novel traits, communities, and genetic changes interact to produce the
variety of organisms that are seen in different environments today? Answers to
these questions will improve scientists' ability to predict the impacts of a
changing world on biodiversity. The project will foster new international
research collaborations by engaging a large team of experts from the United
States and Brazil and will also provide interdisciplinary research training
opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the four aims listed above, the
project will first use a machine learning approach applied to hundreds of traits
and lineages in the BDD to determine which traits predict evolutionary success -
the tendency for xeric-adapted species to undergo evolutionary diversification.
The project will then employ community phylogenetics approaches to understand
how functional trait variation is distributed in the BDD, and will determine the
evolutionary patterns and over- or under-dispersion of trait values observed in
particular communities inhabiting the BDD today, as well as how traits are
filtered across habitat gradients. Finally, the project uses a variety of
genomic technologies, including whole genome sequencing and transcriptomics, to
understand how organisms adapt to the more xeric habitats of the BDD as compared
to close relatives living in adjacent mesic biomes. By linking evolutionary
patterns in traits, communities and genes, the project will synthesize the
functional, phylogenetic and genetic dimensions of biodiversity of the BDD and
present a comprehensive portrait of its origins and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.