* 2151522
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing a platform for superior predictive analysis of HERG Ion Channel-Drug Interactions for the Comprehensive In-vitro Proarrhythmia Assay (CiPA)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Leigh Korbel, Cytocybernetics
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve drug safety. This project
advances software to identify the potential of new drugs to provoke dangerous
cardiac side-effects. Because sudden cardiac death is an infrequent and
relatively rare phenomenon, predicting it with conventional tools is either
impractical or impossible. The proposed technology will make the development of
all new classes of drugs safer, faster, and less expensive. This will be
integrated into investigational new drug submission packages for submission to
the FDA for drug approval. This will improve pharmaceutical safety and clinical
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will address the critical problem of predicting the
arrhythmogenic potential of new drugs seeking FDA approval. Current basic
science research methods are based on trying to reproduce exact and infrequently
encountered in vivo phenomena in an in vitro setting. The economic and practical
constraints on drug development therefore requires industry to use proxies,
primarily drug binding to the HERG potassium channel, as a predictor
arrhythmogenicity. The intellectual challenge in this project is to combine
mathematical modeling and quantitative analysis of rigorous experimental
protocols to bridge this gap and identify underlying features which are strong
predictors of arrhythmogenic behavior. Key to understanding this is the rapid
development and deployment of state-dependent Markov models of drug action based
on limited patch clamp data, which is both time-consuming and expensive to
obtain. This project combines mathematical analysis directly to direct patch-
clamp assay protocols to minimize time and expense while increasing predictive
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.