* 2151018
* Leveraging Technology for Justice-Oriented Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* David Pullman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2027
* USD 691,705.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality science
teachers who are prepared to teach in urban high-need school districts. A focus
of the project will be to prepare educators to teach social justice-oriented
science with integrated technology to diverse populations of students. To
accomplish this, the project will incorporate four underlying components. (1)
Paid internships will be provided for freshmen and sophomore science majors to
experience teaching youth science at community-based camps. (2) Two credential
pathways for future science teachers will be offered - an Integrated Teacher
Education Program (ITEP) for undergraduate science majors and special cohorts in
the Credential Program for College of Science graduates. (3) One-year
scholarships will be provided to prospective teachers who will complete the
science teaching credentials via one of the two pathways. (4) After the
prospective teachers graduate, two years of induction support will be provided
during their early teaching period in a high-need school. The internships are
designed to gain and foster students' interest in teaching science. Monthly
workshops that integrate technology and social justice-oriented teaching
approaches will be provided to the science-credential scholarship students.
Likewise, a special course dedicated to teaching STEM and development of a
community of practice will be part of the credentialing curriculum. Induction
will include regular workshops with project team members, coaching meetings with
the project's dedicated mentor, and continuation of communities of practice. The
project will contribute directly to the development of a skilled STEM workforce
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at San Diego State
University (SDSU), an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), includes partnering
with San Diego Unified School District, an ethnically, linguistically, and
economically diverse, high-need school district. As a result, the project
represents an authentic, place-based partnership. The project has several goals.
First, over five years, the project will recruit a diverse group of twenty-five
(25) university freshman and sophomore science majors into paid field
experiences to encourage them to consider science teaching as a career. Related
to this, a second goal is to recruit a diverse group of forty-one (41) high-
achieving students who are majoring in, or have received degrees in, biology,
chemistry, computer science, engineering, geosciences, mathematics, or physics
in SDSU's College of Sciences to receive a one-year scholarship to complete a
credentialing program for K-12 STEM teaching. For a third goal, project leaders
will investigate the processes of recruiting, supporting, retaining, and
empowering science majors to become STEM teachers who embody a dedication to
technology-based and socially-just science teaching. Fourth, the project team
will implement and study transitional professional development support for the
recipients' first years of teaching. Through research-based learning
experiences, this project will develop the recipientsâ€™ expertise to enact
justice-focused science instruction that is rich in technology. Comprehensive
project evaluation, using qualitative and quantitative methods, will provide
both formative and summative data and feedback. Proactive and robust
dissemination of project outcomes and lessons learned from the SDSU model will
have multiple branches. A project website, which will include announcements of
events, updated project findings, and a repository of teacher education
resources created by and for the project, will be maintained by SDSU's Center
for Research in Mathematics and Science Education. Also, specific dissemination
efforts will be ongoing at the local, regional, state, and national levels. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.