* 2151086
* Pre-service Teacher Research Experience in Biodiversity Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Michael Grillo, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2027
* USD 564,686.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality secondary
science and mathematics teachers. Modern teaching standards and best practices
call for teachers not simply to reiterate facts, but rather to engage students
in scientific processes. However, prospective teachers often have limited
opportunities to immerse themselves in the types of authentic research
experiences that best prepare them to meet these standards. This project
addresses this limitation by providing a summer program at Loyola University of
Chicago with authentic STEM research experiences for prospective science
teachers who are pursuing a baccalaureate degree in biology, ecology, or
environmental science. A research emphasis will be on biodiversity in an urban
setting. Coupled with the research program will be a professional development
summer program with a focus on introducing project participants to many ways in
which research can be applied. At the same time, the program will help them
determine how research and other inquiry-based experiences can be integrated
into their future classrooms. The project has an underlying aim to mentor 8 new
pre-service teachers each year of a 5-year project for a total of 40 unique
participants who will have an authentic STEM research experience. In turn, these
future teachers will be prepared to facilitate research activities in the K-12
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Loyola University of Chicago
(LUC) will focus on several goals. First, the investigators seek to increase the
number and diversity of pre-service teachers in the Chicago area who are STEM
majors with a genuine STEM research experience. A second goal is to augment the
summer research experiences with professional development opportunities. These
opportunities will be aimed at enhancing STEM identities, increasing pedagogical
and content knowledge, gaining experience with communication of science concepts
and skills, and discussing teaching practices with special attention given to
implementing research in the K-12 environment. A component of the professional
development will be a workshop on employing data nuggets to empower the pre-
service teachers to translate their research experience into their future
careers as teachers. Third is to add to the knowledge base for pre-service
teacher preparation. To accomplish this, the project will collect and analyze
data about the short and long-term implications of pre-service teacher research
and other professional development experiences on pedagogical and content
knowledge, science and science teacher identities, and instructional practices.
A final goal is to disseminate outcomes and findings on the LUC model,
especially to other programs interested in using authentic STEM research
experiences, coupled with teacher professional development, to enhance and
improve pre-service science teacher preparation. Qualitative project evaluation
of the stated program goals will rely on formative assessment, including mentor
reflections, focus groups, and interviews. Also, a summative study of the depth
and rigor of the research and professional development experiences will be
incorporated. Overall, evaluation is designed to contribute to understandings of
how research experiences can be integrated into beginning science teachersâ€™
early preparation. The project has the potential to serve as a model for
improving pre-service teacher preparation for which intensive research
experiences would represent an important program component. This Noyce Research
Experiences for Pre-service Teachers project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need districts. It also supports research on the retention and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.