* 2151311
* Factors Relating to Successful Recruitment of Women in Information Technology Jobs
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Sofia Bapna, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 407,450.00

Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields are critical
drivers of economic growth and national competitiveness. Yet women remain
underrepresented in many STEM fields, which has dramatic, negative consequences
both for equality and for creativity and innovation, which often benefit from
diverse perspectives. This award develops knowledge that increases women’s
representation in STEM fields, focusing on information technology (IT). The
research is organized around two projects. Project 1 examines the
characteristics of IT jobs, as described in job advertisements, that increase
women’s likelihood of applying. Project 2 examines whether legislation requiring
medium-term, employer-paid maternity leave changes women’s likelihood of
applying to jobs and companies’ likelihood of interviewing them. The findings
inform companies regarding the job descriptions that attract female applicants
and policymakers regarding the design of parental-leave policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award includes two projects aimed at promoting
women’s representation in STEM fields. It uses large scale data from an
e-recruiting platform—including ~6 million applications to ~20,000 IT job
advertisements posted by ~13,000 companies—that allows tracking of women’s
progress through the hiring funnel. Project 1 identifies characteristics of job
advertisements that increase the likelihood of women applying, using natural
language processing and machine learning. Findings from this project expand the
literature on women’s workforce participation, specifically regarding the job
descriptions that appeal to women. Since prior work uses a deductive approach,
it has necessarily considered only a small set of potentially relevant
characteristics. This award instead uses an inductive approach to build theory,
leveraging “big” data to uncover relationships that are hard to hypothesize a
priori. Project 2 uses an event study to examine the effects of legislation
mandating medium-term employer-paid maternity leave. Findings from this project
expand the literature on women’s workforce participation, specifically regarding
policy interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.