* 2151809
* Magnetic Recording Media based on High Entropy Alloys
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Kai Liu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

Areal density in magnetic recording media has enjoyed tremendous growth in
recent decades. A key property that enables digital information to be stored in
ever shrinking nanoscale magnets is the ability of the media to maintain its
magnetization, known as the magnetic anisotropy. Traditional high magnetic
anisotropy materials contain rare-earth elements, which are prone to price
fluctuations and supply chain issues. Currently, certain alloys of FePt in a
tetragonal phase are being pursued in heat-assisted magnetic recording media,
but they contain precious metals. It is critical to advance the magnetic
recording technology using high anisotropy materials based on earth-abundant
elements. Recent progresses in high entropy alloys offer an exciting new arena
to realize novel types of high anisotropy materials. These materials are multi-
element alloys with high configurational entropy, allowing stabilization of
metastable phases. This project will explore the high entropy alloy approach to
develop novel multi-element phases with high magnetic anisotropy as magnetic
recording media that cannot be achieved by conventional means. To effectively
explore the essentially infinite combinations of the multi-element alloys, an
iterative synthesis, characterization, simulation and machine learning approach
is adapted, to quickly identify the most promising alloy phases and improve
their performance metrics. Magnetic recording media developed using high entropy
alloys have potentially transformative technological impacts. The effective
machine learning method developed will benefit not only explorations of high
entropy alloys, but also numerous other applications. The principal
investigators actively promote broader participation through education and
outreach efforts to engage students at all levels, as well as extensive service
activities in the magnetism community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High entropy
materials with strong magnetic anisotropy are investigated for applications as
magnetic recording media. A synergetic and iterative high-throughput approach is
employed, to survey the vast parameter space and expedite the research progress
towards recording media development. Thin films of high entropy alloys are
synthesized via combinatorial fabrication, exploring large composition
variations. Structural characterizations of crystal structure, phase stability
and morphology are performed by x-ray diffraction and electron microscopy.
Quantitative magnetic phase identification and magnetization reversal
characteristics are investigated using magnetometry and the first-order reversal
curve method. Magnetic correlation length scales are probed by neutron
scattering and compared with sample microstructures. Machine learning is
employed to aid design and optimization of alloy composition and growth
parameter space, forming iterative feedback loops with experiments. This
includes the development of predictive machine learning using conventional
models and existing data, training a Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network
(WGAN) to resolve the overfitting issue, searching for the maximized magnetic
anisotropy, and realizing machine-learning-assisted high throughput
characterization. An experiment-machine learning iteratively derived prototype
magnetic recording media is demonstrated. A key bottleneck of stabilizing high
anisotropy phases via the conventional approaches is circumvented via the
configurational entropy route. The eventual scaling up from thin films into bulk
materials can potentially transform many other industry sectors. A large-size
high entropy alloy database containing both the experimental and WGAN-generated
labeled data is publicly available. The research activities are integrated with
a wide variety of education and outreach efforts for student training and
broadening participation from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.