* 2151000
* Building Capacity for Supporting STEM Educators in the Alabama Black Belt Region
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Dee Cothran, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 124,658.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to increase the
number of culturally reflective STEM teachers in the high-need Black Belt region
of Alabama. Alabama State University (ASU) will strengthen its partnerships with
a community college and high-need school district, leading to an established
pathway for STEM students to enter the regional teaching workforce. The STEM and
education curriculum at ASU will be improved, with new enrichment modules as
well as new test preparation courses that will better prepare students for
certification exams. The outcomes of this project could benefit the wider STEM
and education student population at the university. It will also position ASU
for a future Track 1 proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
partnerships with Trenholm State Community College (TSCC) and the Lowndes County
Public School System (LCPSS). Project goals include: (1) developing a marketing
and recruitment plan to recruit ASU STEM majors and graduates from TSCC, (2)
develop a synergistic partnership, including an articulation agreement, with
TSCC aimed at facilitating students' timely completion of STEM and education
degrees, (3) developing collaborative partnerships with local school systems,
such as LCPSS, and better understanding their needs, (4) developing new
education courses and curricula, and (5) developing an institutional structure
for coordinating and managing the future Track 1 project. Needs assessments of
TSCC and LCPSS will inform the project team as they plan for the Track 1
project. Additionally, current students and faculty at ASU will be surveyed to
allow for better understanding of attitudes and perceptions of the STEM educator
pathway. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.