* 2151709
* I-Corps: A fluorescence sensor for early detection of nitrification in drinking water
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Julian Fairey, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a fluorescence sensor system for early detection of biological
ammonia oxidation in water. Biological ammonia oxidation can degrade drinking
water quality and, in the absence of corrective actions, lead to growth of
bacteria that may sicken consumers. Biological ammonia oxidation is presently
diagnosed by analysis of multiple chemical species following grab sample
collection at several locations within a drinking water distribution system,
which is a time-consuming and labor-intensive process. The proposed fluorescence
sensor system would automate this process by detecting products released by
bacteria prior to the degradation of drinking water quality. Use of this
proposed sensor system may facilitate early detection of biological ammonia
oxidation, allowing for corrective actions to be applied in a timely manner to
maintain high quality drinking water at the tap. Other potential applications
include hospitals and medical facilities that remove drinking water
disinfectants for kidney dialysis and other therapeutic uses, and beverage
manufacturers that remove disinfectants due to taste and odor concerns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
fluorescence sensor system for early detection of biological ammonia oxidation
in water. Research demonstrated that fluorescence intensities at specific
wavelength pairs measured with a laboratory-grade benchtop fluorometer revealed
the presence of soluble microbial products released by bacteria into water prior
to biological ammonia oxidation. To be useful in practice, however, these
fluorescence measurements need to be made in real-time at multiple locations
within a drinking water distribution system as opposed to in a laboratory
following sample collection. The proposed sensor system would allow for
continuous real-time fluorescence measurements and consists of a lamp to
generate excitation light, optical filters to generate the appropriate
wavelengths of light, and an emission detector to collect the fluorescence
spectra. A companion data-processing algorithm and graphical user interface is
used to make comparisons of fluorescence signals to an established threshold
level in which biological ammonia oxidation is not occurring. Hospitals and
beverage manufacturers that remove disinfectants from drinking water also may
leverage this sensor for other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.