* 2151078
* Promoting Inclusiveness and Diversity in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Evans Afenya, Elmhurst University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 01/31/2027
* USD 777,400.00

The project aims to serve the national need to prepare more high-quality STEM
teachers who are trained to succeed in settings with diverse classrooms. More
specifically, this project addresses the ever-growing number of unfilled science
and mathematics teaching positions for middle and secondary schools in the state
of Illinois and the surrounding region. Additionally, while the student
population is often more diverse than that of STEM teachers, STEM teachers have
limited preparation in considering such unique cultural backgrounds in their
teaching approaches. In response, the project team will recruit, retain,
graduate, and support an additional 24 racially, linguistically, and culturally
diverse STEM teachers. THe project will implement and evaluate the effectiveness
of project activities designed to increase the capacity for early career
teachers to use culturally responsive pedagogies (CRP) and content area
literacies in STEM classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Elmhurst
University includes partnerships with Fenton High School District 100 and Leyden
High School District 212, as well as College of DuPage and Harper Community
College. The project goals are to: (1) recruit, retain, and graduate 24
undergraduate students pursuing STEM degrees with teacher licensure in
mathematics, biology, chemistry, or physics over the five years of the project;
(2) place 100% of Noyce graduates in high-need school districts and support them
to complete their Noyce teaching obligation; (3) improve STEM teacher
candidatesâ€™ preparedness for enabling student success in diverse classrooms by
embedding CRP pedagogies and content area literacies throughout the curriculum;
and (4) increase knowledge about best practices for promoting CRP and content
area literacies within teacher preparation programs. The project aims to develop
strategies for better integrating culturally-responsive pedagogy and content
area literacies into K-12 classrooms, primarily through a series of professional
development workshops and classroom observations provided as part of the
induction supports. The project leadership team will disseminate the results of
the project through presentations professional conferences, a workshop focused
on the integration of CRP within teacher preparation programs, and a website
that collects resources on these pedagogies for both K-12 and college educators.
The project evaluation will be conducted by The Rucks Group, using a mixed-
methods approach with surveys, interviews/focus groups, institutional data, and
classroom observations. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.