* 2151449
* SBIR Phase I:  A Universal Connector for High-Density Microfluidic Chip Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Trevor McQueen, Neptune Fluid Flow Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance the lab-on-a-chip and other related life science platforms
by the introduction of a new standardized microfluidic chip interface. The
proposed project advances a novel interface to advance the applications and
capabilities of microfluidic chips in both medical and non-medical fields,
including dramatically increasing the rate at which doctors and medical
researchers can prepare and perform diagnostic tests. The interface enables easy
interoperability of devices as the chips can be freely switched out while the
result of the hardware remains the same. The success of this project could lead
to great breakthroughs in bioenergy, medical diagnostics, and drug
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project undertakes the
development of chip interfaces with reduced size and increased channel density
by making use of novel interfacing and sealing methods, on a reusable micro-
patterned surface. While the technology exists to fabricate microfluidic chips
with much smaller dimensions, with more complex on-chip operations, and at a
reduced cost, the current limitation is the size of the interfaces bridging the
microscopic world of the fluid microchip with the macroscopic world of the
laboratory. The work proposed herein could enable chips with 16x the density of
sample channels, allowing for vastly more complex diagnostics to be performed
and thereby vastly reducing the sample volume needed for accurate
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.