* 2151148
* Investigating Science Teacher, Research, Education, and Methods Used to Prepare Pre-Service Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* David Forbes, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2027
* USD 812,324.00

This Track 1 Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce) aims to serve the
national need of increasing the number of highly qualified science teachers,
especially science teachers who are racially and ethnically diverse. Currently,
the lack of certified science teachers is a major cause of low achievement and
expectations for high-risk pupils. This problem is intensified in both rural and
urban areas where many science teachers are either teaching outside of their
field of certification or do not have a STEM background. This project plans to
address the problem by preparing and supporting highly qualified science majors
who obtain their teaching certifications via a post-baccalaureate program. After
recruiting and selecting qualified Scholars, this project will provide authentic
experiences in science classrooms, starting with a 10-week pre-residency
experience. In addition, the integration of local community science field-based
experiences to engage Scholars in professional learning communities to further
their conceptual understanding of science is planned. As a result, Scholars are
expected to learn how to help their future K-12 students make real-world
connections between the science content they are learning in the classroom and
their local community. This project has the potential to provide Title I schools
with high quality science teachers and as a result increase student achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of South Alabama includes
partnerships with the Mobile County Public School System, Bishop State Community
College, the Alabama State Department of Education’s Alabama Science in Motion,
and the Alabama Math, Science, and Technology Initiatives. Project goals include
supporting science post-baccalaureates and producing a total of 16 new science
teachers over the five-year duration of the grant. Eligible candidates will hold
a bachelor’s degree in science (i.e., physics, chemistry, biology, geology, or
engineering). The recruitment strategy includes the STREAM pre-residency
experience, direct contact with faculty in each science department, and
advertisement on at least one episode of the University of South Alabama
podcast, Sincerely South. This project utilizes best practices from previous
Noyce awards and is expected to add to the body of knowledge regarding factors
that attract science majors to pursue careers as science teachers. Two
characteristics of intellectual merit comprise of the project’s capacity to
continue producing high quality science teachers while measuring the
effectiveness of past Scholars. Lastly, the evaluation of factors that influence
Scholars serving beyond the three-year commitment can be used to better
understand how to support and retain career science teachers. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K- 12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.