* 2151796
* EAGER: Repair and Recombination of Mitochondrial DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* James Haber, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 10/31/2024
* USD 299,944.00

DNA damage, especially in the form of double-strand chromosome breaks (DSBs),
poses a severe threat to genome integrity. Much has been learned about the
various ways that eukaryotic cells can cope with DSB damage, through both
homology-directed repair and nonhomologous end-joining processes, with one
notable exception: virtually nothing is known about how DNA in mitochondria is
repaired, in humans or even in the best-studied model organism, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Understanding of how DSB repair and recombination occur in
mitochondria may open the door to gene therapeutic approaches for the many human
mitochondrial diseases that are related to defects in mtDNA. The project also
provides research and career development opportunities for a post-doctoral
scholar and undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Budding yeast
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) undergoes frequent homologous recombination when
haploids conjugate and both parents contribute mtDNA to the zygote; but almost
nothing is known about how these events are initiated or through what
intermediates recombination progresses. In addition, yeast mitochondria exhibit
very high levels of unidirectional genetic transfer (gene conversion) initiated
by the site-specific endonuclease, I-SceI; but how such events occur is unknown,
save for the fact that they are largely independent of the genes essential for
analogous gene conversion processes occurring between chromosomes in the
nucleus, including DSB repair events initiated by the same endonuclease. The
goals of this EAGER project are threefold: 1) to use genome-wide screening of
budding yeast by CRISPRi (inhibition of gene expression by conditional, dominant
dCas9-mediated repression) to identify genes necessary for general homologous
recombination between mtDNAs; 2) to identify specifically genes that are
required for site-specific I-SceI endonuclease- mediated gene conversion; and 3)
to seek mutants in yeast that would allow the uptake of DNA to effect gene
editing within mitochondria. The last aim tackles a formidable challenge: to
date it has not been possible to introduce DNA into the mitochondrion that could
be used for gene editing (e.g. by Cas9-mediated template
repair).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.