* 2151061
* Educating Science and Mathematics Majors to Teach with Social Justice Models in High-Needs Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* John Pecore, University of West Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 871,573.00

This project aims to serve the national need to recruit and retain highly
qualified STEM teachers for grades 6-12 with a commitment to serve in high-need
school districts. The project will recruit, produce, and place 19 highly
qualified, certified, grades 6-12 STEM teachers in local high-need school
districts. Recognizing that social justice is an often-overlooked component of
STEM educator identity, Scholars will participate in a two-summer social justice
citizen science project and will graduate as highly qualified science and math
teachers. These new teachers will positively impact the two partnering high-need
districts in the area by elevating educational opportunities in a culturally
responsive and sustaining manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of West Florida (UWF) includes continued partnerships with Pensacola
State College and two high-need school districts, Escambia County School
District and Santa Rosa County District Schools. The project goals include: 1)
increasing the number of highly qualified and certified STEM grades 6-12
teachers in Northwest Florida high-need Local Educational Agencies (LEAs), 2)
supporting graduates of UWF-Teach, and scholarship recipients, in the workplace
to increase success and retention in Northwest Florida high-need LEAs, and 3)
engaging Noyce Scholars in authentic social justice-based science research and
development of research projects into citizen science classroom lessons. The
project team will research the following questions. 1) Do program components,
including the two-summer social justice-based citizen science research program,
and course components contribute to STEM majors becoming grades 6-12 classroom
teachers in high need LEAs? 2) How does the two-summer social justice-based
citizen science research program impact Scholars' professional teacher
development (e.g., teacher cultural competency, teaching self-efficacy,
effectiveness as teachers and leaders)? Working with their district, graduates
will receive additional support to ensure their success as a novice teacher,
increasing the likelihood that Scholars will remain in the teaching profession
beyond five years with the potential to impact thousands of students using
equitable and just teaching models. An external evaluator will review project
research activities, evaluate broader impacts, collect and synthesize data
related to success in meeting overall goals, and conduct frequent interviews and
focus groups. Additionally, a research consultant will focus on research
questions and benchmarks. Dissemination of project results will allow program
benefits to be extended beyond program participants and further facilitate
learning and collaboration. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce
program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.