* 2151006
* Transforming Effective Educators of Mathematics and Science in Southeast Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* William McConnell, Virginia Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2027
* USD 612,531.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective
mathematics and science teachers. Educating and supporting prospective teachers
and improving their retention in the secondary STEM education workforce are
central foci of the project. Participating prospective teachers will engage in a
range of activities for preparation as effective educators. Project activities
will include STEM internships, field work in high-need school districts with
diverse student populations, interview and job placement assistance, content
area support, preparation for teaching and content area exams, and purposeful
advising and mentoring from education and STEM faculty. The project’s induction
program will provide online modules, a summer workshop, and observation and
coaching from master teachers. These activities have potential to address
teacher turnover in high-need public schools through inclusion of targeted
supports focused on classroom management, culturally responsive teaching
strategies, and state content standards. Project outcomes will respond to the
critical need for well-qualified STEM secondary educators in southeast Virginia
and nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Virginia Wesleyan
University (VWU) is in partnership with the Portsmouth Public Schools (PPS).
Project goals include (1) recruiting and graduating fifteen secondary STEM
educators with teaching licensure in mathematics, chemistry, biology, or earth
science; (2) increasing the diversity of VWU’s STEM and education graduates; and
(3) providing prospective teachers with needed preparation in cultural
competence and culturally responsive pedagogies. Participating prospective
educators will receive up to three years of scholarship support, two years as an
undergraduate while the STEM baccalaureate degree is completed and a third year
of support at the graduate level during completion of secondary teacher
certification. The project will measure the efficacy and impact of recruitment
activities, internships at PPS, and the VWU KEEP Program, a 3-year induction
program designed to reduce teacher turnover, as well as other project
components. Recruitment activities are designed to educate students at PPS,
local community colleges, and VWU about the benefits of STEM teaching and the
opportunities available. Results from the project will be disseminated locally
and to STEM education communities. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.