* 2151329
* Mesoscale Dynamics and Mixed-phase Microphysics in Arctic Cold Air Outbreaks
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Bart Geerts, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 324,151.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to provide observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used in an effort to better
understand the characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic
climate system more broadly, in order to inform climate models and projections.
The project will also help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with
significant relevance to naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal
communities. The broader field effort includes significant opportunities for
students and early-career scientists, international collaboration, and public
outreach. A unique aspect of this award is the mentorship of a student in the
NCAR Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS)
program, which is an undergraduate-to-graduate bridge program designed to
broaden participation of historically underrepresented communities in
atmospheric and related science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the overall CAESAR goals by focusing on the finely resolved
vertical transects of precipitation and kinematic data from airborne Doppler
radars, and in situ cloud and precipitation probes. The scientific objectives of
this award are to: 1) to characterize the vertical structure and circulations of
Marine Boundary Layer (MBL) convection in cold-air outbreaks (CAOs), in order to
elucidate the role of cloud processes in the mesoscale organization of the CAO
cloud regime, and in polar lows; and 2) to document the size and phase
distribution of hydrometeors, in order to elucidate the roles of primary and
secondary ice processes on precipitation generation and cloud dynamics. The team
will be responsible for installing and test-flying the Ka-band Precipitation
Radar (KPR), developing an improved Wyoming Cloud Radar (WCR) hydrometeor
vertical velocity profile dataset, developing the QA/QCâ€™d and processed KPR
reflectivity and Doppler velocity dataset, developing the WCR dual-Doppler
velocity synthesis dataset, providing the retrieval of Ice Water Content (IWC)
and other cloud and precipitation products from WCR and other sensors, and
providing in-situ Liquid Water Content (LWC)/IWC from the Nevzorov
probe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary funding for this project comes from the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program with partial funding from the Arctic
Natural Sciences program. The deployment of observational assets for CAESAR is
being funded by the Facilities for Atmospheric Research and Education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.