* 2151557
* SBIR Phase II:  Electric Blower-Based Emergency Mask Ventilator for Simple Ventilation and Monitoring During Patient Distress and Transport
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Michael Fogarty, MFM LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 982,208.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is simplifying a difficult and dangerous
medical intervention, that is performed millions of times a year in the United
States, with a portable and ergonomic device that enables rescuers to increase
the safety for every patient in an emergency that requires ventilation
assistance. The resulting device will decrease the time necessary to stabilize a
patient during situations where every second is crucial to the patient’s health.
The device will also enable responders to accomplish their jobs more effectively
and safely. The resulting technology seeks not only to increase safety for
patients and increase efficiency of medical responders, but it seeks to do so in
a cost-effective manner. A main focus of this research is to develop a solution
applies in all emergency situations and for every patient requiring rescue
ventilation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will develop and test a device that will calculate and
measure the tidal volume delivered during rescue ventilation and provide instant
feedback to the responder to evaluate the status of the patient’s respiratory
system. The device will deliver breaths using tightly controlled pressure levels
and respiration rates to avoid injuring the patient while also providing
optimized ventilation. It will provide these features in a small, ergonomic,
portable form-factor that can easily be used ambidextrously with one hand,
thereby improving the flexibility and freedom of the responder to deal with
other issues. The development and customer data from Phase I of this project
will be used to fully construct an operational prototype that will be suitable
for FDA validation testing and clearance. By integrating such a high level of
respiratory care into a portable device, the impact of such technology will be
broadened to all patients that require live-saving
ventilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.