* 2151409
* Polyploidization, gene dosage, and the evolution of hormonal phenotypes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Elaine Day, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,475,000.00

Steroid hormones (adrenal glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids) have been
extensively studied in the context of ecology and behavior because of the
integral roles these hormones play in mediating phenotypic changes that are
crucial for survival and reproduction. One of the most striking findings
emerging from such studies is the diversity that exists with respect to
regulation of these hormones. For example, circulating levels of these hormones
and the extent to which elevated glucocorticoids suppress the production of
gonadal steroids are both highly variable across vertebrate species. This study
examines adrenal glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids in a diploid-polyploid
treefrog species complex to understand how polyploidization (duplication of the
genome) contributes to this variation. Polyploidization is expected to drive
modifications in hormonal regulation because associated changes in gene copy
number can introduce novel gene expression patterns and/or increase rates of
mutation that alter the expression of gene products governing hormone levels and
hormonal interactions. The proposed study is relevant to understanding broad
patterns of variation in hormonal regulation because polyploidy is a historical
feature of vertebrates and a major source of variation in gene copy number in
living vertebrates. This research will be integrated with summer research
programs at the sponsoring institution to recruit at least eight high-school
students from groups underserved in STEM fields to participate in the project.
The project also involves training of undergraduate and graduate students and
one post-doctoral associate, who will work closely with one another, high-
school students, and the principal investigators, to cross-foster training and
career development through peer mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circulating
levels of adrenal glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids, and interactions between
these hormones, are remarkably variable across vertebrates, but the genetic
underpinnings giving rise to this diversity are poorly understood. This study
examines endocrine regulation in polyploids to understand how associated changes
in gene copy number (i.e., gene dosage) contribute to this extraordinary
diversity. Polyploidization and associated changes in gene dosage can
dramatically influence the evolution of the phenotype by altering gene
expression patterns and/or by increasing gene mutation rates, but how
polyploidization contributes to modifications in hormonal regulation remains
largely unstudied. The proposed work examines regulation of adrenal
glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids in three natural tetraploid gray treefrog
lineages and their diploid ancestor to understand how polyploidization impacts
endocrine control. By characterizing hormone levels and interactions between the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal/interrenal and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
axes, comparing steroid receptor and binding protein mRNA expression levels and
sequences, and examining steroid binding protein levels and kinetics in diploid
and tetraploid treefrogs, this study will elucidate how changes in gene dosage
through polyploidization impact hormonal regulation. The broader impacts of this
research include diverse student involvement in field and lab-based
interdisciplinary research in endocrinology, genetics, and neuroscience. Rural
high-school students will be recruited to participate in the research during
summers and the impact of their experiences will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.