* 2151067
* Recruiting and Supporting a Diverse Pool of Highly-Qualified STEM Teachers through Communities of Practice and Informal Science Internships
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* LieJune Shiau, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 707,014.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly-qualified and diverse
teachers of Mathematics, Science, and Computer Science. The nation faces
significant disparity in the percentage of STEM teachers who mirror the
percentage of students from diverse backgrounds they serve in their classrooms.
This is important because studies show improved academic performance among
students whose identities are represented in their schools. This project will
implement and evaluate the impact of several features, including 1) early
exposure to teaching experiences in informal and tutoring settings; 2)
integration of prospective STEM teachers into a range of initiatives, and 3)
intensive mentoring from accomplished STEM teachers who serve in schools with
high percentages of students from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. The expected outcome is an increased number of highly-qualified and
diverse secondary STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of Houston-Clear Lake includes partnerships with eight high-need
independent school districts (Channelview, Dickenson, Goose Creek Consolidated,
Hitchcock, Humble, Pasadena, Spring Branch, and Texas City), four community
colleges (San Jacinto College, Alvin Community College, College of the Mainland,
Galveston Community College), and four STEM organizations (Armand Bayou Nature
Center, Children's Environmental Literacy Foundation, Environmental Institute of
Houston, and Lunar and Planetary Institute). Project goals include 1) recruiting
a diverse pool of 24 undergraduate mathematics, science, and computer science
majors to the teaching profession, 2) increasing prospective STEM teachers'
content mastery and pedagogical skills, and 3) enhancing new STEM teachers'
retention and success in the teaching profession. Through lenses of financial
support, academic support and enrichment, and social and career support, the
project will explore two research questions: 1) How does scholarship support
increase motivation to pursue STEM education careers? and 2) How does
scholarship support increase student success? Data from this project, collected
in the course of project evaluation, will increase knowledge of effective and
replicable strategies to attract STEM majors to secondary STEM teaching careers
and to improve effectiveness of secondary STEM teachers. These assessments will
help inform how STEM pedagogy/content-rich experiences impact future STEM
teachers' confidence to teach STEM and their effectiveness as STEM educators in
high-need schools, including those with a significant number of English-language
learners. Through both quantitative and qualitative measures, the internal
evaluation will focus on examination of benefits to program participants,
including academic success measures and future career plans. Both formative and
summative evaluation of the project will use a concurrent mixed-methods
approach, with program progress indicators and a feedback loop to inform program
effectiveness. Results will be disseminated through a wide variety of media,
including conferences, publications, presentations, and a project website. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.