* 2151435
* SBIR Phase I:  Precision Weeder
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Stephen Jens, Harvest Moon Automation
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,665.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will help address the major concerns
of climate change and sustainability of arable lands. The two common methods of
weed control in the agricultural industry, herbicides and soil tillage, have a
negative impact on the environment and soil sustainability. The health of the
microbial environment in the soil is degraded by the use of herbicides and soil
tillage. In addition, soil tillage exposes the organic matter in the soil to
oxidation releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The goal for reducing
the impact of agricultural practices on the climate is to sequester the carbon
in the soil and not release it. At this time, the only option for weed control
of mid to late stage weeds without the use of herbicides or soil tillage is
manual labor, which is more expensive. The successful development and testing of
the precision weeder extraction tool will give the agricultural industry an
automated and cost effective option for addressing weed control while helping to
reduce the carbon emission from the soil and protect soil
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the development of a robotic end
effector extraction tool that can remove weeds without using chemicals or soil
tillage. Advances in machine vision have made it possible to identify the
individual plants in a field and determine which plant is the crop and which one
is the weed. Presently, the two predominant methods used by automated weeders to
kill the weeds is either by a targeted herbicide spray or soil tillage. Both of
these methods negatively impact the environment and soil health. The proposed
precision weeder will extract and dispose of the weeds without damage to the
soil or environment. The economics of weeding will require the device to be
simple, cost effective, reliable, and field hardened. Design and development of
the extraction tool will use a new and novel method for removing the weeds with
advances in design and actuation. The extraction tool will be tested in the
field to determine its feasibility. Successful field trials will convince the
customer and investor that this is a viable option for commercial automated
weeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.