* 2151023
* Preparing Future Secondary STEM Teachers to Integrate Authentic Experiences into their High-Needs Classrooms using Regional Real-World Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Gwendolyn Carroll, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2027
* USD 771,777.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality secondary
preservice Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Mathematics teachers who can
integrate authentic contexts into their classrooms. The goal of authentic
experiences is to model how scientists think about solving a problem. Authentic
experiences provide a real-world context when learning state-adopted content
standards. These experiences engage students in broadening their critical
thinking skills while furthering their understanding of regional real-world STEM
issues they will encounter during their studies and after graduation. For
teachers to have the ability to create and implement authentic experiences for
their students, they will benefit from being engaged in such experiences. This
project will provide two real-world summer experiences where preservice teachers
will work with university faculty, researchers, and mentor teachers to develop
content and pedagogically rich curriculum to implement in their classrooms and
field experiences. Likewise, they will develop assessments to explore the impact
of the curriculum. High impact teaching practices can lead to higher engagement
in STEM and build a strong STEM workforce to address national and global
problems in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Georgia Southern University, a
public research university, includes partnerships with Evans County Charter
School System, Savannah-Chatham Public School System, Georgia Southern
University Botanical Garden and Center for STEM Education, and Skidaway Island
Marine Extension. The project has four fundamental goals. First, the project
aims to provide K-12 internships for six freshman and sophomore STEM majors to
help generate and sustain their interest in teaching. A second goal is to
provide scholarships and to graduate eighteen (18) high-achieving undergraduate
biology, chemistry, mathematics, or physics majors who are certified to teach in
their major areas at the secondary level. A third goal is to place these
graduates in high-need school districts and then provide mentoring and other
induction support for six years following their graduation. Fourth, the project
team will create, implement, study, and maintain an integrated synchronous and
asynchronous reflective teaching community of practice model. In the process,
the investigators will explore how focused seminar experiences, in addition to
program coursework, can impact preservice readiness to successfully complete
clinical practice and first-year teaching. Project outcomes will provide insight
into how a community of practice model can longitudinally impact program
innovation and teacher retention in high-needs schools. In addition, the project
will provide strategies for developing and integrating authentic contexts in
secondary STEM classrooms. The project also has potential to impact how
preservice teacher education programs are structured, how lesson planning
strategies are taught, and how mentoring strategies to help preservice teachers
develop skills and dispositions to work in high-needs schools are designed.
Resources developed and project evaluation findings will be disseminated via
regional, state, national, and international sources, including STEM
conferences, peer-reviewed publications, and various internet applications. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.