* 2151744
* SBIR Phase II:  Multimodal Diagnostic Microsensors for Monitoring Catheter-based Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sascha Lee, SENSEER HEALTH INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,007,142.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to improve detection and enable
prediction of implantable device failure. The first target application is
hydrocephalus, a life-long, incurable disease characterized by a buildup of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain’s ventricles. Hydrocephalus is treatable
by chronically implanting a shunt to divert CSF from the brain into the
abdominal cavity. Around 90,000 shunts are implanted in the US each year.
However, these shunts fail at alarming rates (40% within the 1st year of use),
leading first to nonspecific symptoms such as headaches and blurred vision and
then to permanent brain damage and death without clinical intervention.
Diagnosing shunt failure is difficult and involves a prolonged assessment period
with costly imaging studies and invasive shunt taps. The proposed sensor module
can be integrated with already-commercialized shunt systems and may allow
remote, on-demand measurement of shunt status, therapeutic efficacy, and patient
health, ultimately improving clinical outcomes while reducing overall treatment
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project will focus on the integration of various microsensors to generate a
diagnostic data set for data analytics. This data set will significantly advance
the scientific/medical understanding of hydrocephalus, which is limited today by
the paucity of data on CSF dynamics over time. The system would include several
first-to-market capabilities, including chronic repeated measurement of CSF
dynamics and automated wireless transduction from multiple sensors to a cloud-
based database for analyses and dissemination. The smart shunt system will
enable remote, on-demand monitoring of shunt status, giving physicians the data
necessary for timely diagnosis and prediction of shunt failure. At-home
electronic shunt monitoring will allow physicians to quantitatively and
proactively manage patients’ disease in real-time, and thereby improve their
quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.