* 2151388
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an artificial iIntelligence (AI)-based, internet of things (IoT)-enabled system for structural health monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Graham Sutherland, CANETIA ANALYTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the low-cost assessment of the health of structures or buildings.
Often property-owners and infrastructure managers do not have a true and fair
view of the actual state of their building assets. Building health is assessed
from infrequent inspections or monitoring that is often uneconomical for smaller
structures. This project seeks to develop a technology that is able to discern
structural anomalies to facilitate risk assessment and proper management. This
technology seeks to disrupt the growing market of structural health monitoring,
providing an affordable solution for the assessment of the current state of
buildings and structures with benefit to cost ratios over 10, installation costs
ranging between $10 to $1,000 per control point and Software as a Service (SaaS)
costs ranging between $10 and $500 per month. Once on the market, the technology
may help to avoid dramatic human, environmental, and economic losses caused by
damaged or collapsed buildings and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a proof of
concept solution featuring Internet of Things (IoT) sensors and Artificial
Intelligence (AI) to provide insights into the conditions of buildings remotely
and automatically by analyzing natural structural vibrations. The solution
targets structureal assets that currently are rarely assessed but entail risk of
failure. The technology takes advantages of the fact that each structure has its
own natural vibration signature, which depends on its design and materials,
purpose, and environment. Hidden signals of anomalies, which can be associated
with degradation, flaws, or failures, can be found encoded within this vibration
signature. This novel technology uses AI to provide insight into these signals
and translate them into valuable information about the health of structures. The
project seeks to validate the degree to which anomalous data clusters obtained
from buildings or structures can be associated with damage or defects and may
help to establish the precision and accuracy in anomaly detection. The project
comprises the monitoring of real buildings or structures and the manufacturing
of the necessary IoT devices, the structural analyses through numerical
modelling, laboratory experiments with physical models, and the use of AI to
control hazard risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.