* 2151551
* SBIR Phase II:  A nature-based nearshore floating infrastructure solution for coastal adaptation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Gabriel Cira, EMERALD TUTU INC, THE
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 997,503.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project is to help manage environmental
change in coastal cities. Currently, a gap exists in the coastal infrastructure
community for an effective solution that supports ecological health and
community-based co-benefits over traditional gray infrastructure, such as
seawalls, berms, or structured fill. This project addresses that gap through a
novel full-scale experimental implementation of a reliable and durable network
of floating biomass-based modules for coastal protection. The proposed project
develops a dynamic, detail-oriented scientific approach and technical modeling.
This project will demonstrate how an interconnected, anchored network of
vegetated biomass modules can dampen wave energy, absorb water pollutants, and
create an engaging community space for coastal cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical innovations of the proposed SBIR Phase II project are: (A) a new
material engineering approach for seaworthy floating modules based on biomass
and living plants, anchored in a hexagonal array and interconnected; (B) a full
numerical predictive modeling suite to simulate biogeochemical effects, fluid
dynamic network effects, and hydrodynamic effects of large such networks of
modules; and (C) a fully functional prototype network to study physical behavior
and effects. This project consists of five separate experimental objectives: (1)
extensive unit prototyping, redesign and monitoring to assess manufacturer
material and biological behavior over time, (2) ecological monitoring of
individual unit and network impacts leading to the development of a predictive
biogeochemical model, (3) translation of physical wave tank lab results into a
predictive coastal environment simulation model, (4) hydrodynamic analysis of a
full-scale experimental network prototype, and (5) development of technical
methods for production and deployment at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.