* 2151295
* THETIS: Thetis modeling of the Heterogenous Environment beneath Thwaites Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* David Holland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 12/31/2025
* USD 588,010.00

The current, rapid melting of Thwaites Glacier in Antarctica and its ongoing
contribution to sea-level rise are of broad societal concern for their potential
to impact coastal communities around the globe. Sea-level rise more than three
meters due to the eventual collapse of this glacier and its neighbors could
displace millions. The results of this research will help to project the future
behavior of this critical glacier by combining observations and computer
modeling of the glacier. The results will also advance the ability to estimate
the future sea-level contribution of this glacier and contribute to the broader
effort of the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration to provide better
insight into future societal impacts. In addition, this project will contribute
to the training and career development of a postdoctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a computational model of
the ocean around and beneath the Thwaites Glacier Ice Shelf in Antarctica. The
project will develop Thetis, an unstructured-mesh, discontinuous Galerkin
finite-element ocean model to simulate ocean circulation within the glacier sub-
ice-shelf ocean cavity. The unstructured mesh will allow for increased
resolution in important regions, such as the grounding zone, and regions with
complex coastal geometry, effectively concentrating computational resources
where they are needed most. The unstructured mesh will also allow for smooth
representations of coastal, seabed, and ice-base geometry, an improvement over
the stair-step style boundaries of commonly used structured mesh models. The
model developed for this project will not only be the most detailed model of the
Thwaites Glacier ocean cavity, it will also represent a step forward for
modeling of ocean-ice interaction in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.