* 2151374
* SBIR Phase I:  Airborne Contagion Mapping through Visual Exhale Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Shane Transue, STRIVISION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2024
* USD 255,870.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a method for monitoring and
evaluating exposure risks from airborne viral contaminants to reduce public
health risks from respiratory disease transmission such as COVID-19. The aim of
this project is to advance our understanding of how airborne contagions are
spread within confined interior spaces through exhaling visualization, to
understand transmission and potentially reduce workspace respiratory disease
transmission. By developing an anonymized vision-based network, this work
provides an effective data-driven method for modeling and analysis of how
respiratory behaviors contribute to viral transmission within real-world
workspaces. The proposed technology aims to identify potentially effective
mitigations to reduce communicable disease costs. The resulting platform will
provide real-time analysis and AI-driven feedback for exhaled contagion risks
for populated interior spaces in educational settings and new forms of data-
driven evaluations of open-air exhale behaviors for high-risk populations in
healthcare facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to address the open problem of how to
effectively and quantitatively evaluate transmission risks associated with
airborne viral contaminants as they are spread through respiratory behaviors
within real-world workspaces. While aerosolized viral contaminant transmission
is well-studied, idealized models provide a limited effective analysis of the
complex interplay between turbulent exhale behaviors, indoor traffic patterns,
and environmental factors that contribute to erratic airborne contaminant
transmissions. This project will present a stochastic method for modeling the
potential transmission of airborne viral contaminants through vision-based
analysis of expiratory flows within 3D reconstructed workspaces. Through
spectral filtered thermal imaging, we isolate and track exhaled CO2 within the
3-5um spectral range to model exhale behaviors within 3D mapped point-cloud
models of interior spaces obtained through networked depth cameras. The
innovation in our system is the adoption of the measurements of exhaling flow in
open air into a quantitative metric that evaluates flow and volume per exhale
and models potential airborne contamination spread, providing a quantitative
foundation for measuring and tracking exhale exposure regions. The expected
outcome of this project is a platform for data-driven modeling of multi-subject
respiratory behavioral analysis for potential contagion exposure
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.