* 2151495
* SBIR Phase II:  A Rotary Aeroponic Cultivation Chamber (RACC) for Household Use
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Sven Nelson, HELIPONIX, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 970,993.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovaiton Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to provide a sustainable method to grow healthy produce for
individuals residential consumers, independent of location, climate, or season
of the year. Rotary aeroponic growing systems have the potential to reduce food
waste, potable water consumption, energy consumption, and greenhouse gas
emissions by decentralizing the production of highly perishable produce within a
consumer's home. Growing fresh produce in the home may not require the use of
pesticides or preservatives. Socio-disadvantaged individuals located in food
deserts may benefit from an automated indoor gardening appliance by subscribing
to low-cost organic seed pods that could be delivered and grown directly in
their home, generate long-term returns on investment and lowering instances of
obesity through healthier diets. Studying the effects of light interactions in a
small rotary aeroponic appliance my encourage a new market for high margin seed
pods that could be assembled in mass quantities by disabled individuals.
Converting highly perishable goods into non-perishable, subscription seed pods
may have the potential to reduce food prices and reduce instances of food
insecurity throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rotary aeroponic
cultivation is the method of growing plants on a rotating cylindrical tower that
is affixed vertically within a controlled environmental chamber. The key
innovation in this project is the coupling of rotary aeroponics with tunable
lighting to enhance the growing efficiency of the plants. Phase II research will
examine how the wavelengths and timing of the lighting can impact plant
photomorphogenesis. The tower design is expected to provide a larger surface
area for growing plants in comparison to traditional vertical farming methods,
increasing the number of plants that can be grown in a smaller space with less
power consumption. The goal of this project is to successfully grow a healthy
polyculture assortment of leafy green vegetables in a food safe environment. The
multi-spectral light will be used to learn how to maximize plant yields,
minimize food safety risks, and enhance the taste profiles of different plant
types to ensure the best user experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.