* 2151296
* Modernization of the Oregon State Arthropod Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Maddison, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 05/31/2025
* USD 495,611.00

The Oregon State Arthropod Collection (OSAC) at Oregon State University is the
largest insect collection in the Pacific Northwest (PNW), and houses about three
million specimens. These specimens serve as the basis for insect diversity
research in the PNW and additionally provide valuable information and reference
material for regional stakeholders in forestry, agriculture, and conservation.
This project installs a compactor system and new cabinets for the OSAC, taking
advantage of a full building remodel, and completing OSACâ€™s transition into a
modern, secure repository that will enable fifty years of research, growth, and
active engagement with diverse communities. This project will also rehouse and
improve several portions of the collection, thereby removing substantial
infrastructural constraints impeding curation and research. Students, including
those in groups underrepresented in STEM, will participate in this
reinvigoration of the OSAC through these curatorial projects and through
assisting in the creation of public displays about the collection and its
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will install nineteen movable
carriages, allowing OSAC to be housed in our newly renovated repository room.
Curatorial projects will focus on ground beetles, brush-footed butterflies, true
bugs, and true flies, and will result in their being rehoused in new cabinets,
drawers, and unit trays. The entire collection will be deep-frozen as part of
the project, and a new specimen-handling workflow developed, eradicating pest
challenges that have historically plagued the collection. A series of community
museum events, student curatorial projects, and an undergraduate course, will
engage students and the public with the collection in an innovative story-
telling approach whereby participants are encouraged to explore and be inspired
by the multifaceted information associated with museum
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.