* 2151802
* Robust and Reliable Mathematical Models for Biomolecular Data via Differential Geometry and Graph Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Duc Nguyen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 306,749.00

This project is jointly funded by Division of Mathematical Sciences/Mathematical
Biology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major trend of biological sciences in the 21st
century is their transition from quantitative, phenomenological, and descriptive
to quantitative, analytical, and predictive. Fundamental challenges that hinder
the current understanding of biomolecular structure-function relationships,
which is the central theme of biological sciences, are their tremendous
structural complexity and excessively large datasets. The project will address
grand challenges in understanding the biomolecular structure-function
relationship from massive datasets by introducing new concepts in graph theory
and differential geometry. The results from this project will open a new
direction and foster similar approaches in biological data analysis. The
graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in data analysis,
biological modeling, and algorithm development from this project. In addition,
novel mathematical frameworks will be available in the software packages to
ensure extensive usage by the community of researchers throughout biology,
computer science, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop new spectral graph theory and differential geometry-based approaches to
revolutionize the current practice in biomolecular data analysis and modeling.
First, investigators will introduce multiscale weighted colored algebraic graphs
(spectral graphs) to reduce the structural complexity of biomolecular data.
These methods will be tailored for various biological systems, such as protein
binding to protein, ligand, DNA, and RNA, protein folding stability changes upon
mutation, drug toxicity, solvation, solubility, and partition coefficient.
Secondly, investigators will construct low-dimensional element interactive
manifolds for the first time to properly encode chemical and biological
information. These methods will be carefully integrated with advanced machine
learning or deep learning algorithms to uncover biomolecular structure-function
relationships. Finally, investigators will extensively validate the proposed
methods on a variety of datasets, optimize these mathematical learning
strategies using parallel and GPU architectures, and develop user-friendly
software packages or online servers for researchers who might not have training
in mathematics and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.