* 2151024
* Authentic STEM Laboratory Research Experiences for Prospective Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Keith Sheppard, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2025
* USD 418,109.00

The project aims to serve the national need for highly effective science
teachers by supporting the academic preparation and professional development of
prospective teachers who will convey understanding and excitement of conducting
basic scientific research to their students. STEM research provides the
foundation for many of the advances that are adopted by society. As there is a
continuing and increasing need for a well-prepared STEM work force, students who
learn the fundamental aspects of experimental design and problem solving while
in high school science classes are more likely to consider careers in STEM
fields. The project will engage and mentor prospective science teachers who will
gain first-hand experience utilizing research methods through their work as
members of STEM research laboratory teams. Prospective teachers who have such
authentic research experiences will be better equipped to create lessons that
enhance their students’ appreciation for the value of basic research and will
encourage their students to view employment in a STEM field as a viable career
choice. Complementing the research, prospective teachers will participate in
professional development activities to gain pedagogical content knowledge and to
learn best practices for engaging secondary school students in authentic
research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Stony Brook
University (SBU) includes partnerships with STEM research faculty at both SBU
and Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) and with several school districts on
Long Island, especially those that already house STEM research programs for
their students. The three-year project will provide twenty-four (24) future
secondary STEM teachers, 8 per year, with summer science laboratory research
experiences at SBU and BNL. The project has four underlying goals. The first
goal is for each of these future teachers to be engaged in an authentic research
experience as a member of a STEM research laboratory team. Second is to
incorporate a professional development program designed to furnish these
perspective STEM teachers with the knowledge base to incorporate research
experiences for students in their future classrooms. A corollary to this goal is
to build cohorts of science teachers who will bring knowledge of authentic
research into their secondary schools. Third is to evaluate the impact of
project components on the project participants' maturating and preparation for
conducting authentic research and bringing experiences to the classroom. Fourth
is to disseminate project outcomes to other faculty, departments, and
institutions with an interest in and passion for improving and enhancing STEM
pre-service teacher preparation, especially via research experiences. Project
evaluation is designed to provide useful insights into how the skills,
knowledge, and cohort interactions that prospective science teachers gain
through the project's research and professional development activities will
influence their self-efficacy as well as their teaching. Findings will be
disseminated through presentations at local, regional, and national meetings
with the goal of informing science teacher educators about the value of
including authentic STEM research experiences in science teacher preparation
programs. This Noyce Research Experiences for Pre-Service Teachers project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teacher to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.