* 2151672
* SBIR Phase I:  A platform for simulating the combined effect of human behavior and environment on airborne infectious spread (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Adam Ryason, INTELLIGENT MEDICINE INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2023
* USD 275,842.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to minimize infection by contagious diseases,
such as COVID-19. This project advances a cloud-based platform for simulating
particle flow in heavily populated, dynamic environments. It will enable
facility managers and health/ safety stakeholders to simulate viral particle
dispersion in indoor environments for design and mitigation procedures
(disinfection, evacuation, etc.). This technology can play a role in mitigating
the ongoing effects of the current COVID-19 pandemic and better prepare
facilities for the next pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project supports facility planning and
response of infectious disease outbreaks. The project advances a hybrid
computational approach to utilizing multi-scale fluid analysis for faster-than-
real-time multimodal simulation. The research objectives are to: (1) create a
simulation platform that can parallelize equations and perform at near real-time
or real-time, which will provide a means to simulate multimodal interactions in
real buildings, such as contamination spread in fluid flow, when analyzed with
human behavior and mobility; (2) characterize and validate the results of the
simulator by measuring particle spread in multiple real building scenarios. It
is anticipated that the simulation results of particle trajectory and surface
contamination will be at least as accurate as state-of-the-art high-fidelity
computational fluid dynamic techniques, but delivered in real time. This project
will provide an environment and behavior-specific simulation essential for
optimizing airflow and facility controls to reducing airborne infectious
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.