* 2151986
* Research Immersions and Professional Development for Future Mathematics and Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Mark Fink, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,825.00

The project aims to serve the national need for highly effective secondary
mathematics and science teachers by supporting the academic preparation and
professional development of prospective teachers. The project will engage high-
performing prospective teachers in significant disciplinary research through a
residential summer program. Complementing the faculty-mentored research,
prospective teachers will participate in professional development activities
with expert educators to learn best practices for engaging secondary school
students in authentic research experiences. These prospective teachers will
engage with faculty members from across the STEM disciplines. Each prospective
teacher will develop a project within a diverse portfolio of opportunities
including molecular electronics, convex and discrete geometry, carbon cycling in
watersheds, and phenological changes in invasive plant species. The project has
an underlying objective of graduating, over a period of two years, ten
prospective secondary STEM teachers who have had an intensive research
experience and are prepared to facilitate research activities in the K-12
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Longwood University will focus on
six primary project goals, namely to: (1) recruit ten high-performing STEM
majors - from biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics - who are actively
working toward a STEM baccalaureate degree and teaching licensure; (2) pair them
with faculty mentors for a summer research experience; (3) engage them in
professional development with a multidisciplinary cohort of researchers from
across the STEM disciplines; (4) deepen their professional preparation through
discussions and workshops focused on integrating research in the K-12 context;
(5) evaluate the impact of project activities on the pre-service teachers; and
(6) disseminate findings and outcomes, especially to other individuals and
institutions interested in using authentic discipline research experiences as a
tool to help enhance and improve pre-service STEM teacher preparation. Project
evaluation will focus on studying the impact on the participants of the research
experiences and of engagement in the professional development program. In
accordance with this, it will include employing previously vetted evaluation
instruments to assess the prospective teachers’ learning outcomes in
communication, autonomy, intellectual growth and development, and pedagogical
and disciplinary knowledge. In addition to the knowledge generated through the
mentored research projects, findings will include insights to inform future
efforts to engage prospective teachers in rigorous disciplinary research and a
community of practice focused on pedagogical best practices. Project results
will be disseminated at the local, regional, and National levels with attention
being given to promoting a model for pre-service teacher experiences and
preparation. This Noyce Research Experiences for Pre-service Teachers project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need districts. It also supports research on
the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.