* 2151141
* Paso del Norte Texas Computer Science Teaching Fellows
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Sanga Kim, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,184,729.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality computer
science (CS) teachers. With technology present in all aspects of daily life, one
of the fastest growing occupations is computer and information technology. In
this project, CS graduates will be recruited as Teaching Fellows (TFs) who will
enter a one-year graduate program in education to receive a Masterâ€™s degree and
teacher certification. It is anticipated the TFs will possess the knowledge and
skills to teach high quality CS principles while at the same time inspiring
secondary students, especially Hispanics, to explore a future in computer and
information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at The University of
Texas at El Paso (UTEP) includes partnerships with the El Paso Independent
School District (EPISD) and CSforAll, a national nonprofit organization
supporting K-12 CS education. The project goal is to increase the number of CS
teachers, especially those who are Hispanic, in the Paso del Norte region of Far
West Texas on the U.S/Mexico border. To meet this goal, 10 individuals holding
at least a baccalaureate degree in CS will receive financial support for the
Master's program and will commit to a minimum of four years of teaching in a
high-need district. During this time, each Fellow will receive a salary
supplement. UTEP has developed an authentic partnership with EPISD through
adoption of an innovative model through the University-School Partnerships for
the Renewal of Educator Preparation, or US PREP. The model incorporates a newly
developed residency program and involves the use of data to support continuous
improvement efforts. External evaluation will measure the effectiveness of the
TFs as teachers and potential teacher leaders. This Track 2: Teaching
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.