* 2151015
* Collaborative Research: Volatile Sources and Sinks across the Mariana Forearc
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Karen Lloyd, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,043.00

Volatile elements such as helium (He), carbon (C), and nitrogen (N) are
exchanged between Earth’s surface (atmosphere and oceans) and interior (crust
and mantle) at volcanic arcs. When an oceanic tectonic plate sinks, or subducts,
underneath a continental plate, forming a volcanic arc, these volatiles
delivered by the oceanic plate are released in volcanos and seeps across the
entire arc system. The efficiency of this transfer controls the composition of
Earth’s mantle, atmospheric evolution, and possibly, the global distribution of
microscopic life. Despite the importance of global-scale deep volatile cycles,
volatile fluxes have not been extensively studied in submarine volcanic
environments, as these regions are notoriously difficult to access. Subseafloor
boreholes were recently installed in four active serpentinite mud volcanoes in
the Southern Mariana forearc. These boreholes offer a unique opportunity to
sample large volumes of deeply sourced volatile-laden fluids. This project will
sample the boreholes for He, C, and N isotopes, as well as microbiology, to
determine how deep volatile cycling is controlled by complex interactions
between geochemical and biological processes in the Mariana forearc. These data
will enable calculation of forearc volatile fluxes, quantifying biological and
geochemical reactions by comparing fluxes of reactive volatiles (C, N) with
inert indicators of mantle contributions (e.g., He) and the relative activity
levels of known microbial metabolic pathways across the Mariana forearc. Results
will be shared through peer-reviewed publications. In addition, a series of four
classroom lectures aimed at a high-school level audience will be developed that
leverages data and experiences from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volatile elements are
exchanged between Earth’s exterior (atmosphere and oceans) and interior (crust
and mantle) at convergent margins. Volatiles are input via subduction and
released in volcanos and seeps across the entire arc system. The efficiency of
this transfer controls mantle heterogeneities, Earth’s redox conditions,
atmospheric evolution, and possibly, the global distribution of microscopic
life. Despite the importance of global-scale deep volatile cycles, volatile
fluxes have not been extensively studied in submarine volcanic forearcs, as
these regions are notoriously difficult to access. Recently emplaced boreholes
provide a unique opportunity to sample large volumes of deeply-sourced pristine
volatile-laden fluids across a wide expanse of the submarine Mariana forearc.
However, volatile outfluxes may be complicated by the fact that shallow forearc
temperatures are amenable to life, and thus some of these deeply derived (i.e.,
from the subducting slab and/or mantle) volatiles (e.g., CO2, CH4, NH4+) may be
altered by subsurface microbes. This project will determine forearc volatile
fluxes, quantifying biological and geochemical reactions by comparing fluxes of
reactive volatiles (C, N) with inert indicators of mantle contributions (e.g.,
He) and the relative activity levels of known microbial metabolic pathways
across a transect of the Mariana forearc. This project will leverage previously
emplaced boreholes that have never been sampled for He, C, and N isotopes, or
microbiology, to determine how volatile recycling efficiency is controlled by
complex interactions between geochemical and biological processes in the Mariana
forearc. Cased boreholes were recently installed in four active serpentinite mud
volcanoes in the Southern Mariana forearc. Together, these four boreholes form a
trench-parallel transect, enabling access to deep fluids from active
serpentinite mud volcanoes across the Mariana forearc. This project will gather
geochemical and biological data from these boreholes, enabling a systematic
assessment of forearc volatile fluxes and the key processes (e.g., calcite
precipitation, heterotrophy, autotrophy, respiration) mediating those fluxes.
This will determine volatile (He, C and N) fluxes between Earth reservoirs and
quantify their sources (slab, mantle wedge, crust) and sinks (geochemical and
biological). Boreholes are located at different distances from the trench and
the emanating fluids have varying pH and temperatures, so the dominant
biological and geochemical processes at each borehole are expected to vary. In
addition to training two PhD students and undergraduate students, the PIs have a
broad outreach plan that incorporates media outlets and collaborations with
science museums, underrepresented high schools, and undergraduate researchers.
Specifically, the PIs will develop a series of four classroom lectures and
activities aimed at a high-school level audience that leverages data and
experiences from this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.