* 2151651
* EAGER: CAS-Climate: AI-driven Probabilistic Technique, Quantile Regression based Artificial Neural Network Model, for Bias Correction and Downscaling of CMIP6 Projections
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Brian Reich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 299,543.00

Global Climate Models (GCMs) are typically used to develop climate projections
to predict extreme events (e.g., droughts, floods). Spatial resolution of GCM
projections has improved due to increasing computational power, but is still
inadequate for watershed-scale applications where extreme event prediction is
needed to enable planning. The research undertaken in this project will develop
an AI-based technique to improve hydroclimatic projections at the watershed
scale. AI techniques are quite powerful in modeling global climate data and
could develop finer spatial and temporal future climatic projections. The
potential impact is improved planning for, and resilience to, extreme events at
the watershed scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop an AI-based
probabilistic approach that uses a Quantile Regression based Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) (QR-AI) model for bias-corrected and statistically downscaled
(BCSD) Coupled Model Intercomparison Projects (CMIP6) projections. Specifically,
the research will develop three BCSD data products of CMIP6 projections over the
continental U.S. (CONUS): 1) Historical simulations (1950-2014) of precipitation
and temperature of GCMs; 2) Near-term (30 year) hindcasts of precipitation and
temperature from relevant GCMs and 3) Near-term (30 year) projections of
precipitation and temperature for four different Shared Socioeconomic Pathways,
which are represented by CO2 emission and mitigation scenarios. Developing BCSD
of both hindcasts and historical projections will provide an opportunity to
validate the QR-AI methodology by comparing the uncertainty in the estimated
climate variables with the observed marginal density of precipitation and
temperature over the CONUS. The BCSD CMIP6 products on precipitation and
temperature will be developed using the AI method for the entire CONUS and
disseminated through the project website. BCSD data will also be archived in
figshare and github for dissemination. Additionally, the investigators will work
with focused user groups, such as reservoir management and social media, for
active dissemination of the developed BCSD products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.