* 2151387
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing NLP-based Platform Technology for Phage-Host Interaction Predictions
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Sofia Sigal-Passeck, UNIPHAGE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve agricultural operations with respect to infection.
Antibiotic resistance in crops is increasing. One of the most promising
alternatives to antibiotics is bacteriophages, also known as phages. Phages are
safe bacterial viruses already used on a small commercial scale in the United
States. One major bottleneck for phage use in a larger number of diseases is the
difficulty involved in selecting phages that will be effective against the
target pathogen. This project addresses this challenge by aiming to develop a
state-of-the-art computational approach to select phages against a range of
diseases in a rapid and efficient manner. This technology will allow for
widespread phage use as a safer and more efficient substitution for antibiotics.
Additionally, the final deliverable of this project includes developing the
first-ever phage-based, sustainable, and cost-effective antimicrobial solution
against Huanglongbing, a devastating and completely incurable bacterial disease
of citruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to remove a key
bottleneck in the bacteriophage field by building the first-ever commercially
viable platform technology to computationally predict phage-host interactions.
Specifically, it is currently difficult and time-consuming to select
bacteriophages against target pathogens as this manual process is inefficient.
Moreover, phages cannot be isolated against uncultivable bacteria. The proposed
project aims to use cutting-edge Natural Language Processing for bacteriophage
use against an increasing number of pathogens. This proposal’s first objective
is to significantly improve the already built models and show that their
predictions hold in vitro using the gold-standard plaque assay experiments. This
proposal’s second objective is to use this platform technology and wet-lab
methods to produce and test the first-ever antibacterial (phage-based) solution
that works against the currently incurable Huanglongbing disease caused by an
uncultivable pathogen. This project will further help determine if Transformer-
based models can excel at complex genome understanding tasks and produce in-
vitro-viable viral-host interaction predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.