* 2151934
* Topological and Geometric Modeling and Computation of Structures and Functions in Single-Cell Omics Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zixuan Cang, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 217,128.00

Different cells interact to maintain the functions of biological tissues. Recent
single-cell technologies profile a tissue with unprecedented resolution and
scale, for example, expression levels of thousands of genes in thousands of
individual cells. Extracting biological insights from this data relies on
structural representations, such as how to describe similarities between cells
and what global shape the data presents. While numerous methods have been
developed to perform various analysis tasks, this initial step of representing
the structure of data is understudied. This project will develop new topological
and geometric methods, a formal language of describing shapes, to investigate
and characterize the structure of single-cell data. The structural
characterizations will be linked to cell functions to reveal structure-function
relationships. These methods will be integrated into the large collection of
existing analysis tools for single-cell data to improve the reliability and
robustness of the biological conclusions and predictions. Application of these
tools will help to identify cells carrying critical functions and the properties
of these cells. The methods will be implemented as publicly available open-
source software packages. The research will promote interdisciplinary
collaborations between biologists and mathematicians with an interest in
advancing the structure-function relationship in single-cell data. This project
will also provide training for students and underrepresented groups at the
interface of advanced mathematics and modern biological data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous single-cell data analysis tools rely on
structural representations with reduced dimensions, and the observations could
be sensitive to the low-dimensional representation used. A systematic
exploration of structural representations is thus needed to control the
reliability and interpretability of downstream analysis results. Methods based
on applied topology and geometry will be developed to extract low-dimensional
structural characteristics from the high-dimensional single-cell omics data by
scanning a wide range of scales and parameters. Methods will be developed to
adapt to the application of single-cell omics data analysis, for example, local
topological fingerprints and topology-guided optimal transport. An atlas of
structural representations for a single-cell dataset with well-defined metrics
quantifying the difference between structures will be assembled to provide a
systematic way of representing the structures of single-cell omics data. A
generally applicable pipeline of applying downstream analysis tools upon this
structure atlas will be introduced and evaluated in various application cases.
The systematic structural analysis method will be combined with machine learning
to further address two important questions: establishment of structure-function
relationships in single-cell datasets, such as identifying transition cells
based on their local structures in the dataset, and integration of single-cell
multi-omics datasets based on topological and geometric characterizations,
especially for datasets without shared features. Efficient, stable, and accurate
numerical methods and algorithms will be developed for these mathematical
questions motivated by biological applications. The tools will be implemented to
be easily usable by both computational and experimental
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.