* 2151757
* SBIR Phase I:  Environmentally Sustainable Manufacturing Technology for Fabrication of Radio Frequency (RF) Filter Products
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Michael Ghadaksaz, DYNAMAC MICROWAVE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2023
* USD 254,214.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to develop a radio frequency (RF) network miniaturization technology and
manufacturing methodologies to dramatically reduce the size, weight, and cost of
RF filters. This research will develop special filters for a broad range of
wireless applications, including smartphones and their infrastructure, WiFi
devices, broadcast systems, and satellite systems. The proposed technology may
reduce landfill contributions by over 300 tons, scrap metal by 2200 tons, and
general metal consumption by 4500 tons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project seeks to demonstrate the feasibility of the worldâ€™s first RF filter
network miniaturization in air using an new network fractionalization algorithm
via simulation and prototype fabrication. The fractionalization algorithm
overcomes the high challenging wavelength barrier to RF filter miniaturization
in air for development of miniature multilayer air filter structures. This
project will develop: (1) methods of manufacture for single resonator circuit
layer assemblies, the main building blocks for construction of multilayer air
filter structures; (2) manufacturing methodologies for structures comprising
multiple single resonator circuit layer assemblies to fabricate multi-resonator
miniature multilayer air filter prototypes to demonstrate performance and key
attributes of the multilayer air filter technology at various frequencies and
power levels. The prototypes will be used to demonstrate the scalability,
repeatability, and reproducibility of the miniature multilayer air filters for
mass volume production, as well as to establish production unit cost
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.