* 2151807
* Collaborative Research: Multiparametric Analyses of Volcanic Aerosols and the Effects on Lightning Generation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Kelley Murphy, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 03/31/2025
* USD 300,675.00

This project will determine the role of volcanic ash particles from explosive
eruptions and hydrometeor (ice, water, hail, etc.) concentrations on lightning
generation. Earth observations, laboratory measurements, and model simulations
will be used to track the size and abundance of these particles at the onset of
eruption and throughout their transport in the atmosphere to identify
relationships with lightning characteristics over time. This project will
determine the value of the Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM), onboard the
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite series (GOES-16 and -17), for
tracking and characterizing volcanic lightning during eruptions, as this tool
has been seldom used despite its ability to continuously monitor numerous active
volcanoes in the Western Hemisphere, including the U.S.A. This project will
launch the careers of several science students at two different Alabama
universities and aid scientists at volcano observatories in using GOES satellite
data to better assess volcanic hazards following eruptions. Additionally,
project results will become part of the lightning exhibit at the Alabama Museum
of Natural History in Tuscaloosa, which explains the effects of lightning on
materials. Museum staff will develop grade school teaching materials focused on
lightning and will freely distribute these materials on their website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first analysis of volcanic lightning using the GLM,
lightning jumps were identified during the 2018 explosive eruption of Volcan
Fuego in Guatemala. Since the 2018 eruption of Fuego, several other volcanoes
have erupted and produced lightning within the GOES field of view. To fully
diagnose the impact of volcanic emissions on aerosol-cloud microphysical
processes and consequently, lightning production, observations, laboratory
measurements, and model results will be synthesized, using the following inter-
related steps. 1) Identify explosive eruptions that produce lightning within the
GOES field of view. 2) Acquire and analyze satellite retrievals of ash plume
characteristics (i.e., ash/hydrometeor concentration, grain size) coincident
with lightning occurrence. 3) Analyze lightning occurrence from both GLM and
ground-based sensors to obtain the most complete picture of lightning activity
over the timescale of eruption and specific characteristics (i.e., size, energy,
current) of discharge events. 4) Determine if a quantifiable relationship exists
between data collected during the second and third steps. 5) Measure ash sample
properties in the laboratory to confirm/refute satellite retrievals and
calculate variables for input into models. 6) Conduct, revise, and test various
model simulations to constrain the explosive eruption source parameters that
produce the observed data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.