* 2151034
* Collaborative Research: From Molecules to Communities: How Levels of Selection Integrate to Tame Selfish Elements
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Helen Murphy, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 358,777.00

Genes code for an extraordinary diversity of life on earth but in some
circumstances, proteins called prions can also replicate across generations.
They cause various diseases such as mad cow disease and chronic wasting disease
but also sometimes provide beneficial traits. This suggests that some prions
have been tamed by their hosts, and even provide a value. In contrast to genes,
we understand very little about how evolution acts on prions. This proposal will
be the first direct investigation of how natural selection acts on prions. In
addition, the work will provide a characterization of the distribution of prion
variants in the global yeast population. The project provides broad societal
impact through increased understanding of prions which are an important class of
emerging disease agents. This information will also allow a better understanding
of viral evolution. Further broader impacts arise through the training of
numerous undergraduate and graduate scientists, and through educational and
outreach activities to the broader public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
takes advantage of the fact that prions can be propagated both inside of cells
and in a cell-free environment. Comparing the outcomes of evolution in each of
these conditions will allow an examination of how prions are tamed by cells. The
proposed research will lead to new insights into how evolution has impacted the
origin and maintenance of prion proteins, spanning from the molecular scale to
biological communities. The project will focus on one prion, termed [GAR+] and
its evolution with and without a yeast host. Expected outcomes include a robust
characterization of the multiple selective pressures that influence prion
evolution including a comprehensive comparisons of the biological effects of
prions evolved within a host or in a cell-free environment. To achieve this the
study will employ a replicated experimental evolution of prions in yeast and in
cell free chemical environments and will compare the changes between these two
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.