* 2151738
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel multianalyte microsensor platform for continuous wireless monitoring applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Muhammad Mujeeb-U-Rahman, Integrated Medical Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of an innovative and user-
friendly continuous wireless sensing platform for simultaneously monitoring
multiple analytes and physiological parameters. The wireless sensor market is
worth &gt; $13 Billion and is growing 10% annually. There is an under-
penetration in the market due to the unmet need of an easy-to-use sensing
platform that can provide users with quantitative and continuous data about
their studies in real-time as compared to discrete sampling techniques used
currently. This is because the current continuous sensors are either wired or
bulky (discrete wireless), are disruptive to the studies, require special
insertion procedures (e.g., complex surgeries for animal research), and do not
easily integrate with the experimental workflow. Given our experience in
wireless sensor development for diabetes, many researchers have asked us to
develop a platform technology for biochemical sensing to enable research in
materials science, pharmaceutical, in vitro diagnostics, protein engineering,
and disease pathways. Such a platform can revolutionize biomedical researchers
with a tool to study new drugs, cell cultures, artificially grown organs,
bioinspired materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project is intended to develop a unique monolithic
semiconductor platform capable of wirelessly monitoring multiple biochemical and
physiological markers simultaneously at a sub-mm3 footprint. This enables the
device to be used in a variety of applications where conventional larger sensors
can’t be used, including test tubes, multi-well plates, and cell cultures.
Moreover, the platform can be injected under the skin using a needle-based
insertion device, eliminating complicated surgical procedures currently used.
The wireless miniature design results in a stable sensor-environment interface
as opposed to the current wired and the bulky wireless devices that suffer from
constant variation in response due to constant interface irritation.
Furthermore, it’s extremely small size minimizes foreign body response, which is
proportional to device size, and implantation injury, and hence minimizes
calibration frequency. Micro/nano design is used to fabricate patterned
electrodes on the top layer of a Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) to form a fully integrated system
without the need for discrete packaging used in current products. This enhances
manufacturability and reduces unit cost in volume production. After successful
feasibility in this Phase-I, we will optimize the system and develop a
manufacturing plan to commercialize it in Phase-II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.