* 2151286
* SBIR Phase I:  Low latency and ultra high quality video streaming platform for highly immersive virtual reality (VR) experiences
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Sebasti√°n Amengual, YERBA BUENA VR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,511.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to address the technological challenges that limit the wide adoption
of virtual and augmented reality in the United States. The proposed solution may
enable or improve telemedicine applications, mental health and wellness social
support programs, realistic training simulations for defense personnel,
workforce development training and science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) teaching solutions, and other applications which benefit from
real-time immersive experiences. Current virtual reality (VR) technology uses
low-quality video in order to deliver real-time interactions or uses realistic
high-quality video that cannot simulate real-time interactions due to high-
latency issues. High quality video delivered with low latency (less than 1
second) is the goal of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a virtual reality,
image rendering, streaming solution that can manage 360-degree video with ultra-
high quality at low latencies. The technical challenges are to overcome the
trade-off between video quality and streaming latency. High-quality VR video,
such as 360-degree crisp video, would have high latency, rendering the images
very slowly. In contrast, low-quality video has low-latency (below 1 second),
which means that the images can be rendered much faster. Both cases limit the
immersive nature and feel of virtual reality technology because the video
quality is insufficient and/or the latency makes it impossible for live virtual
interaction. This SBIR project will include architecture design, low latency
product developmental research, and prototype testing and validation. The
commercialized product may enable companies to offer a fully immersive VR
experience leading to more realistic training simulations, educational
demonstrations, and real-time, social interactions for health and mental well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.