* 2151367
* STTR Phase I: A Diagnostic Device to Measure Dental Implant Stability
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,11/30/2023
* I. Y. (Steve) Shen, QUIVER DENTAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 11/30/2023
* USD 254,360.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I aims to develop a novel
method for monitoring dental implant stability. The system aims to provide a low
cost temporary method for dentists to quantitatively assess the 27 million
dental implants globally placed per year. These implants currently have a 10-15%
failure rate. The proposed system provides mechanical feedback on the bond
stability between the implant and the surrounding bone that serves as a
foundation for the crown and receives bite loads. This bond stability provides
direct, actionable information that may be superior to current subjective
evaluations used by dentists including feel with their hands, X-Ray, or
torqueing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to complete a proof of concept
demonstration of a reliable and accurate device to measure the stability of
dental implants using vibrational technology. The proposed system seeks to
provide controlled forces to the implant in order to sense the degree of motion
and stability. This new technology has two critical concepts: the first is to
quantify implant stability via angular stiffness at the gum line of the implant
bone (i.e., the ability against rotation), and the second is the development of
a clip-on sensor unit and a mechanics-based model to calculate implant
stability. This project seeks to develop a prototype with a design validated on
in vitro mandible models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.