* 2151820
* Understanding Invasion and Disease Ecology and Evolution through Computational Data Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Travis Marsico, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,999,484.00

The living world is a complex thicket of connections among organisms. As humans
continue to modify Earth’s biota, novel species interactions — including
invasive species and emergent diseases — will become more commonplace. Effective
responses to diseases and damaging species hinge on understanding their causes
and impacts. Since the scale of novel interactions ranges from molecules to
communities and beyond, accurately predicting the outcomes of newly interacting
organisms will increasingly require collaborations and integrated tools shared
among biologists, ecologists, computer scientists, and data scientists. This NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) project will bridge the fields of invasion biology,
disease ecology, and computer science to discover the causes and consequences of
novel interactions at multiple levels of biological organization. The project,
"Understanding Invasion and Disease Ecology and Evolution through Computational
Data Education (UandI-DEECoDE)," will provide its trainees with an
interdisciplinary, experiential education; a collaborative and inclusive working
environment; research and travel support; and professional skills development
for a variety of scientific careers. The traineeship anticipates preparing
seventy (70) MS and Ph.D. students, including 16 funded trainees from doctoral
programs in Environmental Sciences and Molecular Biosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research and training program of
study will provide students with the computational knowledge and skills
necessary to maximize the power and scalability of predicting outcomes of
context-dependent novel interactions. It will also provide the biological
knowledge necessary to develop innovative and timely solutions to counter
emergent diseases and invasive species. Furthermore, trainees will explore the
conceptual temporal framework of species interactions (from initial contact to
persistence to expansion) to motivate new algorithms for evolutionary
computation. Trainees will be immersed in a program that emphasizes
communication, teamwork, ethics, mentorship, cross-cultural competency, and
leadership throughout their graduate studies. The activities will encompass
specific interdisciplinary and project-based coursework, professional
development institutes, data science bootcamps, mentorship networks, research
pods, and the opportunity to conduct science abroad. Direct local impacts will
include long-lasting institutional improvements to graduate student life by
sustaining more Ph.D. lines and building a solid and inclusive graduate student
culture. Scientific literacy, appreciation, and engagement deficits in Northeast
Arkansas will be addressed by infusing UandI-DEECoDE into the local community
through targeted outreach activities. Beyond the region, UandI-DEECoDE will
address the critical roles of global awareness, information systems, and
predictive modeling to tackle the growing issues regarding invasive species and
diseases. Targeted recruitment efforts, accessible research and training
support, and intentional mentorship will increase participation and scientific
representation of historically marginalized groups in STEM. UandI-DEECoDE will
contribute scientists to the knowledge-based workforce in the Arkansas Delta,
one of the most disadvantaged regions in the United States and beyond. The focus
of UandI-DEECoDE at the intersection of disease ecology, invasion biology, and
data science makes this program the first of its kind to explicitly address the
need to converge these fields to enhance mechanistic understanding of ecology
and evolution among newly interacting species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.