* 2151036
* Science and Mathematics Teachers Initiative Phase 3: Continuing to Improve Teacher Preparation and Retention through Real-World STEM Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Bert Ely, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,187,578.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing and retaining high-
quality science and mathematics teachers. Teachers need to be equipped to teach
a diverse population of students for an evolving world, especially in STEM. To
further address this need, Science and Mathematics Teachers Initiative Phase 3
(SMTI P3) will partner with a local technical college to provide Scholars with
hands-on experiences in their state-of-the-art STEM labs designed to prepare
STEM professionals. The project aims to graduate 32 new science and mathematics
emerging teacher leaders over five years. Recruitment will include students
majoring in mathematics, statistics, biological sciences, chemistry, and
physics. This project, which builds upon previously successful Noyce projects at
the University of South Carolina, intends to develop Scholars' ability to
effectively teach a diverse student population through innovative coursework,
research-based interactive seminars, and immersive project-based learning
experiences with the project's partnership school districts. Through the
engagement of the Scholars in real-world STEM experiences, the project aims to
support practicing teachers in authentic STEM classroom instruction. This
effective science and mathematics instruction will help to inspire the next
generation of STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of South Carolina includes partnerships with Richland 1 School
District, Richland 2 School District, Lexington 2 School District, and Midlands
Technical College. Project goals include preparing culturally competent science
and mathematics teachers who implement lessons with real-world connections. The
project will support STEM undergraduates and STEM post-baccalaureates. SMTI P3
is grounded in a four-part conceptual framework that addresses real-world STEM,
STEM content knowledge, classroom experiences, and cultural competence. The
project will investigate the impact of real-world STEM experiences on graduates'
instructional practices. It also will continue a focus on investigating factors
that impact mathematics and science teacher retention in high-need schools. The
project's intellectual merit includes using research-based experience from its
past projects to capitalize on partnerships with a technical college and high-
needs districts to recruit, prepare, and ensure success during induction years
for secondary science and mathematics teachers. Broader impacts include
empirical evidence validated through the project evaluation, which may result in
improved teacher education and retention for secondary science and mathematics
teachers for diverse populations. Findings will be disseminated through local
and national conferences as well as published in top-tier practitioner and
research journals to ensure benefits of the project to the STEM education
community. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.