* 2151970
* Forced Displacement and Community Resilience: Housing Insecurity under COVID-19 in Inland Southern California
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Qingfang Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 336,050.00

The unique nature of the COVID-19 pandemic created a disaster situation that
highlights the importance of stable housing, particularly as recent evidence
suggests that eviction increased the risk of COVID-19 infection and mortality.
This study will improve knowledge of processes and consequences of evictions
before and after the COVID-19 pandemic in Inland Southern California. The first
goal is to analyze the demographic and socioeconomic profile of renters who
recently experienced an eviction, as well as the relocation process and outcome.
The second goal is to analyze how community resilience and neighborhood change,
such as neighborhoods that are gentrifying or becoming more impoverished, are
tied to outcomes for renters. The third goal is to evaluate whether and how
these outcomes are changed by the pandemic. This study will advance our
understanding of involuntary residential choices under an external shock like a
pandemic. It contributes to resilience scholarship and helps us understand why
the root cause of socioeconomic disadvantage is the primary source of
vulnerability under disastrous events, and how housing security interacts with
community resilience. As eviction is linked to social, economic, and health
disparities, and urban poverty, effective eviction-prevention initiatives could
go a long way toward addressing these enduring problems. This study provides
evidence for policy interventions designed to address eviction and stem its
consequences. It will also provide significant implications for practice and
policy in housing markets and social welfare to alleviate social and spatial
divides by race, ethnicity, and class that have been exacerbated by the pandemic
disruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates formal and informal
eviction and neighborhood change before and after the COVID-19 pandemic in
Inland Southern California using a multiscalar, comparative, and mixed-methods
framework. Using both public and restrictive datasets, this study will model the
prevalence of eviction and the threat of it at both the household and
neighborhood levels. As residential mobility shapes the future life course of
evicted households and neighborhood dynamics, the team will model the
residential choice of evicted renters and neighborhood dynamics. Further, the
project conducts in-depth interviews with tenants, landlords, real estate agents
and housing developers, non-profit organizations, and government officials to
examine the pathways through which individual characteristics, neighborhood
environment, and institutional forces contribute to eviction. The multiscalar,
mixed-methods and comparative framework will advance knowledge on the process of
eviction at the household level, as well as neighborhood dynamics, policy
interventions, power relations, and the coping process of local communities
during a pandemic-like disruption. Findings from this study will not only
directly benefit policymaking and practice in this region, but also contribute
to knowledge in the field for national audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.