* 2151168
* SBIR Phase I:  Faecalibacterium prausnitzii supernatant oral formulations to improve insulin sensitivity and treat prediabetes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Simon McManus, BACTANA CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to prevent and treat prediabetes and type 2
diabetes. More than 1 in 3 American adults have prediabetes or type 2 diabetes
with associated healthcare costs exceeding $327 billion. Current therapies often
present adverse effects or are ineffective in some patients. The top five human
diabetes drugs alone are expected to cost $23 billion annually by 2024. This
project advances a novel diabetic treatment composed of a postbiotic mixture
from beneficial gut bacteria. This will improve clinical outcomes for
prediabetic patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the efficacy and elucidate the
mechanism of a potential microbiome-based treatment toward an oral treatment
that effectively reduces diabetes-associated markers. The three technical
objectives are to: 1) evaluate the technology and demonstrate equivalent or
superior performance compared to existing antidiabetic drugs, 2) better
understand the mechanism that leads to efficacy in the treatment of prediabetes
and type 2 diabetes, and 3) identify the active molecule(s) from the postbiotic
mixture. These objectives will be carried out using rodent trials, cell-based
assays, and advanced separation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.