* 2151611
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of the WeeBot, an Infant-controlled Powered Ride-on Device for Children with Motor Impairments
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Carole Dennis, ASSISTANCE IN MOTION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is its
innovative and potentially transformative contribution to assistive technologies
for infants with motor impairment. In the United States, over 40,000 infants per
year are born with conditions, such as cerebral palsy, spina bifida, and Down
syndrome, that often result in motor impairment. There is currently no device
that provides independent movement to infants with motor limitations. Since
children learn a great deal about their physical and social environments when
they begin to crawl/walk, conditions that deny or delay independent movement can
impact cognitive, language, and social development. A device that will let these
infants move and explore at the same age as other children could mitigate these
developmental delays and facilitate full integration into society. Lifetime cost
of healthcare for these children has been estimated at $250,000. Providing early
independent movement could result in a potential $50,000 lifetime reduction in
additional interventions such, as behavioral and occupational therapy, special
education, and the need for healthcare and educational aides. This amounts to
over $200,000,000 in savings per year to the health and education
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project addresses the need, expressed by parents and therapists,
for a device that will allow infants with motor impairment to move independently
at the same age as their typically developing peers. Currently, no such device
is available. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is the development of
a novel control method for a powered device that can be used by infants as young
as 6 months old: The device moves in the direction that the infant leans (as
when reaching toward a toy or parent) while preventing collisions and falls.
Previous research has shown that infants as young as five months old can learn
to use this control method to purposefully steer a powered device in all
directions. The research objectives of this project are to build and validate a
second-generation prototype that can be used by parents and clinicians outside
of a research setting. Successful completion of these objectives will advance
the device from a research testbed to a viable, if limited, prototype, enabling
future work to evaluate the impact of the device on the development of
cognitive, social, and communication skills for infants with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.