* 2151591
* SBIR Phase I:  Motion artifact management for accurate and continuous non-invasive blood pressure monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Mohan Thanikachalam, DYNOCARDIA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable accurate, continuous, and widely
available blood pressure (BP) measurements. The current standard of care is
single point-in-time BP monitoring using an arm-cuff device. This method has two
basic drawbacks: inaccuracy and the inability to measure BP continuously over 24
hours, limiting clinical insight. The major challenge to continuous reliable BP
measurements is motion artifacts due to movement, such as an arm gestures. This
project will advance development of a novel device for non-invasive beat-to-beat
BP measurement in a cuff-less, wrist-wearable device. Accurate 24-hour BP
measurement at home and other settings will significantly improve outcomes for
1.5 billion people globally who suffer from chronic high BP or hypertension, a
leading cause of stroke and heart attacks. Other chronic conditions benefiting
from accurate 24-hour BP measurement include sleep apnea, heart and renal
failure, and dementia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project utilizes a highly sensitive optomechanical
sensor to capture video images of skin displacement over the radial artery to
independently measure systolic and diastolic BP continuously. The technology
measures BP accurately and continuously in stationary conditions (i.e., seated
or lying down). The goal of this project is to identify, characterize and
address motion artifacts that occur during routine use in hospital intensive
care units and operating rooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.