* 2151393
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel machine learning framework for the classification of non-mydriatic retinal images
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Daniel Kermany, AI-RIS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,945.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an artificial intelligence (AI)-based method
to screen diabetic retinopathy (DR), the leading cause of vision impairment and
blindness in the US. DR affects almost 4 million people in the US and is
associated with direct annual costs of almost $500 M. If diagnosed early,
clinical treatment and lifestyle changes can halt the progression of the
disease, preventing blindness. However, retinal exams currently require
expensive equipment and invasive eye dilation that restrict screenings to
ophthalmology or optometry practices, leading to the under-diagnosis of the
condition, particularly in underserved populations. This project advances a
system with a new camera and a machine learning approach to enable recognition
of DR and other retinal disorders by clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to explore the
feasibility of developing a novel software-enabled non-mydriatic fundus camera
that can identifiy DR. The proposed innovation is based on: 1) a portable camera
that uses near-infrared (NIR) light, invisible to the human eye, to illuminate
the retina and acquire fundus images, enabling the use of the device by non-
specialists; 2) a novel framework based on transfer learning, which trains
Neural Networks with a limited amount of training data (100 images). In this
project, a prototype system will collect NIR retinal images, with the goal of
developing an AI classification algorithm capable of processing these images. In
parallel, a new image processing algorithm will be developed to improve the
resolution of the NIR images, based on contrast normalization methods and noise
reduction techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.