* 2151578
* STTR Phase I:  An Oleophilic Hydrophobic Magnetic (OHM) Sponge for Environmental Remediation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Vikas Nandwana, MFNS TECH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,932.00

The broader impact of this STTR Phase I project is to develop an environmental
remediation platform for oil spills and related contaminants in water bodies.
Oil spills and associated heavy metals/toxins have significant economic, social,
and environmental adverse impacts. The current state-of-the-art approaches are
expensive, pose dangers to marine life, and/or generate physical waste. This
project introduces a widely deployable sponge technology that attracts oil and
resists water. It can selectively remove and recover oil from an oil/water
mixture and is re-usable. The materials/methods in the proposed project are
cost-effective, scalable, and ecologically friendly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed project is to advance a technology leveraging
the interfacial tension at an oil-water interface. This project develops a
nanotechnology-based simple and scalable sponge that can selectively sequester
oil molecules and metal toxins from an oil-water interface. The proposed system
coats commercially available sponges with a nanocomposite material. Activities
include optimization of key factors affecting interactions between oil and metal
toxins with nanocomposites coated on sponge pores and tailoring both the length-
scale and chemical architecture for remediation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.