* 2151854
* SHF: SMALL: End-to-End Global Routing with Reinforcement Learning in VLSI Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Inna Partin-Vaisband, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 327,371.00

Integrated circuits have transformed every sector of modern life with a broad
range of computing devices â€“ from personal computers to specialized accelerators
and high-performance computing clusters. With the ever-high design complexity of
modern integrated systems, traditional electronic design-automation algorithms
cannot guarantee convergence of the design process, fail to predict output
quality, and often settle for lower performance. Considering billions of dollars
spent on developing a system in a new technology node, the loss of profit due to
not having the system ready on time for release to market or losing the
performance benefits of the new technology node cannot be mitigated. This
project investigates a fundamentally new approach for circuit global routing --
a critical automated design step and a primary bottleneck in the design process.
The primary objective is to route circuits with deep-learning models in a highly
parallelizable manner, shortening the turnaround design time by orders of
magnitude. More broadly, the results from this project are expected to shift
existing physical-design paradigms toward a learning-driven predictable process
that can exploit the advantages of the underlying technology to their full
potential in a timely manner. Executed by a federally designated Hispanic
Serving Institution, this award presents a unique opportunity to engage with a
diverse minority population and creates training opportunities in circuit
design, electronic design automation, and machine learning. As such, the project
is anticipated to have a strong economic and societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designed via a pile of intractable optimizations to
tackle the NP-hard problem of global routing, traditional routers are
characterized by convergence issues and unpredictable routing quality. While
there is a general agreement on potential benefits of realizing routing with
machine-learning (ML) models, not a single end-to-end learning framework has
been demonstrated to route unseen high-resolution practical integrated
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;To address this challenge, global routing will be
investigated as an ML problem in which nets are viewed as the missing parts of a
routing solution and reconstructed, in a preferred order, with imaging ML models
while considering the overall minimum wirelength objective and congestion
constraints. The insights from this study will be exploited to develop a
reinforcement-learning framework comprising: (i) graph neural network for
encoding routing attributes, (ii) net ordering policy for determining the next
net to be routed, and (iii) variational autoencoder to route individual unseen
nets. The resulting design methodology and ML models, architectures, and
algorithms will be integrated in an end-to-end ML router and demonstrated on
existing benchmarks and commercial products provided by industrial
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.