* 2151971
* RUI:  Atomically flat 3D metal-2D layered semiconductor devices for electronic and optoelectronic applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Akm Newaz, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 329,075.00

RUI: Atomically flat 3D metal-2D layered semiconductor devices for electronic
and optoelectronic applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in
whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).
This research focuses on developing an ultrasensitive, gigahertz speed
photodetector in the ultraviolet (UV) range. Fast-response and high-sensitivity
ultraviolet photodetectors are in high demand due to their potential for
widespread applications ranging from fire monitoring, biological analysis,
environmental sensors, and space exploration to UV radiation detection.
Currently, such an efficient and fast semiconductor-based nanoscale
photodetector is not available. One fundamental obstacle in developing such a
device is to create an ideal contact between a semiconductor and a metallic
electrode. Metal surface with almost no roughness (atomically flat surfaces)
creates an ideal contact with a 2D semiconductor. This research will study
devices based on atomically thin 2D semiconductors-atomically flat metal
contacts to understand the basic optoelectronic properties and to utilize them
for applications in the UV region and ultimately for the development of a new
ultrafast, fast-response, and high-sensitivity UV photodetector. This research
is expected to have significant technological impacts ranging from everyday life
to new communication tools. It will be conducted at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution and will involve undergraduate and Master's students, and students
from local high schools. The active participation of students from
underrepresented groups in the project will provide a cutting-edge nanoscience
research experience for underrepresented groups and an outstanding opportunity
to train in nanoscale optoelectronics preparing students for careers in industry
and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomically thin van der Waals crystals
demonstrate remarkable electronic, optical, and optoelectrical properties. The
project will study devices made of monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDs) electrically connected with atomically flat Au surface and investigate
the optoelectronic properties to advance the fundamental understanding to
develop a nanoscale solid-state UV photodetector. The conventional metal
evaporation and deposition to create a metal-2D semiconductor junction causes
inevitable chemical disorder and Fermi-level pinning at the semiconductor-metal
junctions. In this project, a newly developed fabrication technique will be
employed to make ideal 2D semiconductor and atomically flat Au (AFAu) planes.
Three different types of nanoscale devices will be extensively studied; (i)
metal-insulator-metal Schottky diodes, (ii) metal-insulator (hexagonal boron
nitride(hBN))-semiconductor-insulator-metal single quantum well devices, and
(iii) metal-semiconductor-metal photodetector derived from atomically thin
monolayer TMDs sandwiched between two atomically flat metal planes. The
objectives of the proposal are to study: (i) electronic transport of atomically
thin AFAu/hBN/AFAu Schottky heterojunction diodes, (ii) electronic transport of
single quantum well made of AFAu/hBN/TMDs/hBN/AFAu, (iii) realizing
ultrasensitive optoelectronics devices based on TMD semiconductors with
atomically flat metal electrodes. This research will elucidate the electronic
transport across an ideal disorder-free and Fermi level pinning-free metal-
semiconductor interface. Furthermore, this research on the ideal metal-
semiconductor interface may revolutionize the field of nanoelectronics and
nanophotonics, not only in 2D systems but also in other nanoscale systems
ranging from energy harvesting to excitonic
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.