* 2151428
* SBIR Phase I: Production Pathways of Biopolymers for Barrier Paper Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Anindya Mukherjee, PHAXTEC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop new sustainable packaging materials. An important class of
materials is polyhydroxyalkonoates (PHA). Production of PHA from carbon sources
has generally been associated with high costs, precluding widespread adoption.
Natural gas and biogas are cost-effective alternatives, however, and established
PHA-producing microbes use only about half the carbon from methane, releasing
the rest as carbon dioxide. This project will develop protocols to use newly
discovered microbes for efficient PHA production. The newly discovered microbial
platform would enable efficient utilization of biogas with high carbon
conversion, allowing high efficiency and (near) zero emission PHA production.
The produced PHA will be formulated into barrier paper coatings for food service
packaging that is recyclable, compostable, and marine-biodegradable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will validate and develop the
biological pathways for high-yield conversion of biogas using newly discovered
microbes. Current PHA production remains noncompetitive to fossil-based polymers
due to relatively high raw materials cost and low polymer yield with established
microbial platforms, utilizing only a portion of the carbon from methane and
emitting the rest as carbon dioxide. Breakthroughs in PHA production cost
require high-efficiency carbon conversion. The microbes of interest have
demonstrated improved carbon conversion, high polymer yield, and the promise for
a (near) zero emission production. The goals of the project are to elucidate and
optimize the cultivation parameters of the newly discovered cultures and build
novel PHA copolymer pathways in the organisms by constructing synthetic biology
framework(s). The project will also develop fermentation protocols that optimize
yield for producing commercial PHA copolymers for further
scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.