* 2151238
* CNS Core: Small: Privacy-Preserving On-Device Intelligence in the IoT Era
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Xiaoyong Yuan, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

On-device artificial intelligence (AI) is playing an increasingly important role
in the Internet-of-Things (IoT) era. As a key enabler, model compression can
accommodate state-of-the-art AI models within limited IoT resources without
significantly compromising prediction performance. Given the connectivity among
IoT devices, on-device intelligence is expected to not only serve individual IoT
users more quickly and safely, but also support the broader IoT community.
However, the growing IoT market makes IoT devices a primary target of
adversaries. Meanwhile, recent research has shown severe privacy threats of AI
models. When IoT meets AI, on-device intelligence is more likely to be subject
to multiple new attack vectors, with significant potential impacts. This project
consists of three research thrusts to develop privacy-preserving on-device
intelligence in the IoT era: (i) exploring new vulnerabilities and the
corresponding countermeasures for private on-device inference with model
compression; (ii) establishing a private collaborative inference framework to
protect intermediate on-device representations with high prediction performance;
and (iii) investigating uncertainty-aware knowledge aggregation with
lightweight, on-device obfuscation to protect collaborative training privacy.
The proposed research will be rigorously evaluated via simulation tools, a
large-scale testbed, and real-world deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of this project will bring tangible beneﬁts to a range of domains in the IoT
era, including healthcare, cyber-physical systems, transportation, and
education. The proposed research will unlock the potential of intelligent IoT
applications and services while preserving privacy, democratizing AI for a more
diverse community. The programs, models, and testbeds developed in the project
will be publicly released to boost community progress in this research area.
Further, research findings will be integrated within existing courses,
educational programs, and K-12 outreach activities to encourage students,
especially underrepresented groups, to pursue STEM education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.