* 2151160
* Mathematics and Science Teams Engaging in Research to Inspire Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Bryan Rebar, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2027
* USD 636,613.00

The project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective
mathematics and science teachers. School districts are resorting to employing
stop-gap measures, such as emergency certification of teachers without deep
mathematics and science knowledge. Another approach has been to certify teachers
who have content knowledge but do not have deep pedagogical knowledge or
instruction supporting the cultural competence necessary to serve all students.
These approaches address an immediate need for teachers but result in a high
turn-over rate. This project will address the problem by preparing students in
two-person, math-science teams who will undertake applied scientific research
experiences requiring both mathematics and science skills. The project will
support prospective teachers’ translational thinking and communications skills
to draw on research in ways that inspire teaching. The project will be infused
with elements vital to teaching in high-need schools by leveraging the educator
preparation program UOTeach which emphasizes social justice and culturally
supportive pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Oregon includes partnerships with the Springfield Public Schools. The project
will systematically grow sophomore and junior mathematics and science majors'
interest in teaching as a career, resulting in at least 25 certified science or
mathematics teachers over five years. The project will also create a
professional learning community for rising undergraduate interns, graduate
UOTeach Scholars, and practicing teachers. The activities and strategic
scholarship support are designed to develop (a) identities as science
researchers, mathematicians, and science and/or mathematics teachers, (b)
cultural competence, and (c) research-supported instructional strategies that
support the vision of the Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2013) and the
Common Core Math Standards. Due to the project's focus on applied science and
mathematics research to inspire teaching, and the deep equity focus of the
UOTeach program, practicing teachers will enter high-need school districts with
the cultural competence as well as pedagogical and content knowledge to
effectively teach in a high-need school district for four or more years. This
project builds on prior work that highlights the importance of engaging in
knowledge production, communicating that knowledge to others, and realizing that
the doing of science requires trial and error as vital components of the teacher
preparation process (Baxter, et al., 2014, Baldwin &amp; Darner, 2021). The
project will require extant materials to be refined to incorporate mathematics
into existing mentorship and instructional support for prospective teachers
engaged in research (Baxter &amp; Ruzicka, 2017). Through interviews and
surveys, the project team will monitor the efficacy of research inspired
teaching and teaming of mathematics and science majors for the development of
mathematical understandings and pedagogical strategies that benefit their future
students. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.