* 2151990
* RUI: Mathematical Modeling of Immune Response to SARS-CoV-2
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hwayeon Ryu, Elon University
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 102,482.00

This research investigates the human immune response to SARS-CoV-2 virus to
elucidate the key mechanisms responsible for disease severity exhibited by some
COVID-19 patients. Despite a significant volume of clinical and experimental
studies for the detailed mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 virus, there is a lack of
understanding about the host immune response to the virus, which is largely
responsible for the variability in disease severity. To accelerate and
supplement our understanding of key target pathways in the immune response, this
project will develop and analyze a fundamental, comprehensive model for the host
immune dynamics of SARS-CoV-2. Given we continue as a nation under pandemic
conditions with new variants emerging and vaccination rollouts, the theoretical
explorations through mathematical modeling will serve as a complement to lab-
based and data-based approaches. Other features of this work include student
involvement in this research, development of a network of collaborators across
three institutions, curricula development, recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups, and efforts to bring a broad community of researchers
studying the host immune dynamics of COVID-19 together to advance our
understanding of the interactions between the immune system and SARS-CoV-2.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to accomplish two specific research
goals: (i) development of a mathematical model of the host immune dynamics of
COVID-19; and (ii) exploration of the model to address important COVID-19
treatment-related questions. For the first goal, the PI will develop and analyze
a mathematical model that explicitly represents the virus, immune cells,
cytokines, and their interactions, formulated in a system of coupled ordinary
and delay differential equations. The main objective is to obtain a better
understanding of key aspects of immune response to SARS-CoV-2, specifically its
sensitive pathways. For the second goal, the PI will investigate the importance
of timing of specific immune responses in disease severity and divergent
outcomes, and the emergence of the so-called cytokine storm, excessive
production of proinflammatory cytokines in the immune system. The aim is to
identify the key mechanisms responsible for disease severity, which could help
to identify other pathways to target therapeutically. The primary tools to be
used for this project are model parameterization using a series of clinical and
experimental data, sensitivity analysis, and numerical simulations. The primary
mathematical contribution is the development of computational techniques to
analyze high-dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. In addition, the results
from this study on the mechanisms involved in COVID-19 pathology and
identification of several therapeutic targets would provide hypotheses to be
clinically tested, thus, serving as a foundation for the development of
evidence-based treatment protocols to address the global
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.