* 2152015
* The Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) 2022 Workshop; Scranton, Pennsylvania; March 18-19, 2022
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Nathaniel Frissell, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,995.00

The ionosphere is an atmospheric region extends from about 50 to 600 miles above
the earth’s surface. This layer of atmosphere has a high concentration of
charged particles (ions and electrons) that interact strongly with radio waves.
Complex structures and variations of charged particle densities in the
ionosphere alter the behavior of radio wave propagation, greatly affect the
radio communications and global navigation satellite systems. Understanding
ionospheric structures and processes will lead to an increased understanding and
prediction of these effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ham Radio Science Citizen
Investigation (HamSCI) is a collective of professional researchers and licensed
amateur radio operators (a.k.a. hams) with the objective to foster
collaborations between the amateur and professional communities for the purposes
of advancing scientific research and understanding, encouraging the development
of new technologies to support this research, and to provide educational
opportunities for the amateur radio community and the general public. To
maximize the potential of the ham radio-professional researcher relationship,
meetings are needed to bring these groups together to learn about each other’s
communities, vocabularies, share ideas, and participate in activities that
advance both the scientific field and the radio hobby.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will support a 2-day HamSCI workshop to address this need. The 2022
HamSCI Workshop will be the fifth annual U.S. HamSCI Workshop since the
inaugural meeting at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in 2018. This
workshop series has led to cutting-edge work in the fields of space physics,
citizen science, and the use of crowd-sourced ionospheric data. The 2022 HamSCI
Workshop theme will be “The Weather Connection,” and will feature prominent
leaders in space weather, atmospheric weather, and the connection between
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the 2022 workshop will continue to make
headway on topics of past HamSCI meetings, including the use of amateur radio
techniques for observing and understanding the physics behind traveling
ionospheric disturbances, Sporadic E, the ionospheric response to solar flares
and geomagnetic storms, and space weather effects on radio wave propagation.
This meeting will also serve as a bi-annual development meeting of the HamSCI
Personal Space Weather Station (PSWS), a project funded through the NSF Aeronomy
Distributed Array of Small Instruments (DASI) program. Development of the PSWS
will lead to a vast improvement of the scientific quality of citizen science
observations currently made by the amateur radio
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.