* 2152559
* Addressing Rigor and Reproducibility in Heterogeneous, Thermal Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Neil Schweitzer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 50,714.00

The project supports a workshop addressing the rigor and reproducibility of
research conducted in heterogeneous thermal catalysis. The workshop is led by
Dr. Neil Schweitzer of Northwestern University, with co-organizers Rajamani
Gounder (Purdue University), and Robert Rioux (Penn State University). Experts
from academe, industry, U.S. funding agencies and national laboratories, and the
international catalysis research community will convene in both virtual and in-
person sessions to assess the state of catalysis research methodology and
identify actionable opportunities for coordinating rigorous and reproducible
practices across the broader catalysis research community. Participants include
an inclusive and diverse group of attendees including students, early-career
researchers, and senior-level technical experts. Both short- and long-term
objectives will be addressed covering 5 topic areas: 1) Standardized reporting
in literature/proposals, 2) Developing benchmarking standards, 3) Producing
training media and workshops, 4) Establishing a database of experimental data,
and 5) Forming a network of testing labs. The workshop features a novel three-
phase series of virtual sessions that will surround an in-person session of
roughly 70 participants to be held at the Big Ten (B1G) Conference Center in
Rosemont, Illinois (July 21 and July 22, 2022). Products and outcomes of the
workshop will first consist of a workshop report followed by one or more journal
articles summarizing best practices that researchers can use to benchmark,
validate, and reproduce data in specific sub-fields of thermal
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous thermal catalysis has long served
as the bedrock of fuels and chemicals manufacturing. Complexity and variability
spanning the entire breadth of catalyst materials properties, synthesis methods,
characterization techniques, and evaluation procedures, has focused attention on
the need to establish community-accepted practices for ensuring high-quality,
benchmarked, and reproducible data. In addition, urgency around the transition
to clean energy and greenhouse gas reduction has incentivized interdisciplinary,
convergent, and translational approaches to catalysis research in recent years.
Research engineers and scientists with expertise cutting broadly across
materials, chemical synthesis, interfacial science, spectroscopic methods, and
methods of data science and computational simulation, all bring welcome
perspectives to catalysis research, but often with little awareness of the
complexity of catalytic systems, especially in the working environment. Thus,
mechanisms are needed to improve rigor and reproducibility (R&amp;R) in
experimental measurements to ensure alignment of the broader research community
with a common core of practices specific to the realization of high-quality
catalysis research. Similarly, the field is moving rapidly toward computational
and data-science driven catalyst design, but successful implementation of such
predictive tools hinges on model training and validation rooted in rigorously
obtained and reproducible experimental data bases benchmarked to common
specifications. Following the in-person session, specific sub-groups of workshop
leaders and participants will be formed to pursue additional projects, including
the development of online training material and content reflecting the best
practices in catalysis research to improve rigor and reproducibility, the
creation and maintenance of a public database of catalysis data, and the
implementation of testing laboratory facilities that can be used by researchers
to benchmark or validate their data. Emphasis will be placed on including early-
career researchers in all phases of the workshop, to build appreciation of best
practices, while also providing recommendations to those engaged in setting
standards and practices for review of both grant proposals and journal article
submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.