* 2152168
* Quantum Networks Training and Research Alliance in the Southeast
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* George Siopsis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,499,949.00

Quantum networks enable more efficient information processing, promising
functionality that is faster and more secure than the classical networks that
undergird current communication technologies. Research on quantum networks has
the potential to contribute to fundamental discoveries in quantum science as
well as key applications in cybersecurity, quantum sensors, and quantum
computing. However, to realize the promised advantages of a quantum Internet,
many fundamental science and engineering challenges must be overcome. Tackling
these challenges will require a convergence of expertise from science and
engineering disciplines and the development of a well-trained, interdisciplinary
quantum networks workforce. The overarching goal of this NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) project is to advance the design and development of components
and applications of quantum networks, and to establish the first comprehensive,
interdisciplinary quantum information science and engineering (QISE) training
program in the Southeast. Representing a collaboration between the University of
Georgia and the University of Tennessee at Knoxville, this training program is
expected to serve fifty-four masters and doctoral students, including thirty-
four funded trainees in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will carry out quantum networks research in three key areas. The first
centers on quantum network building blocks: single photon emitters, qubit
realization, quantum photon measurement, quantum information theory, and
cybersecurity. The second encompasses quantum devices: networked quantum
computing, networked quantum sensors, and materials for quantum network
components. The third area considers scientific and engineering applications:
space-based entangled photon sources, quantum random number generators, the
power grid, quantum resource estimation, and on-chip technology. These three
research thrusts will be bridged by three cross-disciplinary research
perspectives: experimentation, simulation, and engineering. The training program
and workforce development will significantly contribute to fulfilling the
pressing need for a skilled QISE workforce in academia, national laboratories,
and industry. It will include components uniquely designed to increase the
involvement of diverse students in QISE. It will strengthen existing ties that
the two collaborating institutions have with historically black colleges and
universities, and the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
Leadership and Academic Enhancement Program, for robust recruitment, mentoring,
and retention of women and minority students from groups underrepresented in the
field. In addition, it will engage potential undergraduate recruits with QISE
topics via introductory QISE courses that can be taken for credit across
institutions. This traineeship model will create an interdisciplinary,
workforce-aligned program integrating experimental, simulational, and
engineering experiential learning to galvanize a diverse community of graduate
students toward careers in QISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.