* 2152453
* Collaborative Research: Life after Death: Do Inactive Sulfides Fuel a Unique Ecosystem at the Deep Seafloor?
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Stace Beaulieu, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2025
* USD 437,333.00

This project is investigating a newly discovered community of animals and
microbes near deep-sea hydrothermal vents that appears to inhabit only cool,
inactive sulfide features. The main objectives are to determine what species
live on these features, whether they are new to science, and how they function
in the community. The discovery of this novel community, which may be fueled by
production of resident microbes, is likely to change the way we think about
inactive vents and their contribution to deep-sea biodiversity and productivity.
This project has broad impact in four different areas: 1) Informing policy for
sustainable use (mining) of inactive sulfides; 2) Contributing to global data
systems and the NSF-funded repository at BCO-DMO to make our data available for
research use at other temporal, spatial, and taxonomic scales; 3) Increasing
public scientific literacy by enhancing K-12 education in the sciences at
Memorial Junior High in Eagle Pass TX with about 98% Hispanic and 2% Native
American students and a high number of English Language Learners and migrants;
and 4) Developing a diverse workforce by engaging students from under-
represented and marginalized groups into undergraduate intern programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal venting of heated, reduced fluids from the
seafloor occurs globally at plate tectonic boundaries and mid-plate hotspots and
has been the subject of vigorous geological, chemical and biological research.
However, this venting is ultimately transient, leaving behind only the sulfide
mineral-rich deposits after the fluid flow stops. This project investigates the
organisms living on these lesser studied inactive sulfide features in order to
understand their ecology and associations with the mineral substratum. Recent
discoveries indicate that some microbial and animal species inhabiting inactive
sulfides are not found elsewhere in the marine environment, suggesting the
sulfides serve as a unique habitat, distinct from other seafloor topographic
features. The main project objectives are to characterize the species and
functional diversity of the inactive sulfide ecosystem across all three domains
of life (eukaryotic, bacterial, and archaeal), determine which animal species
are endemic or predominantly associated with inactive sulfides, and explore the
biological and geological characteristics governing those associations. The
investigators are conducting field studies between 9-10 degrees N on the East
Pacific Rise at sites within the axial summit trough as well as at recently
discovered off-axis sites away from modern day venting features. The discovery
of this novel community of organisms inhabiting inactive sulfide features at
hydrothermal vent fields, fueled by resident chemolithotrophic microorganisms,
is likely to change the way we think about the role of these ecosystems in deep-
sea biodiversity and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.