* 2152764
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Scalable Deep Learning-Based Quantitative Ultrasound Tomography
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jiaze He, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,111.00

Empowered by advanced imaging methods, ultrasound computed tomography (USCT)
provides highly specific tissue differentiation and diagnosis through rapid,
low-cost scanning without using sedatives and X-rays. However, these physics-
based imaging methods currently require a long processing time and at times
encounter reconstruction errors, hindering them from being widely used in time-
sensitive USCT applications (e.g., brain and breast imaging). To address these
gaps, this project will create two artificial intelligence-based approaches to
significantly improve the reconstruction speed and the quality of the state-of-
the-art USCT technologies. A faster and more powerful USCT system will
potentially lead to societal benefits such as improved medical outcomes, reduced
risks, higher patient satisfaction, and reduced healthcare costs. The
collaborative team of investigators will actively recruit and mentor
undergraduate and graduate students with diverse backgrounds to participate in
this research, reach out to K-12 educators and students to create student
interest in data science, computing, and STEM fields, incorporate the findings
into class modules, and disseminate the technology and findings to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to create two open-
source, high-performance computing (HPC)-enabled, and deep learning (DL)-based
frameworks to significantly improve the reconstruction speed and the quality of
full waveform inversion (FWI)-based USCT. FWI techniques have recently enabled
USCT in the reconstruction of detailed quantitative material/tissue parameters,
but they have a slow reconstruction speed and a high-computational cost. To
address these challenges, one of the approaches will innovatively incorporate
the adjoint-tomography theory (ATT) into a generative adversarial network (GAN)
to reliably accelerate FWI-based USCT by providing strong priors for GAN. Rapid
patient screening can be achieved using this method. The second DL approach
leverages physics-guided, cycle-consistence in both training and its application
to provide extraordinary, detailed reconstruction. The second method reduces the
reliance on ground truth models in training, alleviates the dependence of
initial models, and utilizes the purposely-built computing hardware for DL
acceleration and hence can a) lower the false-positive rates while reducing
unnecessary extra tests/biopsies and b) decrease the false negatives to enable
early diagnosis/treatment. The theoretical foundations will be derived for both
approaches. Computational details such as framework designing/tuning and the
studies of scientific problems (e.g., influences of initial models and forward
modeling errors) will be generated and disseminated. A cyberinfrastructure that
provides HPC/GPU-enabled imaging data generation and training frameworks and two
clinically relevant databases suitable for DL-based USCT studies will be created
and made available to the public. The framework building philosophy and
approaches developed in this project will demonstrate an efficient, systematic
approach to applying deep learning-based techniques in a scalable and parallel
manner, thereby accelerating broader DL-related topics in ultrasound imaging,
photoacoustic tomography, X-ray computed tomography, radar technologies,
geophysics, and magnetic resonance imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Engineering of Biomedical Systems (EBMS) Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.