* 2152646
* NSF-IITP: CNS Core: Small: Federated Learning for Privacy-preserving Video Caching Network
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 02/28/2025
* USD 499,842.00

Video streaming has, over the past decade, become the dominant form of
entertainment, with most video clips on social media as well as movies being
viewed on wireless devices. Due to large increase in demand, novel methods for
content delivery must be considered so as to not overburden the wireless
networks, while at the same time keeping transmission delays low, to avoid the
dreaded “buffering” warning on the device of the user. One of the most promising
methods for achieving this is caching at the wireless edge, i.e., storing
popular content at or near the wireless base stations that users are connected
to. Caching strategies usually require knowledge of the video popularity, as
well as the historical preferences of the individual users. This information
needs to be combined with information about the wireless network structure and
network parameters, to determine what content should be cached where. Yet, in
many cases it is undesirable to share detailed user profiles with the cache
and/or wireless network operator. The main motivation for avoiding such sharing
is user privacy. The goal of the current project is thus to develop techniques
based on machine learning that enable efficient video caching and delivery
systems while preserving the privacy of the users. Such algorithms will advance
the state of the art in machine learning, by incorporating expert knowledge on
video caching and developing new network structures derived from the specific
problem. At the same time the results will benefit society by providing privacy
– which is of great importance to consumers and steadily becoming more so – as
well as spectral and energy efficiency of wireless networks and thus careful use
of finite resources. The project will also serve to help students develop
interdisciplinary thinking, and has a detailed plan for increasing the
participation from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will explore caching techniques that preserve privacy while retaining the
efficiency of caching. In particular it will use Federated Learning , a form of
Machine Learning that allows localized training and exchange of machine learning
models, such as parameterized neural networks, between distributed nodes without
requiring the exchange of underlying data such as user preferences. The
developed techniques will take into account both content popularity and the
state of the wireless network. Rather than separating the problem into disparate
parts, such as popularity prediction on one hand, and wireless caching
optimization on the other, the project will pursue an integrated approach that
accounts for the interaction between all the different aspects of the work.
Specific topics of investigation will include (i) techniques that do not require
transmission of models to a central server, thus further strengthening privacy,
(ii) algorithms for hybrid global-local models that take account of the fact
that video popularity is a global descriptor while also showing some local
(spatio-temporal) variations, (iii) direct learning of caching strategies
without taking the detour via separate learning of video popularity and wireless
network state, thus improving both efficiency and privacy. All these results
will flow into an integrated, holistic system design for privacy-preserving
video caching systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.