* 2152119
* Cultural Change and Social Equity as Drivers for Convergent Research in Water and Material Circularity
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Natasha Wright, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

A growing global population and limited resources require society to move
towards a circular economy. Resources must be conserved and reused more
effectively, with wastes upcycled into products of value and clean energy. Past
investments in new technologies to increase the circular use of resources have
fallen short, however, failing to consider cultural perspectives and economic
and policy frameworks that are critical to success. New approaches are needed in
which engineers and scientists understand and incorporate multiple stakeholder
values into their work and confront the role of non-technological factors in
advancing circularity. Policymakers also need to understand and incorporate
multiple stakeholder values as they develop and then apply science-based
approaches that recognize technological constraints. This NSF Research
Traineeship project will address these needs by training master’s and doctoral
students in the circular use of water and materials in the context of different
cultural perspectives, real-world experiences, and academic research. The
traineeship anticipates providing unique training opportunities to approximately
300 students, including twenty (20) directly funded trainees and forty (40)
trainees that will participate in all aspects of the program with funding from
other sources. This training program will benefit society by leading to new
technologies, policy and economic instruments, methods, and implementation
strategies for the circular use of resources. Trainees will span fields of
engineering, science, public affairs, urban planning, and environmental
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate policy, engineering,
and science with a combination of coursework, cutting-edge interdisciplinary
research, and internships. Additionally, community interactions led by an
Artist-in-Residence are designed to enhance the trainees’ identity and capacity
for positive societal impact. Trainees will participate in several key
activities. First is cohort-focused coursework on circularity as a system, as
well training to: cultivate essential leadership and professional skills, foster
interdisciplinary collaboration, and promote engaged scholarship on circularity.
A second component consists of interdisciplinary graduate research experiences
focused on creating circular solutions to currently unsustainable water, energy,
and material use. A third aspect is comprised of external internships that build
from research projects and/or community engagement and are incorporated directly
into the trainee’s thesis or dissertation. Finally, a fourth and novel component
of this traineeship will take the form of structured engagements with the
community throughout the program led by an embedded Artist-in-Residence. These
interactions will result in the cultivation of creative models of self-
reflection, collaboration, and social engagement, along with the exploration of
each trainee’s impact identity, defined as the potential of one’s work to bring
about positive societal impact as seen through personal, communal, and
professional aspects of an individual’s practice and interests. These trainees
represent a new generation of sustainability and circularity professionals that
will serve as connectors between researchers, industry, and communities. This
integrated research and education traineeship will result in the creation of a
new certificate program and increased interactions with the community and
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.