* 2152622
* NSF-NERC: PROcesses, drivers, Predictions: Modeling the response of Thwaites Glacier over the next Century using Ice/Ocean Coupled Models (PROPHET)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,03/31/2025
* Mathieu Morlighem, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 430,186.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica.
Thwaites Glacier has been accelerating and widening over the past three decades.
How fast Thwaites will disintegrate or how quickly it will find a new stable
state have become some of the most important questions of the future of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet and its contribution to sea-level rise over the next decades
to centuries and beyond. This project will rely on three independent numerical
models of ice flow, coupled to an ocean circulation model to (1) improve our
understanding of the interactions between the ice and the underlying bedrock,
(2) analyze how sensitive the glacier is to external changes, (3) assess the
processes that may lead to a collapse of Thwaites, and, most importantly, (4)
forecast future ice loss of Thwaites. By providing predictions based on a suite
of coupled ice-ocean models, this project will also assess the uncertainty in
model projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use three independent
ice-sheet models: Ice Sheet System Model, Ua, and STREAMICE, coupled to the
ocean circulation model of the MIT General Circulation Model. The team will
first focus on the representation of key physical processes of calving, ice
damage, and basal slipperiness that have either not been included, or are poorly
represented, in previous ice-flow modelling work. The team will then quantify
the relative role of different proposed external drivers of change (e.g., ocean-
induced ice-shelf thinning, loss of ice-shelf pinning points) and explore the
stability regime of Thwaites Glacier with the aim of identifying internal
thresholds separating stable and unstable grounding-line retreat. Using inverse
methodology, the project will produce new physically consistent high-resolution
(300-m) data sets on ice-thicknesses from available radar measurements.
Furthermore, the team will generate new remote sensing data sets on ice
velocities and rates of elevation change. These will be used to constrain and
validate the numerical models, and will also be valuable stand-alone data sets.
This process will allow the numerical models to be constrained more tightly by
data than has previously been possible. The resultant more robust model
predictions of near-future impact of Thwaites Glacier on global sea levels can
inform policy-relevant decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.