* 2152289
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Compressible Data on Compressive Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jingfang Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 550,825.00

Large-scale high-dimensional data sets are becoming ubiquitous in modern
society, particularly in the areas of physical, biomedical, and social
applications. This focused research group (FRG) will address the foundational
challenges, both computational and theoretical, arising in the analysis of high-
dimensional data by leveraging its compressible features. Discovering such
compressible features is a major challenge in data analysis, which the team of
investigators will approach using hierarchical decompositions derived from
spectral, statistical, and algebraic geometric analysis of data. In contrast to
interpolation-based methods, such as deep neural networks which are often
difficult to interpret, the group will construct optimally defined compressive
networks, specifically tailored to such compressible features. Doing so will
enable an accurate and efficient extraction and manipulation of sparse
representations of high-dimensional data in an inherently interpretable manner.
For instance, one focus of the project is to extend the binary expansion testing
methods developed by members of the group, which have shown promise in both
statistical power and computational complexity in low-dimensional settings. A
high-dimensional generalization of binary expansion testing would, in turn,
enable the direct application to selecting personalized medical treatment plans
based on increasingly complex data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRG
investigators will collaborate across the disciplines of mathematical analysis,
data science, statistics, and computation, as well as across institutions. The
specific goals of this project include generalizing classical concepts of
"compressible" features using ideas from spectral theory, algebraic geometry,
energy and optimization, and network interactions. This will lead to a deeper
understanding of the mathematical and statistical foundations of compressible
high-dimensional data sets on compressive networks. Using newly developed
compressible features, the FRG team will then design and develop accurate and
efficient computational tools for large-scale high-dimensional data sets. All
the work to be done will be aimed at collaborating directly with application
domain scientists to enhance the efficacy of the proposed methods. The FRG
investigators will also jointly mentor graduate and undergraduate students, who
will then have the benefits of training across disciplines and access to a
variety of ideas and tools in complementary and integrative research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.