* 2152683
* SBIR Phase II:  Photopolymer-based Microelectronic Device Transfer Process
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Matthew Robinson, TERECIRCUITS CORPORATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 09/30/2024
* USD 993,980.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable electronic products of great
environmental benefit and social value which cannot be economically made today.
Among these are three important product classes that can deliver on the promise
of the connection of everyday devices via internet (Internet of Things) and
their rapid computing power. First, wearable devices (such as smart watches,
health monitors, or activity trackers) must be smaller, thinner (often flexible)
and less power-hungry than current versions. Second, low-power, high resolution
displays with high brightness are needed to visualize results, even in direct
sunlight. Third, the decentralized computers which collect, manage and process
large datasets require designs that can easily manage sensors, process
information, and control devices to support smart cities, smart vehicles, smart
homes, and smart applications. The primary focus of this project is to enable
the next generation of advanced displays, capable of substantial energy savings
coupled with greater visual appeal. Broadly, the results are critical for
enabling the cost-effective manufacturing of each of the three product classes,
which all suffer from fundamental challenges in chip manufacturing and require
innovation in packaging and assembly to be commercially viable at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is designed primarily to make
better displays possible. There is a widespread desire to make displays with
ultrasmall light-emitting diodes (LEDs), enabling better contrast and color,
sunlight viewability, longer lifetimes, lower power consumption, and lower cost.
To do so, currently unsolved chip fabrication obstacles must be overcome. The
main impediment is a cost-effective approach to place such small LEDs at desired
pixel positions with adequate precision. The objective of the project is to meet
this need, using a unique non-contact photopolymer-based method which transfers
&lt;10 um die with +/- 2 um accuracy at many thousands of units per second with
high yield. The research will involve systematic study of the parameters of the
process, including polymer composition and characteristics, film
characteristics, pre-transfer bonding process parameters (temperature, pressure
and time), and optical system parameters. Yield will be measured statistically
and improved. While demonstrating actual throughput requires full-scale
production equipment, the feasibility of meeting industry required targets will
be demonstrated to the extent possible on lab-scale
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.