* 2152908
* CDS&amp;E: Computation-Informed Learning of Melt Pool Dynamics for Real-Time Prognosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yuebin Guo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 509,721.00

Metal additive manufacturing (AM) offers a great opportunity for making complex
parts. However, the collective impact of complex part geometry, nonuniform heat
dissipation, and diverse laser scanning often cause overheating of the melt pool
during the printing process. The overheating problem leads to various quality
issues. Therefore, the understanding and fast prediction of melt pool behaviors
are necessary for printing high-quality parts. Data science models (e.g., deep
learning, or DL) may use diverse types of melt pool data for efficient
prediction of overheating. But the data science models lack transparency, are
computationally expensive, and need massive training data. On the other hand,
computational models may understand the complex melt pool behaviors, but require
continuous updates of model parameters and are not suitable for fast prediction.
This award provides an integrated approach by using the strength of both models
for fast prediction of melt pool overheating. The outcome of this project will
not only contribute to the fundamental knowledge of deep learning but also
enable the broad acceptance of the project's testbed as a public tool for the AM
community. The results will help many industry sectors including aerospace,
healthcare, tools, and mold, automotive, and others. The projectâ€™s
interdisciplinary nature also helps train the future digital manufacturing
workforce by broadening the participation of women and underrepresented minority
groups in data science-driven research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research bridges the knowledge gap in fundamental understanding and real-time
prognosis of melt pool dynamics by developing a new computation-informed deep
learning (Co-DL) approach. The research team will: (1) develop a computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) model of selective laser melting (SLM) to generate
complementary data which cannot be measured otherwise; (2) create
cyberinfrastructure to enable multimodal data curation, contextualization,
integration, and interoperability, extracting knowledge from data analytics, and
interfacing Co-DL testbed; (3) develop a Co-DL modeling method to integrate
physical laws of melt pool dynamics and augmented data from the CFD model into
DL training and learning algorithm; (4) create a set of DL acceleration and
semi-supervised learning approaches with small data; and (5) create a real-time
online Co-DL testbed for the metal AM community. The resulting method will solve
a major limitation of pure data-driven DL models for lacking explainability,
significantly reduce the time-latency of the Co-DL model training and inference,
and create cyberinfrastructure to enable data curation, contextualization,
integration, interoperability, and interfacing with the Co-DL
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.