* 2152178
* Building a Partnership in New Orleans: Paving the Way for STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Ruby Broadway, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 122,427.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to prepare
well-qualified STEM teachers, particularly to serve high-need school districts
in New Orleans, Louisiana. This project will work toward developing an
innovative undergraduate degree and licensure program to address STEM teacher
needs in the following foundational disciplines: Biology/Life Sciences,
Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science, and Physics. While centered at Dillard
University, the project includes partnerships with Delgado Community College and
Xavier University to help plan and build capacity toward a distinctive multi-
institutional curricular pathway. This pathway could encourage and support
talented, diverse students to pursue K-12 STEM teaching in local high-need
school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish capacity for
a strong transfer pathway from Delgado Community College, a two-year urban
institution, to Dillard University, an urban HBCU in New Orleans, and finally to
Xavier Universityâ€™s master's program for a teaching certificate. The project
goals include: (1) a needs assessment for STEM teacher education in the New
Orleans area, (2) the establishment of strong partnerships between the three
institutions and several local high-need schools, to be identified in the
planning year, and (3) the design of new STEM major courses offering a
specialized teacher training emphasis and culturally responsive curriculum. This
Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.