* 2152540
* RUI: Investigating Spin Currents from Nuclear Field Gradients
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Nicholas Harmon, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 97,513.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research into spin and
charge current generation relevant to future "spintronics" technologies,
educating wider student populations about the quantum mechanics of spin, and
outreach to local communities on issues pertaining to quantum science. Familiar
electronics is based on a current of charges. Spintronics works, instead, on a
current of magnetic spins, which one can think of as infinitesimal bar magnets.
Efficiently generating and measuring spin currents is a condition for many
proposed spin-based devices. The research effort will theoretically investigate
a mechanism of spin-current generation and measurement that involves non-uniform
magnetic fields coming from atomic nuclei embedded in a semiconductor. A further
goal of this activity will be to compare figures of merit of this new mechanism
to traditional spin-orbit coupling for spin-current generation and detection.
Students will take part in all aspects of the project: learning and applying
analytic and numerical methods, drafting articles, and presenting results at
meetings. The principal investigator (PI) will develop course materials for an
introductory class in the quantum mechanics of spin that will be geared toward a
wide swath of students: those who have not taken traditional quantum mechanics
or even many upper-level physics courses. The curriculum will be designed to be
accessible to chemistry and engineering/computer science students in an effort
to mainstream quantum mechanical and quantum computing concepts. Quantum
technologies are expected to bring about a quantum revolution. The PI will
engage the campus and local community in discussions (through public
presentations) of quantum science, the directions quantum technology will lead,
and the importance of quantum education for the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical investigations of spin-current-to-charge-current and charge-current-
to-spin-current conversion by means of gradients in nuclear field. The spin-Hall
effect and its inverse effect are presently the chief methods by which
spin/charge currents are converted. Spin-Hall conversions require materials with
strong spin-orbit interactions, which shorten spin diffusion lengths. The
research thrust here is to tap into alternative materials for charge/spin
current conversion where strong spin-orbit interactions are not necessary or
desirable; instead, strong hyperfine interactions are relied upon. Nuclear field
or hyperfine gradients offer a mechanism by which either spin or charge current
can be generated. Spin separation via this nuclear gradient channel is
reminiscent of the Stern-Gerlach effect, but since the nuclear field is not a
true magnetic field in the sense of a Lorentz force being operational, spins are
able to separate more effectively than they would in a true magnetic field
gradient (the nuclear field - at the level of the Fermi contact potential - acts
only on the spin and not on the orbital degree of freedom). The project goal is
to develop and solve spin and charge drift-diffusion equations with the gradient
effect included. Analytic solutions are possible for some configurations but in
general the coupled equations are nonlinear and necessitate numerical methods.
Furthermore, two possible experimental realizations of the effect will be
modeled: electrical spin injection and optical spin injection. In both
situations, a nuclear gradient is feasible through non-uniform dynamic nuclear
polarization by injected spin polarized carriers. By modeling and evaluating
these scenarios, a guide will be provided to experimentalists who wish to
observe the spin and charge separating effects. Ultimately, the spin/charge
drift diffusion formalism developed will be able to incorporate other types of
field gradients as well, namely, spin-orbit fields such as those due to the
Rashba interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.