* 2152258
* Science to Policy Education: Activating Knowledge for Sustainable Transportation (SPEAKS)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Matthew Barth, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

As society looks increasingly to scientific advances for solutions to major
challenges, researchers must engage with the public and policymakers to develop
and implement new technologies based on those advances to benefit society. For
example, such engagement is essential to address climate change, as people and
industries must quickly and equitably embrace renewable energy sources and
sustainably powered vehicles and technologies. This NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) project will train STEM graduate students to integrate engineering, social
and environmental science, and public policy to conduct research focused on
accelerating the integration of renewable energy into the electric grid, taking
advantage of renewable hydrogen and different energy storage capabilities. Such
integration will ultimately help accelerate the decarbonization of
transportation and other sectors. This project will use a novel science-to-
policy (S2P) training program to teach students to engage stakeholder groups and
understand and incorporate their needs into research programs while
communicating the science, and prioritizing attention to diversity, equity,
inclusion, and ethics. This project anticipates training eighty (80) Ph.D.
students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, from different engineering
programs, environmental sciences, sociology, and political science. Funded
trainees will intern in legislative offices, government agencies, non-profits,
and industry for hands-on career preparation with a tangible product, such as a
policy recommendation or report. This project will convene expert practitioners
from these areas to teach students and participate in research projects. Project
faculty and researchers from engineering, policy, sciences, and humanities will
implement an interdisciplinary training program providing Ph.D. students skills
and experience necessary to address key scientific challenges to transportation
decarbonization and to implement their findings in public policy. Faculty will
also work with campus leadership to integrate elements of the S2P training
program in campus-wide introductory graduate courses and collaborate with the
National Science Policy Network to share this training program nationally. This
training program is the first step in transforming STEM graduate education to
better prepare students for any career and to translate societally beneficial
research into public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accelerating decarbonization
of the transportation sector while continuing to integrate renewables into the
electric grid is critical to address climate change. Towards this goal NRT
trainees will pursue three key activities. First is to conduct cutting-edge
research in integrating the high renewables electric grid with transportation
infrastructure, investigating renewable hydrogen as a fuel and energy storage
medium. Second is to understand policies around sustainability, air pollution,
and renewable energy, learn to communicate science to all audiences, and
appreciate the needs of various stakeholders to create equitable solutions for
environmental justice. Third is to develop best practices for human interaction
with renewable energy technology by designing solutions based on individual,
societal, and political needs. Engaging key stakeholder groups during research
and development will accelerate the deployment of renewable technologies and
foster effective communication and decision-making on scientific topics. This
project will prepare trainees to develop and deploy a model for scientific
research that is closely connected with societal challenges through meaningful
community engagement and responsive programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.