* 2152107
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Complex Lagrangians, Integrable Systems, and Quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Laura Schaposnik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2025
* USD 380,000.00

Mirror symmetry was discovered over three decades ago in theoretical physics.
Since then, it has been a deep mystery appearing in many frontiers of
mathematics. In general, it appears to be a hidden relation between symplectic
geometry, which is the natural framework for describing classical mechanics, and
complex algebraic geometry. More recent discoveries link it with several other
areas of mathematics and physics. Still, as of today, there is no systematic
understanding of mirror symmetry. The main goal of this focused research group
is to establish a universal tool to study mirror symmetry and related geometric
questions arising in modern frontiers of geometry and topology. In particular,
the project aims at constructing a large class of concrete models that would
demonstrate all aspects of mirror symmetry. The investigators bring expertise
from different areas of mathematics and will use a variety of techniques. They
will also organize workshops, summer schools, and conferences, aimed at training
early career researchers in this area, disseminating recent results and
facilitating further advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the original context,
mirror symmetry relates counting problems in one space with complex differential
equations on its mirror symmetric space. As understanding has evolved, mirror
symmetry has been identified as the Laplace transform in certain cases, which
provides an effective mechanism of computing quantum invariants of a space from
the complex geometry of its mirror. In general, it is a higher categorical
relation between symplectic geometry and complex algebraic geometry. In a gauge
theoretic context, mirror symmetry appears in the form of the Langlands duality
among algebraic groups. More recent discoveries link it with quantum knot
invariants. The main goal of the project is to establish complex Lagrangian
geometry as a universal tool to study geometric questions and quantization
arising in modern frontiers of geometry and topology and to construct models in
which we can see all aspects of mirror symmetry, including the real symplectic-
complex algebraic duality, the Langlands duality, the Laplace transform, and a
relation to three-manifold invariants. In Lagrange's formulation many non-linear
problems can be solved via integrable systems, an approach which is widely
applicable, extending far beyond its classical origins to high-energy particle
physics and string theory. This project aims to advance understanding of the
complex integrable systems that arise in such situations, together with their
quantum mechanical counterparts, by considering concrete models constructed on
Hitchin integrable systems. The work will employ a generalization of the Laplace
transform known as topological recursion that is expected to provide a
conjectural new mechanism for holomorphic quantization of these spaces and shed
new light on mirror symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.