* 2152610
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Foundations and Scalable Algorithms for Personalized and Collaborative Virtual Reality Over Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Bin Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 167,500.00

Virtual reality (VR) over wireless networks can provide an interactive and
immersive experience for multiple users simultaneously and thus has many
applications, especially in VR-based education/training. However, satisfactory
personalized user experience in such wireless immersive services demands
stringent performance requirements, including: (1) high-speed and high-
resolution panoramic image rendering; (2) extremely low delay guarantees; and
(3) seamless user experience. Besides the aforementioned requirements,
collaborative user experience requires both scalability and fairness of VR
service. Existing VR systems heavily rely on various heuristic designs and do
not efficiently exploit VR content commonality and its predictability, which
impede their large-scale deployment. This project aims to develop the
theoretical foundations and complete implementation of a system for providing
both personalized and scalable collaborative VR experience over wireless
networks. This project will integrate machine learning, wireless networking, and
mobile computing to enable high-quality and scalable wireless immersive
applications on commodity mobile devices. The theory and practical
implementations to be developed in this project will be integrated into both
undergraduate and graduate curriculum, as well as exposing K-12 students to
state-of-the-art wireless and VR technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
designs are motivated by a number of insights that we have developed from our
preliminary work, including (1) viewport-adaptive rendering; (2) commonality
among VR content for multiple users to enable multicasting; and (3)
predictability of VR content to enable prefetching. The proposed research will
contribute to and advance both theoretical and system-oriented research in the
fields of wireless networks and virtual reality. The project explicitly exploits
the unique characteristics of both immersive VR applications and wireless
networks, and propose the following four interdependent research thrusts: (I)
Dealing with network and prediction uncertainties: &lt;br/&gt;This thrust will
investigate algorithm designs to optimize personalized user experience given
both network and viewport prediction uncertainties. (II) Meeting stringent
immersive service requirements: This thrust will develop wireless scheduling
algorithms that provide stringent immersive, personalized service guarantees for
multiple VR users. (III) Supporting smooth collaborative interaction: This
thrust will focus on the algorithm design that leverages the VR content
similarities and predictabilities that naturally emerge during collaborative
interactions. (IV) Scalable system integration, implementation, evaluation, and
deployment: This thrust will integrate Research Thrusts I through III into a
holistic system, perform system-level optimizations, and evaluate it through lab
experiments and real-world classroom deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.