* 2152644
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: After the Breach: Detecting Lateral Movement, Reconnaissance, and Exfiltration in Enterprise Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Geoffrey Voelker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

Large-scale data breaches and ransomware attacks have become a pressing threat
for government agencies and corporations alike. However, what distinguishes
these events is rarely the technical mechanisms by which unauthorized access was
first obtained, but rather the methodical actions taken after gaining such
access. Thus, while efforts to protect against initial intrusions remain
important, it is clearly every bit as important to develop sound approaches for
detecting and subduing the actions of attackers already operating inside an
organization. This project tackles precisely this problem: how to detect,
identify and remediate malicious actors via their operational actions inside an
organization. To address this goal, the project’s novelty is in developing a
network analysis system to model the causality of computer and network events –
ways in which an action that occurred on one machine can be explained as an
attacker pivoting from another machine in pursuit of increased access in an
organization. The project’s broader significance and importance are in providing
a well-founded rigorous basis for evaluating best practices for detecting and
mitigating enterprise-scale data breaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an
inferred causal graph of such activities, the investigators develop and evaluate
detectors for evidence of internal reconnaissance, lateral movement and external
communication. Using both empirical data sources and a simulator for testing a
range of enterprise network models, the investigators explore the extent to
which this causal framework can distinguish known attacks from the broad range
of benign activities that take place. Finally, the project also evaluates the
value of such frameworks for both triage and post-incident response, removing
the manual work involved in identifying which machines and accounts may have
been compromised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.