* 2152373
* Physics-inspired Coarsening for Turbulent Flow Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Perry Johnson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

Fluid turbulence constitutes a key physical phenomenon with vital implications
in a wide range of engineering and scientific fields. However, turbulent flows
are notoriously costly to simulate and predict due to their essentially
nonlinear, chaotic behavior involving a wide range of coupled length and time
scales. An increasingly attractive method is to compute only the dynamics of
large-scale motions with models to represent the net effect of unresolved
features, an approach known as Large-Eddy Simulation (LES). The underlying
theory of LES based on spatial filtering, however, suffers from several
shortcomings, including the lack of an accurate, consistent treatment of
nonuniform grid resolution, boundaries, and interfaces. This proposal introduces
the idea of physics-inspired coarsening as a potentially transformative concept
for addressing these challenges. The main objective of the project is to develop
the physics-inspired framework for turbulent flow simulations and to test it on
representative flows sharing the essential characteristics with many turbulent
flows of interest. As such, the proposed work aims to develop game-changing
simulation technologies relevant to applications including oceanography,
atmospheric science, renewable energy, aerospace, propulsion, astrophysics, and
even human health. The project will include the development of a new
undergraduate course in numerical methods and a fully integrated undergraduate
research project to serve as on-ramps to computational science and engineering
research at UC Irvine, a Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
essential hypothesis of the physics-inspired approach is that low-cost digital
representations of turbulent flows can be generated in a particularly
advantageous way by leveraging physical processes that limit dynamical
complexity in nature. Of foremost importance for turbulent flows, this means
mimicking the physics of viscosity to develop a coarsening procedure. The
physics-inspired and spatial filtering approaches are mathematically equivalent
in the very simplest of cases, where spatial filtering has proven most
effective. For more complex, realistic cases such as flow simulations with non-
uniform grid resolution or turbulent flow modeling near a solid surface, the
physics-inspired method provides a novel modeling framework that avoids the
shortcomings associated with spatial filtering. The project will perform Direct
Numerical Simulations together with LES to rigorously test new models in a range
of flow conditions including isotropic turbulence, wall-free shear flows, and
wall-bounded flows. Evaluations will include both direct testing of model
accuracy prior to implementation as well as integrated testing of model
performance within LES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.