* 2152655
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: Local Gaussian Process Approaches for Predicting Jump Behaviors of Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Chiwoo Park, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 293,236.00

This award will contribute to national prosperity and economic welfare by
developing tools to support the efficient and effective design of modern
engineering systems such as smart factories and smart autonomous systems for
material handling. A major challenge in designing such systems is that their
performance can change abruptly with small changes in design variables, creating
discontinuous design responses. This grant will develop efficient surrogate
modeling methods to predict design performance in the presence of such
discontinuities which can then be exploited in design optimization. This work
will facilitate the solution of complex engineering design problems and will be
evaluated in the design of a smart manufacturing system for carbon nanotubes,
and the design of automated material handling systems. The award will also
contribute to the development of a data science-capable workforce by providing
multidisciplinary research, training, and international collaboration
opportunities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students. The research team
will broadly disseminate their research findings and share data and the
resulting software packages to the data science and systems engineering
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make substantial
contributions to the areas of surrogate modeling, sequential design, active
learning, system design, and advanced manufacturing. System performance is
modeled as a piece-wise continuous function of design variables, motivating
local Gaussian process (GP) surrogate modeling. The approach accommodates regime
changes around a prediction location, segmenting local data based on the
estimated partition(s). Only the local data belonging to the same regime as a
prediction location affects the model prediction. Research activities will
explore two ideas: (1) local GP modeling with local data selection; and (2)
smoother alternatives that augment design variables with probabilistic regime
estimates. A sequential design approach to optimize data acquisition plans for
training the new surrogate models will also be investigated. The resulting new
meta-models and sequential design scheme will be validated using design problems
in carbon nanotube synthesis and smart material handling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.