* 2152668
* RUI: Social Information Use and Communication in Aquatic Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessica Ward, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2025
* USD 487,606.00

Animals laid as eggs in nests may obtain information during embryonic
development about the environment that they are likely to experience after
hatching. This ability to learn during the egg stage is thought to be beneficial
because it prepares individuals to respond to resources and risks and can
improve survival. Although we know that many aquatic organisms, including fish
and amphibians, can learn during the egg stage, we do not fully understand how
they learn. Previous research has shown that aquatic embryos can detect and
learn from visual and chemical cues in the water around them and directly learn
from those cues. However, little is known about how the presence of neighbors in
the nest contributes to learning during the egg stage. Given the proximity of
eggs to one another in a nest, embryos also have the potential to gain
information about the environment by paying attention to the behavior of other
embryos (i.e., learning through social mechanisms). This project will use a
common, freshwater fish species, the fathead minnow, to investigate whether and
how embryos learn about locally abundant predators during the egg stage from
other individuals in the nest, and to understand how this information is
transferred among egg-bound individuals. These data will provide new insight
into the development of behavior and communication at a critical early life
stage. The PI will also collaborate with science education faculty and an
interdisciplinary team of undergraduates to develop and deliver education
materials for K-12 students (via a Junior Scientist education program) and
conduct outreach to the local community with a focus on evolutionary biology,
biodiversity, and the process of scientific inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
embryonic stage is a critical window of development and embryos are highly
sensitive to environmental cues in a variety of modalities. During the egg
stage, individuals may obtain information about the environment directly (via
asocial learning mechanisms) or by observing the behavior of conspecifics
(social learning mechanisms), or via a combination of the two. Although previous
research has shown that embryos of various oviparous aquatic taxa are sensitive
to environmental cues that increase fitness after hatching, we know very little
about embryonic social information use and learning in lower aquatic
vertebrates. In addition, few studies have explicitly tested hypotheses related
to learning in aquatic embryos prior to hatching, and thus numerous questions
remain about the development and mechanisms of learning at this key stage of
ontogeny. This project will test multiple, non-mutually exclusive hypotheses of
social learning and information transfer to determine when learned behaviors are
first expressed in a common, oviparous freshwater fish species, Pimephales
promelas, and how and from whom do embryos learn? The results will also provide
insight into how embryos perceive and transmit conspecific sensory information.
In addition to advancing our understanding of the evolution and development of
behavior, learning, social cognition, communication and sensory ecology, these
data may also promote new insight in other areas of behavioral ecology,
including predator-prey interactions and mate choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.