* 2152221
* Linking Quantum Sensing Technologies across Disciplines: a Convergent Quantum Sciences and Engineering Graduate Training Program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Sophia Hayes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,998,446.00

Quantum sensors rely on the unique physical properties of nature at the atomic
and subatomic scales to detect phenomena that evade identification in the human-
scaled realm of lived experience. As such quantum behavior finds increasingly
more applications, there is a growing need for a workforce prepared to discover,
develop, and deploy the science and engineering advancements in this emerging
field. In addition, awareness of how discoveries in the lab can impact the
economy and the private sector is critical to harnessing these developments for
society to benefit. To capitalize on such developments, this NSF Research
Traineeships (NRT) project, "Linking Quantum Sensing TechnoLogies across
Disciplines (LinQ-STL)," is establishing an interdisciplinary program of study
to connect research efforts across the St. Louis region between Washington
University, the University of Missouri – St. Louis, St. Louis University, and
Harris Stowe State University. The project’s vision is to build quantum fluency
among scientists and engineers spanning the disciplines of chemistry, biology,
physics, medicine, engineering, and mathematics. LinQ-STL achieves these goals
by building common vocabulary, research community awareness, research identity,
and technical skills that will prepare the trainees to launch a range of
professional careers. The project anticipates training 100 students, including
40 funded trainees from chemistry, physics, computer, and electrical and system
engineering doctorate programs. Furthermore, the project's investigators seek to
create institutional change in graduate education by demonstrating how career-
building internships and experiences aligned with students’ professional
interests can affect their career trajectories and success. This model will be
broadly disseminated to other disciplines and
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three essential areas guide the experimental,
theoretical, and computational work of this project: “looking out” beyond the
Earth into the universe; “looking in” to meso- and microscopic domains of
quantum bits and materials phenomena; and “looking where we cannot yet see”
comprising efforts to identify heretofore unmeasured domains such as dark matter
detection. LinQ-STL will pursue opportunities for quantum sensing, with cross-
cutting themes such as new instrumentation and new materials, data-enabled
science via machine learning, and photon detection over decades of energy
scales. Researchers “looking out” (astrophysics) will develop observational
tools across orders of magnitude in photon energy, enabling the acquisition of
massive data sets. Researchers “looking in” at the smallest material length
scales will use photon spectroscopies and the unexpected benefits of materials
defects to probe new behaviors. Finally, “looking where we cannot yet see”
includes new quantum light imaging modalities applicable in biology and medical
imaging, and new probes of topological and quantum phenomena in materials.
Research by the project team will also probe how students perceive themselves as
science learners via their science identity, racial and gender identity, and
efficacy beliefs—to diversify the workforce by acknowledging the role of
identity in enabling students to become the next generation of leaders and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs. Because of its alignment with the
research thrusts within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS), the project is receiving co-funding from the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.