* 2152180
* Neuromechanical Resonance and Distributed Control in Organismal Pumping
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Alexander Hoover, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2022
* USD 103,532.00

For many swimming and flying animals, locomotion emerges from the transfer of
momentum from an organism's body or appendage to the local fluid environment.
This motion is a result of internal neuromechanical processes that translate
neural signals into the activation of muscular tissue. As tissue-engineered
pumps and biohybrid robotics improve with every technological advancement,
developing the theory behind the actuation of their excitable materials is
paramount. While much of the theory in organismal biomechanics and biomimetic
materials has examined their performance in the context of mechanical resonance,
very little work has been done examining the internal actuation of excitable
materials. The interplay between neural time scales, that signal for muscular
activation, and mechanical time scales, that are inherent to the elastic profile
of the structure, have been found to play an important role in the resulting
motion of an actuated material. Furthermore, understanding the role pacemakers
play in driving the neural signaling can elucidate how robustness can be
ingrained into excitable systems. This research program will develop and employ
a suite of mathematical models that describe neuromechanical activation and
pacemaker processes, as well as incorporate “living” materials into
computational fluid-structure interaction models. The mathematical principles
developed here are relevant in the design of actuators for other biological
pumps and systems with excitable materials. The project will involve work with
both graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this research program will be to both examine the mathematical theory that girds
the interplay between the neuromechanical actuation wave speed and the material
wave speed, as well as examine the role pacemaker processes play in driving
these neuromechanical systems. To examine this interplay, a moon jellyfish is
chosen as a model organism due to the relative simplicity of their nervous
system and muscle morphology. To develop this framework the investigators will
employ three different classes of mathematical models: (1) 1-D/2-D elastic wave
equation model with internal actuation; (2) a coupled neuronal network model to
describe the neurophysiological activity that leads to actuation; (3) a 3-D
computational fluid-structure interaction (FSI) model to describe the forces and
motion of a jellyfish bell. The research program's focus is on the roles of
actuation wave speeds, pacemaker processes, and the fluid environment plays in
the performance of organismal pumps and excitable materials. The resulting
framework will be used to develop the first 3-D model of a swimming organism
that fully couples the surrounding fluid with an animal whose emergent
kinematics are a consequence of neuromuscular activation, elastic properties,
and pacemaker processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.