* 2152819
* CRII: SHF: Assessing and Profiling Continuous Integration for Machine Learning Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Foyzul Hassan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 190,290.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous integration (CI) is a
widely adopted software development practice for faster code change integration
and maintenance of software quality attributes. At the same time, machine
learning (ML), including deep learning (DL), is quickly gaining popularity for
solving complex problems. Like typical software, ML applications also require
many iterations to improve software quality. However, iterative ML application-
development processes face higher-level difficulties in adopting CI in three
aspects. First, developers lack systematic understanding for managing ML data,
models and code in the CI workflow. For ML-based systems, the process to define
the CI workflow is currently much more experimental in nature. Second, existing
CI systems are lacking in the handling of ML-centric challenges such as defining
evaluation conditions of ML models, formulating complicated build steps, long
build and integration time, etc. For ML applications, the build process is much
more complicated due to the complex dependency of data, model, code, etc. Third,
data scientists lack the technical support to adopt and maintain CI
configurations due to complex interconnections among data, model, code, etc. and
the changing nature of the ML applications. For data scientists with limited or
no knowledge of CI, it becomes increasingly difficult to adopt CI for ML
applications, and even if adopted it requires too much manual effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make progress in acquiring knowledge on
the feasibility and effectiveness of the current adoption of CI for ML
applications. This will assist in understanding the workflow of CI for ML
applications and identifying improvement scopes. Moreover, the project will
develop a novel CI profiling framework to generate a dependency graph among
heterogeneous artifacts (e.g., data, model, code, etc.) of ML applications. The
knowledge and framework will serve as the basis for future research on automatic
generation and maintenance of ML CI configuration, mining software repositories,
build optimization and monitoring systems for ML CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.