* 2152984
* LEAP-HI: GOALI: Accelerating Design for Additive Manufacturing of Smart Multimaterial Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Mary Frecker, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,013,747.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), also known as 3D Printing, is the process of making
customized parts layer-by-layer, directly from a digital file without the need
for part-specific tooling. Relative to conventional manufacturing processes, AM
can shorten lead times, reduce waste, avoid supply chain disruptions, and enable
unprecedented levels of functionality, design freedom, and customization with
significant benefit to industries ranging from aerospace systems to medical
devices. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project supports fundamental research to establish new AM capabilities
for smart devices that can be rapidly customized for individual patients and
enable engineered changes in shape as the patients’ needs change. The highly
integrated nature of this project requires addressing challenges in materials
science, design engineering, and AM simultaneously to enable robust
manufacturing of advanced smart devices–projected to be a $98.2 billion market
by 2025–thus improving US competitiveness in crosscutting industries from
medical devices to advanced electronics. Moreover, the project provides an
opportunity for a gender studies scholar to study the process of collaboration
among the all-female team of PIs and develop a better understanding of how
technological and scientific advances are achieved and how to support technical
leaders of any gender as they pursue similar goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent advances in AM technologies and the growth
of research into smart devices and active materials, including printable ones,
few researchers have demonstrated AM of smart multimaterial structures and
devices. This award provides a transformative opportunity to address this gap in
knowledge by careful integration of processing, modeling, design, and
characterization, and by investigating the complex interactions between multiple
foci. Fundamental investigations include: (1) development of new polymer-based
active materials with significantly enhanced performance via gradation of
fillers, (2) development of a novel AM process that integrates multiple
materials and functionally grades them on demand, (3) development of an
efficient, robust design method that accounts for process variability, and (4)
an ethnographic analysis of the female leadership team with the potential to
positively impact the field of mechanical engineering more broadly. The results
are expected to enable the creation of customizable smart devices that can be
commercialized by industry partners in medical and other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.