* 2152774
* Accelerating Bayesian Dimension Reduction for Dynamic Network Data with Many Observations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrew Holbrook, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Global viral epidemics produce vast amounts of high-dimensional spatiotemporal
data. Scientists, businesses, governments and independent organizations want to
learn from this data so they can understand basic biological mechanisms, invest
capital, allocate aid and design coherent policy in a changing world. Analyzing
spatial associations within viral contagion is, unsurprisingly, an area of
immense scientific interest, but the task requires accounting for the dynamic
and multiscale transportation networks that shape the global economy. This
project seeks to advance knowledge of statistical inference from stochastic
process models in the context of massive amounts of dynamic and network-indexed
data. The proposed research ideas will avoid costly direct representations of
network structure and instead use Bayesian dimension reduction to
probabilistically map network dynamics to a continuous domain. The project
combines theoretical and methodological developments in scalable Bayesian
dimension reduction; develops efficient algorithms into open-source, high
performance computing (HPC) software; and applies them to the high-impact
analysis of viruses including, but not limited to, SARS-CoV-2. The project will
emphasize the combination of rigorous statistical methodology with parallel
computing techniques available to any scientist with moderate
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine theory,
methods and applications in advancing knowledge of statistical inference for
network-indexed processes. Bayesian multidimensional scaling (BMDS) stands as an
established tool for probabilistic dimension reduction of network data but the
method's quadratic computational complexity prohibits big data application. The
project will extend BMDS to the analysis of millions of data points using a
multipronged approach. From a theoretical standpoint, the investigators will
show that the classical BMDS model is strictly equivalent to a modified BMDS
model with sparse couplings between observations. This 'free lunch' result will
amount to a linear reduction in the computational complexity of the classical
algorithm, but its use will require an upper bound on the rank of the
traditional BMDS distance matrix. A jointly methodological and theoretical
investigation will develop a cutting-edge rank estimation procedure for
Euclidean distance matrices (EDM) and derive non-asymptotic and asymptotic
bounds for the rank estimation error and its impact on the modified BMDS
posterior. Bayesian inference with the developed sparse BMDS (S-BMDS) will
amount to simulating a massive N-body problem with sparse pairwise couplings. A
primary methodological investigation will develop fast parallel algorithms for
computing (1) the S-BMDS likelihood and gradient, and (2) the EDM rank in ways
that efficiently use multi-core and vectorized central processing units (CPU)
and multiple graphics processing units (GPU). The investigators will then allow
trends in Google mobility data to inform effective distances between viruses and
use our developed machinery to model the spread of, e.g., SARS-CoV-2 through
global mobility space. The project also includes an expansive plan for
educational, outreach and mentoring activities and will actively disseminate the
research findings in a form of open-source HPC
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.