* 2152630
* Acquisition of Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometer and Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Plant Biomarker Characterization and Isotopic Determinations
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Sarah Feakins, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2025
* USD 473,608.00

This award will fund the acquisition of a gas chromatography mass spectrometer
and an isotope ratio mass spectrometer for biomarker identification,
quantification, and measurement. Plant wax biomarkers serve as a protective
coating on living plants and have proven the capability to yield geological
evidence spanning decades to millions of years. There is considerable interest
in tracking changes in the carbon cycle through time, changes in ecosystems, and
changes in hydroclimate. Future research of this group at the University of
Southern California (USC) depends upon replacement of aging instrumentation. A
particular focus will be on the Miocene time period, which is increasingly being
recognized as a suitable analogue environment for future climate change. The
principal investigator seeks a dense network of hydroclimate and vegetation
records to assess response to global warmth. Allied to this will be
understanding of the food-water-soil nexus via translational activities of this
geological research to modern plant-soil continuums to optimize soil carbon
sequestration and minimize plant water usage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to these research objectives, the new analytical capability will enable hands-on
learning for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and some advanced
undergraduate students toward career readiness in analytical sciences as
demonstrated by recent placements of trainees. The principal investigator has a
strong track record of developing research experiences for diverse STEM trainees
with career interests related to their biogeochemistry laboratory and analytical
experience at USC, that find careers in environmental, food and health sciences
and engineering in academic, government and corporate sectors. Instrument
related communications include a webpage with resources including laboratory
protocols, scripts, parts list and instructional video on Youtube, to which new
content videos will be added to support the development of the next generation
of researchers. A new local connection with Santa Monica College (SMC), will
offer flexible two-way mentoring and training connections, building awareness of
laboratory instrumentation and research questions to SMC students, and providing
project management and team-leading experience for USC graduate students towards
career readiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.