* 2152468
* LEAP-HI: Dynamic Sensing and Computational Approaches to Assess Individual-level Heat Risk Across Diverse Populations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Ariane Middel, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Extreme heat is an invisible and deadly disaster with wide-ranging adverse
effects on people’s health and well-being. It is increasing in frequency and
severity, and its impacts are felt disproportionately by vulnerable populations.
Yet, there is a minimal understanding of how body temperatures are elevated in
extreme heat because prolonged human exposure to such conditions is dangerous.
This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure
(LEAP-HI) project leverages expertise from disparate disciplines to pioneer a
field method for measuring human heat exposure with unprecedented detail. The
method merges an advanced mobile biometeorological station with a human-shaped
thermal manikin. The manikin measures the heat load received by an average human
body and mimics the thermoregulatory system’s response. Physical methods will be
co-developed with computational manikins to allow a realistic heat exposure
assessment across diverse demographics and body shapes. The research will help
develop more equitable heat exposure sensing and modeling approaches, thus help
to mitigate the health risks of severely hot weather. The manikin will be
leveraged to engage the general public and students through multimedia outreach
programs and open house events. The integrated research and education activities
will emphasize the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM, including
female early-career faculty investigators and a transdisciplinary student body
that spans undergraduates and graduates from engineering, sustainability,
climate, arts, and health sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
research models and methods of varying complexity that translate built
environment thermal measurements or simulations into realistic convective and
radiative boundary conditions for three-dimensional computational manikin
simulations of diverse demographics. These models will address knowledge gaps
surrounding the impact of air turbulence on convection dynamics and the effect
of directional and spectral radiation distributions on the radiative flux on
various body parts and shapes. Novel thermal manikin field methods and soft
composite heat-mode filtering manikin coatings will be developed to validate and
benchmark models and manikin simulations in varying environments. The project
will also establish new field calibration, data collection, and analysis
protocols. A database will be created based on various “heatscapes” and evolving
“riskscapes,” calculated from heat load and strain simulations of computational
manikins representing the diversity of the U.S.
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.