* 2152725
* GOALI: Additive Manufacturing of Nano-twinned Metals via Localized Pulsed Electrodeposition (L-PED)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Jagannathan Rajagopalan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2023
* USD 80,932.00

Additive manufacturing is revolutionizing manufacturing by enabling layer-by-
layer production of components from computer models. Metal additive
manufacturing has been adopted by industry at a slower pace compared to 3D
printing of plastics, polymers, and hydrogels. This Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project involves fundamental research to
enable expansion of additive manufacturing of metals. The process enabled by
this research will be focused on a specialized type of metals, called `nano-
twinned' metals, which exhibit simultaneous high strength, high ductility, and
high electrical conductivity. These properties are enabled by their special
microstructure, which is distinctly different than conventional metals.
Specifically, in the atomic structure of these metals, parallel arrays of
specialized boundaries (twin boundaries, TBs) form in which atoms have a mirror
symmetry with respect to the boundary. These boundaries strengthen the metal.
Also, electric current can readily flow through mirror atoms in the boundary,
making these materials well-suited for electrical applications. This fundamental
research will result in an additive manufacturing process that can be adopted in
many industries such as for structural applications, interconnects in
electronics, and sensors. This research may result in a viable commercial low-
cost 3D printer for metals, which can be adopted by academic research labs,
educational facilities, and small manufacturing enterprises (SMEs). The
partnership with industry on this GOALI project will facilitate such
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, fundamental research will be
conducted on a new process for additive manufacturing of metals with controlled
twin lamella thickness and twin density, and hence controlled mechanical and
electrical properties. The process is based on a localized pulsed
electrodeposition process. Nano-twinned metals are ultrafine-grained or fine-
grained metals that contain a high density of layered nanoscale regions. These
regions are divided by coherent twin boundaries. Nano-twinned metals have an
unprecedented combination of ultrahigh strength, high ductility, and high
electrical conductivity. This type of metal in bulk form can be synthesized via
various approaches including electrodeposition, recrystallization, phase
transformation, and sputter deposition, and plastic deformation processing.
However, there is no current process for additive manufacturing of nano-twinned
metals. This project will develop a theoretical understanding of additive
manufacturing of nano-twinned metals by localized pulsed electrodeposition
(L-PED) using combined multi-physics simulation and multi-scale experiments. In
addition, nano-twinned metals will be manufactured by 3D L-PED and the process-
structure-property relationship of the printed metals will be investigated.