* 2152303
* Collaborative Research: SBP: Scientific topics and careers at the intersection: an algorithmic approach
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Cassidy Sugimoto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 03/31/2025
* USD 219,023.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the direct harms to science wrought
by structural racism and the benefits derived by the inclusion of people of
color and other historically marginalized groups in the scientific workforce.
Specifically, this work seeks to (a) quantify the participation of people of
color and members of historically marginalized populations in the production of
science, (b) elucidate their role in propelling intellectual innovations, and
(c) understand how the distribution of labor and composition of scientific teams
creates barriers and pathways to their scientific success. The project will
support the mission of open science, by making the algorithms and publications
openly available to propel this area of research. Finally, the PI team will
recruit a cohort of a dozen student Fellows from a variety of disciplines and
countries to discuss the ways in which they incorporate their lived experiences
into research design and the challenges and barriers to this process. Priority
will be given to doctoral students of color, or who identify as a member of a
historically marginalized population within their country of affiliation. The
goal of the fellowship is to empower students to navigate academic spaces by
suggesting new topical directions with advisors, to cultivate change in terms of
how authors are distributed in scientific publications, and to examine what and
how science is conducted. Our research aims to empirically examine the degree to
which diversity in the scientific workforce creates a more innovative and robust
scientific system. The research has strong implications for all sectors of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds upon previous quantitative
analyses to construct more robust and equitable algorithms that take into
consideration contextual factors that influence the performance of the
algorithm. To address our primary aim we use articles’ abstract, title, and
keywords to train a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to infer the topics
within a corpus of papers and the distribution of topics within each article.
Data sources include millions of articles and distinct authors indexed in the
Web of Science (WoS) database. To address our primary aim we will use articles’
abstract, title, and keywords to train a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model
and to extend our work on intersecting race, ethnicity, and gender inequalities
in the US research landscape to citation and collaboration patterns, the role of
institutional affiliation and changes over time; infer the topics within a
corpus of papers, and the distribution of topics within each article. Our second
aim is to determine if variation by race, ethnicity and gender identified in the
US context translates to other national contexts. To address this second aim we
will replicate and expand our methodology to two other scientifically
productive, diverse societies. Comparison across all three nation states will
allow for the identification of potentially generalizable characteristics,
mechanisms that can be used to improve equity in science across the globe, and
knowledge of how topicality of research in different countries is affected by
the racial composition of teams. This research will provide a scalable
methodological contribution that extends beyond the confines of this single
research project and will allow other researchers to analyze race, ethnicity,
and gender in any dataset that includes individual
names.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.