* 2152636
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP-17- OCE and -ANT Sections: External sources, cycling and processes affecting mercury speciation in the South Pacific and Southern Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2025
* USD 360,054.00

This project will evaluate the concentrations of mercury (Hg) in its various
forms in the ocean and atmosphere to examine the factors that control its
concentration and chemistry in remote regions of the ocean. The proposed work
will examine mercury sources, primarily from the atmosphere, and how mercury is
finally removed from ocean waters. Specifically, this study is focused on the
South Pacific and Southern Ocean around Antarctica, regions that are remote from
human activity and their associated Hg inputs to the biosphere. Human activity
has substantially enhanced the amount of Hg in the biosphere and its levels in
seafood consumed by humans, and therefore their potential exposure, but its
impact in these remote regions is poorly constrained. The measurements will be
made during two ocean expeditions that form part of the international GEOTRACES
program. GEOTRACES aims to examine the concentrations and distributions of trace
elements and their isotopes in the atmosphere, surface and deep oceans of the
world. Mercury is a primarily a concern because of its ability to bioaccumulate
in marine food chains, primarily in its organic form, methylmercury (MeHg).
Elevated levels of MeHg in fish and other marine organisms is a concern for
human and wildlife health due to exposure through seafood consumption, and the
factors controlling this exposure are not well understood. The proposed work
will support three graduate and several undergraduate students across the three
participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the two expeditions, the
research team will collect high resolution data on the concentrations of the
primary Hg forms in the atmosphere, the water column, and the sediments, to
examine the sources of Hg to these regions and the processes that lead to the
conversion of Hg to its more toxic and bioaccumulative form, MeHg. Dissolved and
particulate forms of the various Hg species (gaseous elemental Hg, ionic Hg,
MeHg and dimethylmercury) will be determined in the atmosphere and throughout
the water column using high resolution sampling and novel techniques.
Additionally, measurements of Hg stable isotopes in atmospheric and water
samples will be used to identify sources (e.g., geogenic or anthropogenic
inputs) and delivery mechanisms (e.g., dry or wet deposition, glacial melt) of
Hg to these regions. This comprehensive project will leverage Hg speciation and
Hg source tracking capabilities to assess the importance of human activity and
climate change in altering the amount of Hg and MeHg in these ocean waters, and
the resultant levels in marine organisms consumed by
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.