* 2152135
* Human-Machine Systems for Physical Rehabilitation
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Eric Schearer, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

There is a compelling national need for advanced research to develop technology
for people with disabilities. Some of the most vexing challenges include
rehabilitating sensorimotor coordination to prevent falls, restoring motor
function after paralysis, and regenerating muscle after traumatic injuries.
Despite the development of impressive devices, people with disabilities abandon
assistive technologies at alarmingly high rates largely because their
perspectives are not included in the development process. Assistive technology
is increasingly more intertwined in a web of human, ethical, legal,
psychological, and social factors. Meanwhile, disability groups seek to
participate in the research process to shed light on these issues. Against this
background, graduate engineering education to date has been largely isolated
from the complexity of disabled persons’ experiences, from rehabilitation
therapy education, and from fields examining the larger impacts of disability
and technology in the community. Moreover, traditional discipline-specific
training inhibits transdisciplinary thinking that can lead to versatile
rehabilitative technologies. To address these shortcomings in graduate
education, this NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) project will create a graduate
traineeship program that equips students to work on transdisciplinary research
teams that successfully partner with people with disabilities to develop
rehabilitation and assistive technologies. The training program will: develop
courses to teach skills for spanning perspectives in human-machine systems,
create a community that immerses students in multiple facets of disability, and
test a model that promotes research-inspired collaborative teaching across
disciplines. The significance of the program is that it will produce a
traineeship model for engineers, psychologists, and urban experts to collaborate
with therapy professionals and the disability community to deliver technology
for the most complex rehabilitation challenges that people with disabilities use
in their daily lives. The project anticipates training 20 PhD and 10 MS
students, including 15 funded trainees, from Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Computer Science, Exercise Science,
Experimental Psychology, and Urban Studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will
participate on three transdisciplinary teams that will include people with lived
disability experience according to the Integrated Knowledge Translation
Principles for teaming with the disability community. Three objectives guide the
project team's work. First is to create physical human-machine interaction
technologies that improve individuals’ abilities to access, engage with, and
manipulate their physical, social, and sensory environments. Second is to
understand human processing and communication and develop artificial processing
and communication to allow people with limited sensorimotor function to engage
in meaningful activities (e.g., self-feeding, grooming, cooking) in realistic
environments. Third is to develop therapeutic agents that are engineered to
treat organ defects at a cellular and tissue level. This novel, human-centered
traineeship model will include users in design, development, and implementation
of technologies, while expanding students’ mindsets and skills to work
interactively towards these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.