* 2152562
* Collaborative Research: Harnessing Mechanics for the Design of All-Solid-State Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Roseanne Warren, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 321,996.00

This grant will support fundamental research on the mechanics of lithium anodes
in all-solid-state lithium batteries. All-solid-state lithium batteries are a
promising candidate for next-generation, high-capacity rechargeable batteries.
Lithium anodes can provide the highest energy density among all known anode
materials. Solid-state electrolytes improve battery safety by eliminating
flammable liquid electrolytes. However, new problems emerge. During charging,
non-uniform lithium plating occurs at the anode, which can cause fracture of the
current collector. During discharging, non-uniform lithium stripping leads to
void formation, dead lithium, and capacity drop. Cracking and dendrite growth
also occur in solid electrolytes, causing short-circuits. This research will
investigate how mechanics can be used to achieve uniform and stable plating and
stripping in lithium anodes. This research will advance next-generation battery
technology for electric vehicles, contributing to the national economy and
sustainability. This project will integrate the research capabilities of two
Utah universities, and train next-generation engineers and scientists for
research in renewable energy. Moreover, this grant will enhance the diversity of
STEM fields by recruiting and training under-represented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research hypothesizes that mechanics can be harnessed
as a control parameter to program electrochemical processes in all-solid-state
lithium batteries and achieve “plasticity-assisted” uniform plating and
stripping of lithium. Four research tasks are researched to test this
hypothesis: (1) lithium plating and stripping are investigated using correlated
mechanical-(electro)chemical-morphological characterization and residual stress
measurements; (2) density functional theory and molecular dynamics simulations
of lithium-solid electrolyte interfaces are used to quantify the stress and
geometric effects on lithium plating/stripping at the atomic scale; (3) informed
by the atomic simulations in Task 2, a continuum model is built to account for
the interplay of stresses, interfacial geometries and chemical reactions; (4)
integrated experiments and computations are leveraged in a mechanics-driven
design approach for anode interfaces in all-solid-state lithium batteries to
engineer plasticity-assisted uniform lithium
plating/stripping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.