* 2152413
* AF: Small: Streaming Complexity of Constraint Satisfaction Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Madhu Sudan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

A large part of modern computation involves massive streams of data that need to
be analyzed by tiny processors that are incapable of much computation or storing
much information as it whizzes by. Streaming-algorithms research tackles this
challenge head on and aims to come up with novel algorithms that manage to
extract some global features of the data despite the limited time and memory.
While many surprising tasks are by now known to be solved by streaming
algorithms, and others are known to require large memory, this area still lacks
broad understanding. This project aims for a systematic study of the power of
streaming algorithms in the context of constraint-satisfaction problems (CSPs).
CSPs are a broad, natural class of optimization problems that have been
intensely explored in the context of fast algorithms without memory constraints.
In that context they have served as a valuable tool in understanding the
diversity of algorithms, inherent limits on algorithmic performance, and in
understanding which algorithm to use for a newly discovered task. This project
aims for a similar understanding of the power of streaming algorithms when
memory is limited. Success in such a project would vastly improve understanding
of the power, the limits, and the variety that exists among algorithms that
analyze massive streams of data with limited computational resources. Such an
understanding would yield a readily applicable toolkit for an application
designer aiming to design a streaming algorithm for a newly encountered task,
thereby vastly improving the bridge from the theory to its application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically this project aims for a complete
classification of all constraint-satisfaction problems in the setting of
streaming algorithms. Constraint-satisfaction problems form an infinite class of
optimization problems where the goal is to find an assignment to n variables
that maximizes the number of satisfied constraints, where a single constraint
depends on a constant number of variables and restricts the joint assignment of
these variables. The sets of restricted assignments defines the problem. The
goal of the classification is to determine the exact approximability of the
optimum for every constraint-satisfaction problem, when restricted to
subpolynomial space in n, and to sublinear space in n. Additional goals involve
understanding the limits of multipass algorithms. Some concrete algorithms that
the project explores are "sketching algorithms," "snapshot algorithms," and
"random-walk algorithms". The former two are known to exhibit surprising power.
The latter classes of algorithms are broader but have not been shown to be more
powerful. The ultimate goal of this project is to resolve the strength of these
algorithms. On the lower-bound side, the project will explore new questions and
models in communication complexity and new tools in information theory with the
aim of proving limits to these algorithms. The educational component of the
project involves developing courses in information theory, and including modules
related to streaming algorithms in the undergraduate curriculum. Progress from
the project will be reported on public domain sites like the arxiv
(www.arxiv.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.