* 2152011
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Modeling, Prediction, and Validation of Multi-Scale Dynamics for Three-Dimensional Chromatin Structures in Cell Differentiation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Jianrong Wang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2026
* USD 382,522.00

This interdisciplinary award develops mathematical models and computational
algorithms to dissect the mechanisms of how different types of cells are formed
from stem cells. The formation of specific cell types plays pivotal roles in all
aspects of life, and different tissues are composed of hundreds of types of
cells. As one of the underlying mechanisms, the 3D structure of DNA undergoes
dynamic reshaping and instructs this complex process. However, it is under-
studied and quantitative models are lacking due to the complexity of the system
and large amounts of noisy data. The project will establish a novel mathematical
framework to understand the dynamics of DNA structures and its effects on new
cell type formation. Efficient computational and statistical algorithms will
also be designed to discover the molecular drivers, which will be interrogated
by cutting-edge experiments. The integrative strategy will lead to new systems-
level insights into the molecular mechanisms of the formation of diverse cell
types, with broad impacts on human health, synthetic biology and disease
analyses, including neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. To expand the
societal impacts, the project will integrate the scientific discoveries with a
series of outreach activities for public engagement, including new interactive
educational modules and platforms. Interdisciplinary hands-on training will be
developed for both undergraduate and graduate students, with an emphasis on
increasing the diversity and participation of under-represented groups of
students for STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to
theoretically and quantitatively delineate the functional roles of dynamic 3D
genome structures in the process of multi-lineage cell differentiation. Due to
the complexity of multi-scale 3D organizations of chromatin, the coupled
dynamics of transcription and epigenetic factors, and the high rates of missing
data in genome-wide experiments, systems-level modeling of the temporal dynamics
of 3D chromatin through specific cell differentiation trajectory has been
challenging. The project tackles this fundamental problem using an integrative
strategy by combining mathematical, computational, statistical and experimental
approaches. Specifically, the project will: 1) establish a new multi-scale
mathematical model for the dynamics of 3D chromatin architecture through cell
differentiation, by integrating different experimental observations; 2) design
novel computational algorithms to reconstruct the trajectories across cell
differentiation from large-scale noisy data; and 3) develop efficient
statistical inference tools to discover the underlying molecular events of cell
fate determination. Both theoretical and computational predictions will be
thoroughly analyzed by experimental techniques, including 3C-HTGTS and 3D FISH.
The new methodology generated by the project, along with the genome-wide
predictions across diverse panels of cell types, will have broad impacts on
multiple scientific fields in both mathematics and biology, and will
significantly improve the mechanistic understandings, predictive capacities and
experimental engineering of cell differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.