* 2152210
* Graduate Traineeship on Advances in Materials Science using Machine Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Sadhan Jana, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,191,084.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tackling societyâ€™s grand
challenges will require a workforce that is prepared to work to integrate
knowledge from multiple disciplines, to work as a team, and to leverage the
intellectual contributions of individuals from diverse backgrounds. However,
employers often find that graduate students entering the workforce lack
interdisciplinary training and an appreciation for data science. These scenarios
necessitate new designs of STEM graduate education programs that promote
interdisciplinary team building, integration of data science in solution
methodologies, and exposure of graduate students to multicultural work
environments. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award
to The University of Akron (UA) will support the first such traineeship program
in Northeast Ohio for masters and doctoral students working at the interface of
materials science and machine learning that will lead to the discovery of new
materials and major advances in materials research. The traineeship will serve
40 M.S. and Ph.D. students including 20 funded M.S. and Ph.D. students recruited
from diverse backgrounds including underrepresented minority groups and enrolled
in graduate programs in polymer science and polymer engineering, mechanical
engineering, and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT program seeks
to identify and mitigate the knowledge gaps while providing data-driven answers
for several cross-disciplinary research questions that are of interest to the
broad materials research community. Examples include i) the tunability of a
material modulus with temperature and the quality consistency of composite parts
produced via additive manufacturing, ii) the dynamics of ions and mechanisms of
ion transport in crystalline polymer domains as in batteries, iii) the molecular
design of chemically recyclable polymers with tunable thermal and mechanical
properties; iv) novel feature selection techniques in current machine learning
tools to handle data from large complex polymeric systems; and v) efficient and
systematic integration of large-scale heterogeneous data from multiple sources.
The research will utilize a combination of experimental and numerical
approaches, including molecular dynamics simulation, finite element analysis,
polymer chemistry synthesis, additive manufacturing techniques and machine
learning tools, to achieve the desired objectives. This project will create a
scalable materials database that is integrable with existing polymer
repositories and can be used to develop novel composite materials, molecular
design rules for solid electrolytes with superior conductivity, and the design
of new polymer materials that can be efficiently recycled. The trainees will
develop strong interdisciplinary skills via courses and research work, workshops
and seminars, laboratory rotations, internships at federal and industrial
laboratories, and international exposure. They will receive a Data Science
Engineering graduate certificate and are expected to become strong proponents of
digitalization tools in materials research. The trainees will also participate
in outreach and mentoring activities at high schools and two-year colleges to
enhance diversity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.