* 2152218
* Engendering the Spirit of Gadugi at the Food-Energy-Water Nexus
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Pedro Arce, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,140,105.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the future workforce
needs at the Human-Technology Frontier, professionals are needed who are
effective at both finding and solving problems. Traditional approaches to
graduate student training are constrained in preparing innovators for emerging
societal challenges. In these models, experts often define the problems to be
solved, depriving students of critical learning opportunities in problem
identification. Instead, this project will investigate a potentially
transformative model of graduate education that makes students the center of
innovation through immersive, interdisciplinary, and cross-cultural experiences.
Students will be trained to identify and solve problems through a graduate-
student-focused adaptation of the Renaissance Foundry educational Model (RFM).
This model has been previously demonstrated at the undergraduate level for
effective development of holistic, "T-shaped" professionals with strong problem
identification and problem-solving skills in depth, complemented by broad
collaborative and interdisciplinary traits. Students will learn to apply their
training as they collaboratively find and address challenges at the food-energy-
water nexus in Appalachian, Native American, and other rural communities, which
are at the center of the mission of Tennessee Tech University (TTU). The project
will directly support 20 students (8 PhD; 12 MS) as NRT trainees with stipends.
No fewer than 60 additional graduate student trainees will be included, along
with undergraduate and K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four objectives will
guide the implementation of this project. First is to modify and adapt the RFM
as an interdisciplinary, graduate-level STEM educational model. Second is to
build graduate level organizational outreach, supports, and capacities to
implement and sustain the RFM. Third is to implement and test the model with
graduate students, and fourth is to support and mentor students' transition from
education to independent research and early STEM career pathways. Key elements
of this training model include opportunities for immersion in partnering
communities for problem identification as well as preparation for such
experiences through a cultural training course; and guidance in ensuring that
the problems identified and the research-based solutions developed are aligned
with community needs. Trainees will be co-mentored by a team of researchers
collectively providing technical and socio-cultural expertise, and each trainee
will complete a program of study consistent with their degree program
objectives, receive extensive and guided training in research methods and
research at the FEW nexus, as well as career training and opportunities for
internship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.