* 2152724
* Conference on Homological Commutative Algebra and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Alina Iacob, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award funds the research conference "Homological Commutative Algebra and
Related Topics and their Applications." This international conference will be
held at Georgia Southern University's Armstrong Campus in Savannah, Georgia
during May 13-15, 2022. The main goal of the meeting is to bring together a
diverse group of researchers from a mixture of fields, and in different stages
of their careers, in a forum where they will be able to exchange and build on
their mathematical ideas and work. In particular, the conference will highlight
the recent results and developments in homological commutative algebra and will
further connect with several fields of mathematics, including combinatorics,
geometry, number theory, and others. The event will include established and
early-career mathematicians, as well as post-doctoral fellows and students,
allowing collaborations, networking, and professional development between these
different groups. Special care will be taken to ensure participation from women
and researchers in underrepresented groups to enhance and promote diversity and
inclusion in the mathematical sciences. The expected outcome is to support and
promote these mathematical topics for students and researchers in the
southeastern region and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homological algebra
originated from algebraic topology as a tool used in the commutative algebra
localization conjecture of regular local rings. Subsequently, homological
algebra has become a major subdiscipline of commutative algebra. The conference
activities will address many connections between homological commutative algebra
and other mathematical disciplines. Specifically, the event includes discussions
on fundamental problems in commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, algebraic
number theory, representation theory, combinatorics, deformation theory,
category theory, rational homotopy theory, and other related areas. It will
follow a typical format with research talks in conjunction with collaboration
opportunities, and it will feature a mix of 50-minute research talks given by
established mathematicians and 25-minute presentations from early-career
researchers. For more information, see the conference webpage
https://sites.google.com/georgiasouthern.edu/commutative-algebra-
conference/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.