* 2152131
* Stakeholder-Guided Environmental Science
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Philippe Tissot, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) project at the Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus
Christi (TAMU-CC), a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI), will train students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in their participation in STEM fields
of study to be part of a diverse workforce of interdisciplinary environmental
scientists capable of harnessing the data revolution (HDR) for Stakeholder-
Guided Environmental Science (STAGES). Coastal climate change is a grand
challenge, and there is a need to generate actionable new knowledge and
solutions to address this challenge, using convergent approaches. The Coastal
and Marine System Science program (CMSS) will house the STAGES program and offer
a convergent training experience. This experience will connect innovative
research to practitioner and community needs to answer stakeholder-guided
questions of national concern. The project anticipates training up to forty (40)
Master's and Ph.D. students, including twenty-one (21) funded trainees from the
TAMU-CC's Coastal and Marine System Science (CMSS) program, over four
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STAGES will generate new knowledge: (1) from big
data at the nexus of land-water-atmospheric connections to understand complex
processes driving coastal environmental systems, and (2) regarding the
integration of stakeholders and big data into academic research in ways that
boost trainee involvement in convergent research and occupational readiness.
CMSS faculty's long-standing relationships with stakeholders will be used for a
new training model that is sustainable and scalable. This model will co-develop
research projects suitable for trainee teams to tackle using Machine Learning
(ML) methods. Stakeholders include government agencies on all levels, non-
governmental organizations, and community groups, with a common goal to improve
the resiliency of Gulf Coast communities and environment. STAGES will provide a
curricular foundation for convergent environmental science that is data
intensive, starting each spring with coursework and a week-long field trip to
experience the interaction of land-water-atmospheric events firsthand. Late
Spring Stakeholder Workshops pair trainees and stakeholders to formulate data-
focused research questions. Summer Big Data Blitzes prepare trainees for team
efforts to answer questions, culminating in Fall Capstones to refine and
communicate research results. Trainees will benefit from an interdisciplinary
cadre of deeply experienced faculty researchers with extensive field, data
science, and student training experience. Anticipated findings are expected to
include best practices for engaging stakeholders to identify data-intensive
challenges and co-develop research questions; assimilation of the challenges by
trainees with various backgrounds; and identification of problems appropriate
for the trainees' different fields of study. During the training process,
trainees will become better science communicators who can engage stakeholders
and grasp the ethical dimensions of their decisions for long-term
collaborations. STAGES will establish and disseminate transformative STEM
training, research, and evaluation advances in coastal and marine system science
that produce a sustainable and scalable graduate education model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.