* 2152789
* RUI: Collaborative Research: DMS/NIGMS 1: The mathematical laws of morphology and biomechanics through ontogeny
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alessandro Selvitella, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 212,262.00

Although fruitful interactions between mathematical theory and scientific
experimentation were plentiful in the 20th century, even now the integration of
math into biology is still in its infancy and mostly limited to fine scales.
Already 100 years ago, Dâ€™Arcy Thompson developed critical concepts and tools for
the analysis of form and function as organisms develop, yet nevertheless, we
continue to lack a solid, mathematical theory of how macroscopic, fully 3D
shapes and functions evolve through growth in animals. To thoroughly understand
the mechanisms of changes in form and function through growth, it is necessary
to derive rigorous mathematical laws that govern both morphology and locomotion
through development. This project will concentrate on arboreal lizards, a model
system in many fields of biology, and will combine biomechanical experiments and
morphological analysis, together with mathematical modeling and machine
learning. By capitalizing on the rapid growth and extraordinary diversity of
body forms and locomotor behaviors of arboreal lizards, this research will build
an integrative picture of how their form and function transform through
development with mathematical rigor. This will provide a tangible contribution
to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the flexibility and resilience
of species that face an ever-changing environment, while at the same time
stimulating new research in applied mathematics such as the modeling of
increasingly complex, multi-scale, and nonlinear systems. This project will have
broad community and societal impacts through the education and training of
highly qualified personnel (undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars),
particularly those from underrepresented groups in STEM. Through outreach
initiatives, this project will educate school children, especially those from
disadvantaged populations, and the public on the ways that math and biology can
work together to contribute to our understanding of animal form and movement,
climate change, population aging, and conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will bring new theoretical and methodological foundations to the
understanding of the biology of arboreal lizards via the data-driven discovery
of the mathematical laws that govern 1) their biomechanical transformation
through ontogeny, in the form of differential equations describing the coupled
motion of joints/limbs; 2) their transformations in morphology through ontogeny,
via smooth group transformations in the form of nonlinear maps between shapes;
and 3) how their shape and mechanics are related to each other, via explainable
statistical and machine learning models and low-dimensional transformations
across age-groups. Experiments will be conducted to collect comprehensive
biomechanical and morphological data that will empower mathematical and machine
learning models and will occur in two phases. Phase 1 will capitalize on a
parthenogenic arboreal lizard (mourning gecko) and a common garden design to
construct models that will allow us to quantify the coordinated changes of form
and function through growth; Phase 2 will test the generality of our models on
three additional arboreal lizard species. The longitudinal data produced will be
unparalleled in its scale and scope in functional morphology and comparative
biomechanics, making it a benchmark dataset and enabling and stimulating the
investigation of further questions related to developmental biology, animal
behavior, and ecomorphology. This work will provide a unifying perspective to
how ontogeny, morphology, behavior, locomotion, community ecology, and evolution
interact and merge by producing a common mathematical and computational
framework that will become of broad use at the intersection of these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.