* 2152081
* Extreme THz Science with Ultra-Intense Laser Induced Plasma
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2025
* USD 514,958.00

The region of THz frequency band (0.3 – 10 THz) has long been considered the
last remaining scientific gap in the electromagnetic spectrum. This field shows
great promise for a variety of reasons including small-scale electron
accelerators, contact-less probes, high-field nonlinear optics, and broadband
material characterization. Since the use of short-pulse laser excitation on the
photoconductors and the electro-optic crystals in late 1980s’, the research of
THz science and technology has been limited to the marginal power level of
available lasers with nano-Joule to mJ laser pulse energy. The project is basic
scientific exploration, applied device innovation, and a pilot test for the
extreme THz science with ultra-intense laser pulses. Greater than kJ laser pulse
energy with less than 1 ps laser pulse duration for the THz science is not
available anywhere in the world. PI’s preliminary experiment in the Laboratory
for Laser Energetics used a multi-terawatt laser (&gt;10 J pulse energy and 1 ps
pulse duration) and the Omega-EP laser (&gt;200 J pulse energy and sub-ps pulse
duration) to create micro-plasma and measured THz wave generation under
different laser condition during the pilot test. PI will investigate extreme THz
science with THz wave generation and detection by using unique lasers (from &lt;
J to &gt; kJ pulse energy). The proposed ultra-intense THz source will open the
doors for a large variety of light-matter interaction
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI proposes to explore extreme THz wave
science with the application of the most intense lasers (&gt; kJ pulse energy
and &lt; ps pulse duration) originally constructed for laser fusion at the
Laboratory for Laser Energetics, Univ. of Rochester. The goal is to achieve the
most intense THz sources in the world, and study nonlinear sciences with single
cycle THz pulses. Single-shot spatiotemporal THz emission measurement would be
the first critical development for the ultra-intense THz photonics. Proposed
tasks including study of THz wave generation from different target materials
(including elements with different atomic numbers as well as organic materials),
pulsed laser parameters (pulse duration, laser wavelength, optical polarization,
and power density), and spectral/temporally resolved measurement. The
development of a single-shot THz characterization technology is imperative for
the ultra-intense lasers (waiting time between the laser shot is often at 40
minutes or longer), which will also be demonstrated in our lab. Our development
of the THz photonics project enables interdisciplinary research and advances
numerous THz wave sensing and spectroscopy developments. If this is successful,
this high-risk study may lead to new understanding, inventions, and processes
with broad scientific impact. As the pursuit of progress in THz science involves
extensive interdisciplinary research, this project will continue to provide
excellent collaborative opportunities in the promotion of teaching, training,
and learning among students with diverse socioeconomic backgrounds and within
underrepresented groups. The research team will have one PhD student from an
underrepresented minority group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.