* 2152565
* Understanding and classifying lithic use wear: a systematic study using controlled tribological experiments and computer vision
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Rakesh Behera, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 213,247.00

The history of technology is crucial to understanding what makes us human.
Microscopic wear traces present on the earliest (stone) tools excavated by
archaeologists, offer key insights into how ancient people worked a variety of
materials, like wood, skins, ivory, etc. Despite the enormous interpretive
potential, archaeologists have experienced problems related to the difficulty
and efficiency of securely identifying worked materials from wear traces, as
well as reproducing each otherâ€™s results. This project will harness the power of
tribology and artificial intelligence (AI) to advance understanding how wear
patterns form and, at the same time, facilitate and democratize the
identification process. Beside scientific publications, the investigators will
produce an open-source tool for helping other researchers use their algorithms
in their own work. The produced results will thus be useful to both the bio-
engineering community as well as to archaeologists. To address pipeline issues
in archaeological science, the project will increase diversity and the
representation of minority groups by engaging high school students from New York
City in the lab experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to solve a
70-year standing problem in archaeology: how does wear form on the surface of
stone tools as a result of working different materials? Answering this question
will generate predictions that will enable large-scale studies of archaeological
wear to be carried out in the future. To tackle this problem, an
interdisciplinary team of archaeologists, together with mechanical and bio-
materials engineers will first catalogue the mechanical properties of natural
worked materials, such as wood, ivory, skins, etc. The researchers will then
build surrogate biomaterials isolating the role of these properties (such as
hardness, elasticity, fracture toughness, etc.), so that their effect on wear
formation can be tested individually in experiments. Each surrogate material
will be rubbed against experimentally produced stone bits using a tribometer.
The result will be a large collection of recorded wear patterns that can be
causally correlated with worked material properties. In a second experiment,
stone bits will be used in more realistic tasks using a force-controlled robot
and organic target materials to generate a large collection of wear patterns
that approximate archaeological wear. Information from both experiments will be
used to train computers to classify archaeologically occurring wear patterns
according to the materials they most likely came into contact with. Moreover,
classification algorithms with and without expert input for identifying worked
materials will be compared, which addresses the application of artificial
intelligence in archaeology, a topic which is currently of great interest to
archaeologists in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.