* 2152487
* Unique Continuation and Regularity of Mappings and Functions in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Shiferaw Berhanu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 229,761.00

Partial differential equations describe dynamic interrelationships between
several mutually dependent quantities. As such, they are ubiquitous in the
mathematical modelling of a host of systems in physics, engineering, and other
scientific fields. This project will explore two salient issues related to the
theory of partial differential equations, in the setting of higher-dimensional
spaces defined via complex numbers. The first topic is the question of unique
continuation, which – in rough terms – asks when infinitesimal data about the
solution to a differential equation suffices to determine the behavior of the
solution on macroscopic scale. The second topic is the regularity of solutions.
In many physically relevant situations, partial differential equations exhibit a
self-improving regularity property: solutions that are a priori assumed to exist
within a broad class of functions with a weakly defined notion of smoothness, in
fact can be shown a posteriori to satisfy a much more stringent smoothness
condition. Such results are important both for the theory of partial
differential equations and for scientific applications. The types of second
order partial differential equations under consideration in this project are
relevant for other equations of physical significance, such as the wave and heat
equations, the Klein-Gordon equation, Maxell’s equation, and Schrödinger’s
equation. The project will also contribute to the development of a
scientifically literate workforce through graduate recruitment and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of the project is on the theory
of CR mappings between CR manifolds. CR mappings are a foundational concept in
the theory of several complex variables. In this context, a general unique
continuation problem asks when a CR mapping between two embedded CR manifolds,
that vanishes to infinite order at a single point, must vanish identically in a
neighborhood of that point. Very few sufficient conditions are known, even in
simple special cases. This question will be investigated in concert with related
unique continuation problems for solutions of second order subelliptic partial
differential equations with real analytic coefficients. The second part of the
project involves the regularity theory of CR mappings on embeddable and abstract
CR manifolds, along with the regularity of CR functions on abstract CR
manifolds. Such results have applications to the theory of solutions of systems
of first order complex nonlinear partial differential equations. The current
project will focus on understanding conditions on the underlying manifolds that
guarantee smoothness of CR mappings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.