* 2152252
* Collaborative Research: The 2020-2021 Alaska-Aleutian Earthquake Sequence: Cascading Events &amp; Stress Loading of the Shallow Megathrust
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Ronni Grapenthin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2025
* USD 188,864.00

Estimating the size and location of future earthquakes remains an elusive goal
in seismology and hazard research. This project studies the 2020 M7.8 Simeonof
and 2021 M8.2 Chignik earthquakes that ruptured adjacent portions of the deeper
interface between the North American and Pacific Plates offshore Alaska. The
project will probe the relationship between these two earthquakes: how the
Earthâ€™s response to the 2020 Simeonof event may have affected the fault area
that failed in the 2021 Chignik earthquake, the role of tectonics and geometry
of this plate interface in earthquake occurrence, and how these events fit in
the longer history of earthquakes along this plate boundary. Another key
question is whether the yet unruptured shallower parts of the plate interface in
this region may rupture in earthquakes that have the potential to create
devastating, Pacific-wide tsunamis. This project will deploy four GPS/GNSS
instruments around the Chignik earthquake rupture to better capture deformation
following the earthquake. This project is a collaboration between the University
of Alaska, Fairbanks and Michigan State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study crustal motions and stress changes due to the Simeonof and
Chignik earthquakes directly and from readjustments of the Earth after the
earthquakes. It will make use of multiple geophysical data sources, including
high-precision GPS instrumentation, combined with modeling of crustal motions
and stress changes. Careful separation of different tectonic processes, and
models of realistic fault geometries informed by accurate earthquake relocation
will yield improved models for how the plates moved during and after the Chignik
earthquake. Coupled with similar, separately generated products for Simeonof
earthquake and the earlier 1938 M8.3 earthquake in the same region, the project
will create short- and long-term stress change models, and investigate how
stress change may influence future rupture patterns. A virtual workshop will
bring together subduction zone scientists, generate interest in the data
produced through this project, showcase new findings, and inspire novel science
and future opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.