* 2152854
* 3rd AfroBiotech Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Erika Moore, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2022
* USD 26,100.00

The AfroBiotech conference will be held October 25-27, 2021 on a virtual
platform owing to the continuing Covin-19 pandemic facing the world at present.
The conference highlights the achievements of African Americans in
biotechnology, inspires a new generation of diverse biotechnology professionals
and identifies, communicates, and explores current advancements in various
aspects of Biotechnology. This forum organizes African-American scientific
talent from across the U.S. at a single event and provides a venue to inspire a
new generation of diverse biotechnology professionals, for scientific
presentations, for highlights on African American achievements in biotechnology,
for participation of students and postdocs and for an interdisciplinary dialogue
among professionals. A virtual platform that facilitates vibrant and highly
interactive virtual events that include a poster session, Question and Answer
discussions, and small group/one-on-one discussion has been chosen. The
conference also provides specific forums for scientific presentations, posters,
networking, extended discussions and presentations and is inclusive of early-
career researchers, postdoctoral associates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the field of biological engineering is
rapidly expanding and integrating with the US and global economies the data show
that African Americans continue to be underrepresented in this scientific area.
There is also an increasing number of African Americans entering this scientific
area but this growth is still insufficient to alleviate the under-representation
in the field of biological engineering. This situation represents an opportunity
for the community of African American biological engineers to organize itself to
address current and future opportunities. The AfroBiotech conference creates a
forum for African American biological engineers to become organized to focus on
this growing opportunity and at the same time address advances and prospects in
scientific areas pertinent to biological engineering. The conference has a
diverse agenda that is inclusive of early-career and postdoctoral researchers as
well as graduate students. The agenda accommodates sessions for networking and
extended discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.