* 2152521
* Latent Space Simulators for the Efficient Estimation of Long-time Molecular Thermodynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2025
* USD 387,874.00

Andrew Ferguson of the University of Chicago is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to establish new theoretical and computational tools to simulate the
dynamics of proteins and DNA. Computer simulations provide a means to model and
understand the structure, dynamics, and properties of these molecules at a level
of detail inaccessible to experiment. The high computational cost of these
calculations mean that the accuracy of their predictions is limited since it is
difficult to simulate the dynamics of biomolecules for longer than microseconds
even on the most powerful supercomputers. In this work, Ferguson will develop
novel simulation approaches enabled by machine learning and new mathematical
theorems to simulate biomolecules millions of times faster than is currently
possible. The crux of the approach rests on the development of ultra-efficient
simulators that identify and model only the key variables driving the long-time
molecular behavior. The approach is being developed and tested on well-
understood fast-folding mini-proteins, and then applied to better understand
dysfunction in proteins implicated in cancer, to control the kinetics of DNA
double helix formation, and to determine how proteins recognize and bind to DNA.
As part of the work, the new computational tools will be made available as free
open-source software and Ferguson is offering mentored research experiences for
undergraduate and high school students, serving as an instructor in workshops
for City Colleges of Chicago students, and developing molecular simulation
training materials for the NSF-supported
nanoHUB.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andrew Ferguson of the University of Chicago
will develop the theoretical and algorithmic foundations of an approach to
generate ultra-long atomistic molecular simulation trajectories of biomolecules
that are continuous in space and time. This approach, termed latent space
simulators (LSS), is trained over short, discontinuous, enhanced sampling
simulation data, and then produces continuous all-atom simulation trajectories
obeying the correct structural, thermodynamic, and kinetic statistics at several
orders of magnitude lower cost than conventional molecular dynamics.
Accelerations are realized by the vastly lower cost of propagating the dynamics
within a low-dimensional slow subspace spanned by the collective variables
governing the long-time dynamical evolution of the molecular system. The
computational implementation employs three specialized deep learning
architectures that (i) identify the slow collective variables, (ii) propagate
the dynamics within this slow subspace, and (iii) decode back to molecular
space. Ferguson is developing the approach for fast-folding mini-proteins Trp-
cage and protein G, and then applying it to recover structural transitions in
c-Src kinase that is overexpressed in cancers, to engineer sequence-dependent
hybridization kinetics of DNA oligomers, and to understand binding of
transcription factor proteins to DNA. The ultra-long molecular trajectories
generated by the LSS can resolve kinetic mechanisms at time scales inaccessible
to existing approaches and is being made broadly available as free and open-
source software. Ferguson will also offer mentored undergraduate and high school
research opportunities and reach out to the community college students through
hosting workshops at City Colleges of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.