* 2152155
* Mutant evolution in spatially structured, hierarchical populations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Natalia Komarova, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 255,279.00

Evolutionary theory for asexual populations seeks to understand how and why
genetic change happens in a variety of contexts, from unicellular organisms over
generations, to aging and disease of multicellular organisms within the lifespan
of a single individual (somatic evolution). While the principles of mutant
evolution in homogeneous populations are well-understood and are commonly part
of textbooks, they do not directly apply to any realistic population with a
spatial, hierarchical structure (such as stem cells that maintain the tissue and
more differentiated cells that perform tissue function). These features are,
however, a common theme of cell dynamics in tissues of higher organisms, as well
as microbial populations such as biofilm forming bacteria, which are also
characterized by both spatial and hierarchical structure (cell sub-populations
with different specializations). This research project will extend fundamental
laws of evolution to be applicable across a much greater variety of biological
systems. The mathematical theory will be applied to experimental data that
follow the evolution of cells in a mouse model of Rhabdomyosarcoma, which is a
pediatric cancer. Finally, the project will develop a new mentoring program that
facilitates interactions between students and professors, geared especially
towards underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large mathematical
literature exists about mutant spread and invasion, focusing on measures such as
the mutant fixation probability or the time to mutant fixation in constant
populations, as well as mutant load in growing populations. Scaling laws of
evolutionary dynamics have been derived, including the equilibrium population
density in spatial models, the rate of stochastic tunneling (double-mutant
generation from a minority of single mutants), and the mutant content in
expanding colonies. In various biological scenarios, however, cells and
organisms evolve in more complex settings than those traditionally considered by
evolutionary theory. Of particular importance are spatially structured,
hierarchically organized cell populations that are regulated by signaling
mechanisms. Examples include tissues consisting of stem and more differentiated
cells, solid tumors, and biofilms containing bacterial cells with specialized
functions. A comprehensive evolutionary theory for such population structures
currently does not exist. This project seeks to mathematically define
evolutionary scaling laws for spatially structured populations that are
hierarchically organized and contain regulatory feedback loops that control cell
fate decisions. This will be done by (a) developing efficient numerical methods
that describe spatially expanding, evolving populations, and (b) deriving laws
of spatial population dynamics, including rates of fitness valley crossing and
scaling laws for the mutant load for different mutant types. The evolutionary
theory will be applied to data on cellular evolution in Rhabdomyosarcoma mouse
xenografts, which are characterized by both spatial and hierarchical
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.