* 2152312
* Collaborative Research: Calculus beyond Schubert
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rebecca Goldin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 170,233.00

This research project aims to resolve outstanding questions in enumerative
algebraic geometry. Broadly speaking, methods for finding simultaneous solutions
to multiple equations have significant implications for progress in physics,
computer science, and engineering. These solutions may be expressed in terms of
the intersection of certain geometric spaces. The motivating question in
enumerative geometry is to predict the number of geometric figures with
specified properties that satisfy a list of conditions. For example, we may seek
the number of curves that contain a set of points and are tangent to a list of
lines. Surprisingly, while it can be very difficult to determine the precise
list of figures that satisfy the conditions, it is often possible to predict the
number of such figures. The search for exact formulas for the number of
solutions in enumerative geometry is an active area of research with relations
to numerous fields, including geometry, combinatorics, representation theory,
complexity theory in computer science, and mirror symmetry in theoretical
physics. This grant will support continued work in these areas by the
investigators and their graduate students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An effective
approach to solving enumerative geometric problems is to understand the
intersection theory of moduli spaces of geometric figures. The field of Schubert
calculus loosely applies to these investigations among large classes of
varieties in homogeneous spaces. Various cohomology theories can be used to
extract enumerative information. For example, singular cohomology is useful for
counting the number of points in intersections of geometric figures, quantum
cohomology is designed for counting curves meeting other figures, and
equivariant cohomology produces more general geometric invariants that depend on
a group action. Cohomology theories of spaces with group actions often have
naturally defined bases, and geometric invariants related to such bases tend to
possess intriguing positivity properties, often related to beautiful
combinatorial structures that capture the essential aspects of the geometry. The
investigators will study these phenomena in the context of several geometric
spaces, including flag varieties and their cotangent bundles, bow varieties, and
Hessenberg varieties. Techniques include intersection theory, equivariant
localization, symmetric functions, Hecke algebra actions, and geometric
representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.