* 2152437
* SCISIPBIO: Examining the Career Barriers Confronting African American or Black Biomedical Scientists
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 408,187.00

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is the largest science funding agency in
the world. Discoveries linked to NIH funding have contributed to the health and
longevity of the population in the United States. NIH funding is also essential
for academic careers in biomedical research fields. Several researchers have
documented race and ethnicity differences in the likelihood of receiving NIH
funding. However, a full account of the career challenges facing scientists from
historically underrepresented groups has been hampered by a lack of access to
data on science faculty linked to their publications and grants. This study will
construct a dataset that identifies the race, gender, academic field, academic
rank, publications, citations and grants of individual scientists by linking
data on over 2 million individual faculty from Academic Analytics for the years
2009-2023, the National Science Foundation’s Survey of Earned Doctorates, NIH
Reporter, the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), and web
searches. These data will be used to examine race/ethnicity differences in the
career paths of scientists at research-intensive universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will have five specific aims. Aim 1 of this
study will create the Demographic Academic Careers (DAC) data set that will be
housed in a data enclave at National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics (NCSES) so that the research community can make use of this rich data
to understand academic careers as well as other Science of Science Research
questions. Aim 2 will document the race/ethnicity distribution of faculty at 427
research-intensive universities and medical schools across the United States and
their impact on students of color. Although many researchers have examined the
demographic makeup faculty of medical schools, and aggregate statistics have
been reported, less attention has been given to the demographics of faculty at
research institutions that train undergraduates who will become future
scientists. This aim will examine whether institutions with more faculty of
color produce more undergraduate and graduate students of color. Aim 3 will
examine race/ethnicity differences in promotion to associate and full professor
as well as the potential double-bind of gender and race/ethnicity. Research
funding is considered essential for academic promotion in biomedical sciences.
This study will examine whether the race/ethnicity NIH funding gaps contribute
to similar academic promotion gaps. Aim 4 will examine race/ethnicity
differences in the age of research independence and funding longevity. Although
researchers have examined these topics in the aggregate or for women the same
has not been done by race/ethnicity. The longitudinal data developed in Aim 1 is
ideal for this kind of study. Aim 5 will examine gender and race/ethnicity
differences in NIH R01 renewals (Type 2) awards. Researchers have documented
that women and faculty of color are less likely to receive Type 2 and renewals.
This project will determine whether publications, citations, prior funding, and
institutional affiliations explain these differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.