* 2152687
* Collaborative Research: Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra for Large Scale Inversion, Sparse Principal Component Analysis, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Petros Drineas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 100,000.00

In many scientific applications such as genetics, geophysics, bioinformatics,
and medicine, data are being generated at ever-increasing rates. For these, and
other data-intensive applications, the massive size of the data sets, as well as
the growing model complexities, present fundamental computational challenges.
State-of-the-art inference methods have exceeded their limits of applicability
and advanced mathematical, computational, and statistical tools are urgently
needed to extract relevant information. This research addresses the urgent need
to advance efficient methods for computing solutions of large-scale inverse
problems. This project will advance tools from inverse problems which will be
merged with novel approaches from randomized numerical linear algebra, and
sparse principal component analysis. The expanded tools produced by this project
will have the ability to transform the field of large-scale inverse problems and
subsequently benefit a wide variety of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
development of novel approaches for large-scale inversion will significantly
advance current solutions in a wide range of applications, such as machine
learning, geophysics, and genetics. This project will investigate advanced
iterative methods for inverse problems, randomization, sketching schemes, as
well as methods for sparse principal component analysis. By accelerating
numerical methods, providing theoretical convergence analysis, and producing a
user-friendly software package, the broader scientific community will be able to
integrate these advanced tools within their application areas. The project
offers training opportunities for students in computational and applied
mathematics. These include the implementation of a novel cross-institutional
graduate course, merging the expertise of the three PIs in the topics of inverse
problems, randomized linear algebra, and numerical optimization, to provide a
broader opportunity for graduate students to engage in timely research projects;
connect with their peers across the US; and expand the diversity pool of
students in our programs. Collaborations between the project team and domain
experts guarantee that the proposed algorithms and software will have an impact
on real data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.