* 2152814
* Methods for Nonlinear, Non-Gaussian, and Data-Driven Ensemble Data Assimilation in Large-Scale Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ian Grooms, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 149,999.00

A wide range of disciplines, from weather to epidemiology to reservoir
management, depend on data assimilation, that is, a set of methods that combine
incomplete and imperfect observations with a forecasting model to estimate and
predict the state of a complex, evolving system. For large-scale systems such as
those in weather forecasting, computational efficiency is essential, so the
methods used often rely on a Gaussian approximation - assuming that properties
are distributed according to a bell curve - because this approximation unlocks
highly efficient algorithms. However, in practice many quantities of interest,
from sea ice thickness to rain rates, are not described by a bell curve, and
predictions can be inaccurate. This project aims to develop new algorithms that
are not based on a bell curve approximation but that can still be used in large-
scale applications where computational efficiency is crucial. This inherently
interdisciplinary project will provide a multitude of opportunities for training
and professional development of the next generation of statisticians and data
scientists, with a particular focus on enhancing diversity and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new insight on which the research project is
built is a novel representation of the Bayesian posterior distribution through
the introduction of a new synthetic random variable. The Bayesian posterior can
be represented as the expected value of the probability density of the state
variable conditioned on the new variable, where the expectation is taken with
respect to the posterior on the new variable. This insight enables the use of a
two-step approach to sampling from the posterior. The first step is standard
Bayesian sampling but with a lower dimensionality, while the second step is
based on regression. The project will combine methods from low-dimensional
Bayesian computation for the first step with generalized linear regression
and/or machine-learning regression for the second step. A skeleton of the two-
step approach is already implemented in the Data Assimilation Research Testbed
(DART) software suite, and DART enables data assimilation with over 25
geoscientifically-relevant models including the National Water Model and the
Community Earth System Model. The research findings will be implemented in a
form of new advanced two-step non-Gaussian algorithms in DART, making them
available to a wide range of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.