* 2152585
* Accessioning and curating the BING peatmoss (Sphagnum) collection into DUKE
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,856.00

This project will complete the transfer and integration of some 22,000 specimens
of the moss genus Sphagnum from Binghamton University into the Duke University
herbarium. The specimens will be transferred to archival quality specimen
packets and associated collection information will be uploaded to appropriate
databases to make specimen information available to researchers and citizen
scientists. Sphagnum is both a genus of plants and an entire ecosystem.
Sphagnum-dominated peatlands are estimated to store 25-30% of the total
terrestrial carbon pool and are for that reason critical to understanding and
management of the global climate. Sphagnum is currently under active development
as a model for studying the impacts of changing climate on plants, and the
combined Duke-Binghamton Sphagnum herbarium will be an irreplaceable resource to
document geographic and ecological variation in Sphagnum peat mosses. It is well
established that ecological function, including levels of carbon sequestration,
varies with regard to both Sphagnum species and geographic setting. The
augmented Duke University collection, with over 50,000 specimens of Sphagnum,
will comprise the largest collection of this group in the world and will have
unparalleled importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the rescue
of an at-risk collection of the moss genus Sphagnum from Binghamton University
(BING) and its integration with the L.E. Anderson Bryophyte Herbarium at Duke
University (DUKE). The collection will be curated both physically and
taxonomically to preserve and increase its value as a resource for research and
teaching. Most of the BING specimens are currently packeted in non-archival
quality paper on herbarium sheets. Many of the packets, including many holding
type specimens, are disintegrating, with labels and packets in various stages of
detachment. All transferred specimens will be properly curated; they will be re-
packeted with new labels, organized using the geographic system currently
employed in the DUKE bryophyte herbarium, digitized, and made accessible via the
Bryophyte Portal (bryophyteportal.org/portal/) and iDigBio.org. The taxonomy of
these collections will be updated based on recent research findings of Sphagnum
taxonomy. This activity will involve microscopic examination of specimens
belonging to groups for which taxonomic revisions have been
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.