* 2152115
* GOALI: Merging Deep Learning and Mechanistic Modeling to Analyze the Electrophysiology of Circadian Clock Neurons, Aging, Cardiac Arrhythmias, and Alzheimer's Disease
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Casey Diekman, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 464,102.00

This collaborative project with IBM Research aims to make breakthrough
improvements in methodologies for building models from observational data that
can both predict and explain biological phenomena. A fundamental challenge in
the life and health sciences is explaining hidden physiological and disease
mechanisms. These hidden mechanisms shape experimental and clinical
observations, and medicine strives to improve health by influencing them with
new therapies such as drugs. Machine learning can now make stunningly accurate
predictions of biological phenomena based on observed data from variable
sources. These predictions, however, are difficult to interpret and exploit,
because they usually do not address the underlying physiological mechanisms from
which the data and predictions derive. On the other hand, mechanistic models
replicate features of the experimental and clinical data and address their
causes with model parameters that represent the underlying physiology. But these
models usually fail to address inherent cell-to-cell and patient-to-patient
variability. This project will develop a hybrid deep learning/mechanistic
modeling framework that can capture and explain the inherent variability in
biological data through identification of parameter sets that result in model
outputs consistent with data. The framework is intended to be versatile enough
to find input parameters of a model for multiple conditions distinguished by
some factor (e.g., treatment, age, or disease state) simultaneously; such
“intervention” scenarios are common in practice. The framework will advance the
state of the art by enabling researchers to incorporate additional constraints
based on prior knowledge about the nature of an intervention. This project will
provide interdisciplinary industrial research experiences to community college
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and apply
novel hybrid modeling architectures that use generative adversarial networks, a
class of machine learning algorithms in which two artificial neural networks
compete, to map distributions of experimental observations to distributions of
biophysical model parameters. The system will tackle a set of important
biological questions involving the electrophysiology of circadian clock neurons
and aging, cardiac arrhythmias, and Alzheimer’s disease using datasets provided
by experimental collaborators. First, the system will be employed to identify
which ion channel conductances are involved in the age-related decline of
circadian rhythm amplitude in suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons and the altered
excitability properties of hippocampal neurons in mouse models of Alzheimer’s
disease. Second, the system will be employed on human electrocardiogram data to
test the hypothesis that circadian rhythms in cardiac excitability can affect
the efficacy of drugs used to treat cardiac arrhythmias. Students from Essex
County College, an open-access, two-year college that is federally designated as
a minority serving institution, will perform summer research mentored by a team
of researchers from academia (New Jersey Institute of Technology and Purdue
University) and industry (IBM) with complementary expertise in artificial
intelligence and deep learning, biophysical modeling and simulation, and
dynamical systems theory. ECC students, as well as NJIT graduate students, will
gain exposure to the industrial research environment through interactions with
IBM’s T.J. Watson Research Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.