* 2152514
* Collaborative Research: Surface Properties and Transport of Micro- and Nanoplastics in Unsaturated Soil
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Markus Flury, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 326,499.00

Plastic pollution of terrestrial ecosystems is an emerging threat to soil
health. While there is much known about plastics pollution in marine ecosystems,
little is known about fate and transport of micro- and nanoplastics in
terrestrial systems. Micro- and nanoplastics may be held up in soil, thereby
negatively impacting soil organisms, or they may move through soil, potentially
contaminating groundwater and drinking water resources. This project aims to
characterize the fate of micro- and nanoplastics in terrestrial systems, so that
the environmental hazards posed by micro- and nanoplastics can be assessed.
Plastic particles in soil will be tracked over time to determine whether their
chemical properties change and how they move.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four commonly
used plastics will be used: polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, and a
typical biodegradable plastic. The plastics will be subjected to environmental
weathering by exposing them to UV and rainfall. Micro- and nanoplastics will
then be thoroughly characterized for size, shape, and surface and colloidal
properties. It is expected that the weathered micro- and nanoscale plastics
particles form an "eco-corona", i.e., a covering with extracellular substances,
soil organic matter, and clay minerals, which makes the particles more
hydrophilic and mobile in soils. Surface and colloidal properties of the
plastics will be characterized. Further, transport of the plastics in soils and
groundwater will be quantified to determine whether micro- and nanoplastics are
held up in soils or aquifers. The specific objectives of this project are to (1)
understand the creation of secondary micro- and nanoplastics during weathering,
(2) determine the role of weathering on the surface and colloidal properties of
micro- and nanoplastics, and (3) identify the fundamental mechanisms involved in
transport of micro- and nanoplastics in unsaturated porous media and soils. The
project will provide mechanistic information on mobility of micro- and
nanoplastics under saturated and unsaturated flow conditions. The project will
also provide valuable information for policy makers on the degradation of
biodegradable plastics in terrestrial environments. Biodegradable plastics are a
promising alternative to conventional plastics, particularly for single-use
applications. The results will help inform legislation on the use of
biodegradable plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.