* 2152887
* Projecting Flood Frequency Curves Under a Changing Climate Using Spatial Extreme Value Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 05/31/2025
* USD 229,719.00

Climate change is often described in terms of the mean, but it will be felt most
acutely in terms of extreme events. In particular, the International Panel of
Climate Changeâ€™s recent Sixth Assessment warns of an increase in the likelihood
and magnitude of extreme flooding events in upcoming decades. Understanding the
spatiotemporal variability of these changes is critical to mitigating their
impact. However, current methods for spatial extreme value analysis are limited
in their modeling flexibility and computational capabilities, and thus
methodological work is required to analyze extreme events across the United
States. Therefore, in this project, the investigators will develop new
methodological and computational tools for spatial extreme value analysis and
apply them to forecasting flood risk under a changing climate. The project team
is comprised of an interdisciplinary group of statisticians and hydrologists to
accomplish these ambitious objectives and ensure that the results are
disseminated to the appropriate communities. The analysis combines fifty years
of annual maximum streamflow observations at hundreds of gauges provided by the
United States Geological Survey with CMIP6 climate model output produced under
different climate scenarios. This analysis will provide high-resolution maps of
anticipated change in flood risk and local flood frequency curves to inform
water infrastructure projects. A highlight of the project is a workshop that
will foster synergy between statisticians and hydrologists by encouraging the
sharing of ideas, approaches and solutions to flood risk prediction, and aid in
the formulation of a common language shared by statisticians and hydrologists
for successful transfer of knowledge across disciplines. The overall objective
is to improve resiliency to extreme flooding events in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in major
advances in both spatial extreme value analysis and hydrology. The investigators
will pursue two methods that exploit recent developments in distributed
computing, machine learning and artificial intelligence, respectively, to
improve computation for spatial extreme value analysis. Computation for spatial
extremes is challenging because the most common model is the max-stable process,
and this model gives an intractable likelihood function and is thus not
conducive to direct application of maximum likelihood or Bayesian analysis. To
overcome this difficulty, this project will develop a divide-and-conquer method
that analyzes data separately by subregion and then combines the results using
generalized method of moments techniques. It is shown that this procedure has
desirable theoretical properties and gives substantial performance gain over
state-of-the-art methods. The project also develops a new method under the
Bayesian framework that is preferred for uncertainty quantification. The new
method decomposes the intractable likelihood function into a sequence of simpler
functions, and uses deep-learning distribution regression to approximate these
simpler functions. This approximation can be arbitrarily precise with
computational requirements that scale linearly with the number of spatial
locations, facilitating analysis of large datasets. The project culminates with
the analysis of flood-frequency curves across the US. Compared to current
methods, by using spatial extreme value analysis the analysis borrows
information across space to improve estimation of small probabilities and
estimate the probability of multiple locations simultaneously experiencing an
extreme event. This project will produce new software for extreme value analysis
and also train two graduate students in theoretical, computational and applied
extreme value analysis in hydrology with a strong emphasis on interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.