* 2152966
* Collaborative Research: Empirical Frequency Band Analysis for Functional Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pramita Bagchi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,669.00

Monitoring seasonal storms over time is an essential component of understanding
long-term atmospheric trends and producing reliable seasonal forecasts. A well-
established measure of the location and intensity of mid-latitude storms uses
the temporal variance of wind velocity within a certain frequency band. There
are two areas of large variance, extending from the East Coasts of Asia and
North America out into the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans respectively, and the
location of these "storm tracks" and their intensities vary from year to year.
However, the measured configurations and strength of the storm tracks are
sensitive to the choice of frequency band, and there are currently no data-
driven techniques for identifying frequency bands that appropriately
characterize trends in wind velocity variability. Understanding the relative
strength of higher frequencies (cyclone growth and propagation) vs. lower
frequencies (cyclone occlusion and decay) as a function of location and season,
as well as long-term trends in the locations and characteristics of storm
tracks, aids climate researchers in assessing spatial and time trends in
atmospheric conditions. This project aims to develop data-driven procedures to
enhance this effort by establishing optimal summary measures for characterizing
differences in wind velocity trends among frequencies. The research team will
develop, validate, and openly share software and analytical tools for adaptive
frequency band estimation that adequately summarizes time-varying dynamics and
accounts for the complex interaction between the spatial and temporal dependence
in atmospheric conditions. In addition, the project includes professional
training through a transdisciplinary program in atmospheric sciences and
computational and theoretical statistics. The activities include supervision of
doctoral theses and undergraduate capstone projects, as well as talks for local
high school students interested in research at the intersection of statistics
and atmospheric sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frequency-domain properties
of nonstationary functional time series often contain valuable information.
These properties are characterized through their time-varying power spectra.
Practitioners seeking low-dimensional summary measures of the power spectrum
often partition frequencies into bands and create collapsed measures of power
within these bands. However, standard frequency bands may not provide adequate
summary measures of the power spectrum. There is need for a standardized,
quantitative approach to objectively identify frequency bands that can best
summarize spectral information, which for nonstationary functional time series
is especially challenging due to the high dimensionality. This project seeks to
establish a new data-driven framework for adaptive frequency band estimation for
nonstationary functional time series that adequately summarizes the time varying
dynamics of the series and simultaneously accounts for the complex interaction
between the functional and temporal dependence structures. The three specific
aims associated with this effort are: (1) to develop methodology for local
frequency band estimation of a nonstationary functional time series that best
preserves nonstationary spectral information localized within the functional
domain, (2) to develop new methodology for local frequency band estimation of a
multivariate nonstationary functional time series that best preserves the joint
nonstationary spectral information among multiple functional time series
localized within the functional domain, and (3) to develop new approaches for
multivariate frequency band estimation of a nonstationary functional time series
that best preserves nonstationary spectral information localized within a
multidimensional frequency domain. Theoretical validity of these procedures will
be established, and computationally efficient estimation procedures will be
designed to ensure scalability. Extensive simulation studies will be conducted
to explore the empirical and computational properties of the new methods, which
are expected to enhance understanding of hidden mechanisms behind storm dynamics
and thereby contribute to enhanced resilience to adverse climatic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.