* 2152260
* NeuralStorm: Taking Neuroengineering by Storm
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Karen Moxon, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,999,999.00

Neuroengineering has the potential to transform society at all levels by
restoring function for people with neural deficits, disease, or injury while
also providing unprecedented insights into brain function. However, it is
becoming increasingly clear that the analysis of large datasets (e.g., from
brain imaging or other observations of brain signals) on which the development
of exciting neural technologies are based will need targeted design of data
processing, machine learning tools, and artificial intelligence approaches.
Therefore, there is a need for a convergent science curriculum that leverages
the latest advances in team-based science to create a workforce capable of
optimizing advances made in neuroengineering to maximize the impact of this
field for the broadest possible segments of society. This NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) project, NeuralStorm, is addressing several of NSF’s research
challenges, including Harnessing the Data Revolution, Growing Convergence
Research, and The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier, by developing
a graduate curriculum that allows students to gain expertise within a specific
area (e.g., computer science, engineering, medicine) while also contributing to
cross-disciplinary problem-solving in neuroengineering. The project anticipates
training 70 Ph.D. and 20 masters’ students, including 30 funded trainees, from
computer science, engineering, neuroscience, and psychology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NeuralStorm project will bring together trainees from
broad academic backgrounds with three objectives. First is to ensure they are
grounded in the complex neuroethical issues associated with interfacing the
nervous system. Second is to equip the students with intelligent communication
skills that allow them to work effectively across fields. Third is to prepare
them to navigate the expected rapid advances in technology throughout their
careers in a way that ensures the resulting neurotechnology has the greatest,
positive impact for society. NeuralStorm has the potential to revolutionize the
way neuroengineers work by enhancing collaboration in multi-disciplinary teams,
evaluating user performance and quality of life changes, and assessing the best
ways to bring products to market at a reasonable cost to impact broad and
diverse segments of society positively. This curriculum will train students to
know and understand the various resources available to them, have intelligent
conversations about impact across a broad and diverse segment of society,
understand how to evaluate and use new advances, and create a reservoir of
information that will be made available on a website and through publications,
seminars, and workshops. Finally, the leadership team will work to package the
convergent ideals of this program for other fields beyond neuroengineering.
These training elements will connect evidence-based educational activities to
program goals and use rigorous assessment and adaptive learning to ensure
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.