* 2152671
* Collaborative Research: High-Resolution Aerial Forest Mapping Infrastructure and Database to Support Forest and Disturbance Ecology Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Derek Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2027
* USD 174,821.00

Forest inventories are critical resources for understanding biological patterns
and processes, but they have traditionally required time-consuming ground-based
surveys. Recent advances in small uncrewed aerial systems (sUAS, or “drones”)
and artificial intelligence are enabling a new era of forest research in which
individual trees can be mapped, measured, and identified to genus or species
across broad areas without extensive ground surveys. Although the technology for
low-cost drone-based forest mapping now exists, infrastructure to enable
scientists to produce and access extensive forest maps is limiting. This project
establishes and facilitates future expansion of a network of over 100 forest
inventory plots of approximately 25 ha each. Fine-scale, broad-extent forest
inventory data allows for new insight into the complex processes shaping forest
communities and ecosystems. Understanding these dynamics is increasingly urgent
as stressors such as droughts and high-severity wildfires drive dramatic shifts
in forests–including conversion to non-forest vegetation–in the western U.S. and
globally. Ecologists and forest managers require data on forest response to
these novel conditions to develop management strategies, but the rate and
magnitude of recent changes challenge traditional field-based data collection
approaches. This project introduces drone-based forest mapping tools to the next
generation of scientists via a Forest Ecology Drone Pilot Apprenticeship and via
outreach events emphasizing underrepresented communities. It leverages existing
investments in public cyberinfrastructure by NSF and trains scientists in its
use for cloud-native research. It is demonstrating the relevance of the forest
mapping infrastructure to forest management planning by mapping forests to
support a multi-stakeholder forest restoration partnership. In recruiting staff
and student participants, the project engages groups supporting underrepresented
students and scholars, and the selection processes use holistic review and
distance-traveled criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
development of three complementary cyberinfrastructure innovations to support
and extend the capacity of forest ecology and disturbance ecology research: (1)
a scalable, reproducible, AI-enabled software workflow for processing imagery
from low-cost drones into forest inventory data (e.g., maps of individual trees
by size and genus or species); (2) a searchable, publicly accessible, extensible
database of tree maps, initiated with &gt; 100, 25-ha maps aligned with forest
inventory plot networks (including the NSF National Ecological Observatory
Network, NEON) along important abiotic and disturbance history gradients; and
(3) documentation and training, including virtual and in-person workshops, to
enable researchers to produce and contribute their own data and analytical
tools. The software workflow, which incorporates photogrammetry for 3D stand
structure modeling and multi-view computer vision (via artificial neural
networks) for taxonomic classification and rejection of false-positive tree
detections, expands the forest survey extents achievable by scientists and
resource managers by &gt; 100-fold. The project leverages CyVerse, one of NSF’s
largest investments in research cyberinfrastructure, for data processing and
data hosting. The resulting public forest inventory database supports cloud
native research to improve models of forest pattern and process currently
constrained by limited data. Open-source software development and project
results are available at openforestobservatory.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.