* 2152057
* Interdisciplinary Graduate Training through Research in Artificial Intelligence and Secure Networked Sensing to Mitigate the Crisis of Alcohol and Drug Abuse
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yugyung Lee, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,999,999.00

Alcohol and drug abuse are on the rise around the world, causing serious
socioeconomic crises and consequences, such as accidents, homicides, suicides,
physical and sexual assaults, or other problems such as anxiety and depression.
Existing data for the treatment of alcohol and drug abuse are primarily
collected through unreliable self-reports. Other methods are direct measurements
on bodily fluids, breath, or sweat, which require penetration through the skin
or physical maneuvering, and indirect estimates through interviews and
observations. Non-invasive sensing and testing paired with artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques offer the promise of vastly improved data
collection methods and analysis that in turn can improve treatments. However,
the world, and the United States in particular, faces a shortage of trained
workforce and innovators in this field. This NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
award will address these needs by preparing master’s and doctoral students to
make convergent research contributions in the interdisciplinary fields of
artificial intelligence (AI) and secure networked sensing to tackle the growing
alcohol and drug crisis, and other social pandemics. The project will provide a
unique and comprehensive training opportunity for up to one hundred twenty
graduate students, including twenty funded trainees, by combining the
disciplines of AI, communication networks, cybersecurity, sensor technologies,
interactions with healthcare and legal partners, and a culture of innovation and
translational research that considers human factors, law, regulation,
communication, and leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the
global and national alcohol/drug abuse crisis from a broad perspective,
including technological, ethical, legal, and socioeconomic challenges and
opportunities. It aims at making radical programmatic changes in the way
traditional and non-traditional graduate students are trained. This crisis,
which costs in work productivity, healthcare, and law enforcement expenses,
requires interdisciplinary research to efficiently collect and assemble data,
possibly from diverse sources, and analyze it to extract actionable information
while being conscious of contextual factors, such as a consumer's health
history, potential criminal record, personal background, and individual data
security and privacy. The data aspects of this societal problem pose significant
challenges on its collection, e.g., non-invasive sensing, and its secure and
privacy-aware data analytics, which are the main research lines of this
proposal. The project's students will get practical and multidisciplinary
training to prepare them as future skilled professionals in the rapidly growing
area of applications of AI and secure networked sensing technologies. The
proposed model combines project-based learning techniques, multidisciplinary
programs, ethics, civic engagement, leadership, and professional development and
dissemination initiatives. The educational model structure will allow students
from seven interdisciplinary doctoral and four master's programs to participate
in the activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.