* 2152117
* Dependable Data Driven Discovery
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Surya Mallapragada, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,998,973.00

Data-driven decisions are becoming increasingly critical for the well-being of
individuals and society; and the nation and the world’s reliance on such
decisions is likely to increase tremendously in the next decade. However, data
science lifecycles are assembled and operated by a wide variety of individuals
and institutions with varying levels of expertise. While to err is human, the
consequences of errors in critical data science lifecycles can be catastrophic.
Unreliable decisions can potentially have enormous negative impacts such as loss
of life, widespread contagions, and economic depression. To respond to this
critical challenge, this NSF Research Traineeship project is establishing a
graduate program of study, "Dependable Data Driven Discovery (D4)" that engages
faculty across multiple disciplines to train students with diverse scientific
backgrounds to recognize risks to dependable data driven discovery and to
develop corresponding mitigation strategies. One hundred students are expected
to participate from disciplines such as computer science, mathematics,
statistics, bioengineering, and computational biology, including 32 funded
graduate (MS &amp; PhD) trainees and 16 undergraduate students from minority
groups who are underrepresented in their participation in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Trainees will gain a holistic perspective of the
entire data science lifecycle through coursework as well as collaborative,
transdisciplinary research. Three focal areas comprise the D4 research and
training agenda. First is a focus on formal foundations, methodology, and tools
for a dependable data driven discovery framework. Second is an examination of
risk mitigation methods to handle noise in data, limited training data, and
uncertainty prediction and interpretability of machine learning models. The
third focal area addresses quality assurance issues for protein function
prediction and cellular engineering processes to direct undifferentiated cells
into mature, functional cells with dependable data science lifecycles. The
project will develop a new graduate certificate in dependable data science to
train students in dependability issues within data science lifecycles. Through
coursework, trainees will experience the entire data science lifecycle several
times, each with an increasingly deeper understanding of the risks, measures,
and risks mitigation mechanisms. Trainees will also engage with industry
partners to examine their data science lifecycles and discuss risk mitigation
methods. The capstone project course will reinforce trainees’ technical skills
to address the above research problems in data science, biological science, and
engineering as well as written and oral communication skills. Trainees will
interact with outside collaborators through the D4 seminars, gain experiential
learning with industry partners, conduct original research through capstone
projects, and work in internships, resulting in awareness of dependable data
science lifecycles and risk mitigation mechanisms across Iowa State University,
local industry, NGOs, and government. The project will engage in outreach
activities through two existing Iowa State University infrastructures: ISU
Science Bound and ISU Extension and Outreach with Iowa
4-H.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed
to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NRT
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.