* 2152760
* Using London Dispersion Force Effects to Stabilize Inorganic and Organometallic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Phillip Power, Chemistry Department, University of
California–Davis is studying the role of London dispersion (LD) effects in
determining the structures and reactivity of inorganic molecules. Chemical bonds
often involve the sharing of electrons between two atoms. These are bonds are
typically quite strong and are the principal forces that hold many chemical
compounds together. However, there are other, usually weaker forces that can
influence the behavior of compounds. One of these is called London Dispersion
(LD) and results from instantaneously generated electric dipoles that form when
non bonded atoms approach one another. While these interactions are weak, they
can stabilize normally unstable classes of compounds. The research provides
details of how the LD effects can influence molecules leading to structures and
reactivity that are counterintuitive. Such interactions have not generally been
considered during the preparation of chemicals, but this project seeks to
provide the groundwork to utilize LD in the design of new molecules. The project
will provide training in sophisticated chemical techniques to a variety of
students, including ones from underrepresented groups. In addition, there is an
outreach component to K-12 students and teachers that aim to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main theme of this proposal is the investigation of the effects of the London
Dispersion (LD) energies on the structures, stability, and reactivity of
sterically crowded inorganic molecules. Despite the weak nature of such
interactions (ca. &lt; 1 kcal mol-1 /H---H interaction) these are nonetheless
ubiquitous and, collectively, can strongly influence molecular properties.
Recent LD results have been obtained using terphenyl ligands in which alkyl
substituents on two ‘flanking’ aryl rings generate the close H---H approaches
for the LD force stabilization. However, in the terphenyl ligands the number of
H atoms is limited and they also can interact further via nucleophilic
interactions of their flanking rings. To overcome these limitations, ligands
that have either less reactive aliphatic rings or rigid hydrocarbon framework
groups at the ‘flanking’ positions will be prepared. The ability of these
ligands to form and stabilize presently unknown (a) organocopper(I) compounds,
(b) compounds with transition metal - main group element bonds, (c) uncomplexed,
free-standing dialuminenes and (d) new LDF donor organolithium reagents will be
explored. In addition, the use of LD forces in organometallic synthesis, for
example, assembling (e) dimetallenes vs. metalylenes and (f) metal-metal bonded
complexes in the alkaline earth, and early transition metals will be evaluated.
This knowledge is expected to provide useful information on how LD forces enable
the assembly of new compound classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.