* 2152766
* Mathematically-Guaranteed Global Solutions to Structure-from-Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gilad Lerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 169,190.00

The central problem of structure from motion (SfM) asks to recover the three-
dimensional structure of a scene from projective two-dimensional images. Its
study has led to successful commercial applications that impact our society,
such as in self-driving cars, robotics, augmented/virtual reality and visual-
inertial navigation. Despite the impressive progress in SfM, there are many open
computational and mathematical problems. The goal of this project is to address
these problems. Not only are these problems important to computer vision
research, but they are also fundamental for computational mathematics and
optimization research. In particular, mathematically guaranteed global
procedures, which avoid unnecessary heuristics and parameters, are expected to
be relevant to other applied problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project
aims to create theoretically-guaranteed optimization components for the SfM
pipeline. The current pipeline still uses incremental and heuristic procedures,
lacks sufficient guarantees for handling highly corrupted datasets and is slow.
The specific subprojects are guided by rigorous mathematical approaches. In
particular, mathematical arguments suggest optimal choices and definitions. They
are also helpful with many practical considerations of SfM, such as reducing the
number of parameters and improving robustness to corruption. These arguments are
expected to develop into interesting mathematical theorems. The investigator
will continue guiding graduate and undergraduate students in research. The
investigator will also continue facilitating educational activities that prepare
students for successful careers in industry. In particular, arranging summer
internships and organizing the industrial problem
seminar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.