* 2152954
* Host immune suppression as a key adaptation enabling bacterial symbioses
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Benjamin Parker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 657,891.00

Bacterial symbionts are widespread among animals and plants and often provide
beneficial functions that profoundly influence their hosts' biology. Insects, in
particular, have repeatedly formed symbioses with microbes for metabolism,
nutrition, and protection. Insect immune systems are tasked with the challenge
of controlling and regulating beneficial microbes while combating often closely-
related pathogenic microbes. A critical unanswered question is whether the
insect immune system is a key mediator of both symbionts and pathogens across
different host species. This project will combine cutting edge genomics with
experimental manipulations that will link immune responses with symbiont
associations across diverse host species. Gaining a mechanistic understanding of
how immune systems interact with symbionts is not only critical for
understanding the evolution of host-associated microbiomes, it also has
relevance to the invertebrate pests that vector devastating diseases of crops,
livestock, and humans. In addition, there are research opportunities available
for undergraduate students to train the next generation of STEM
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use aphids as a model system
and involves research at the University of Tennessee Knoxville and the Queen
Mary University of London. Aphids are uniquely suited for this work because they
have strong non-random associations with microbial symbionts: a symbiont species
may be common in one aphid species, yet rarely found in a close relative. This
suggests a dynamic interplay between host and microbe that can drive symbiont
spread or loss over relatively short evolutionary timescales. Preliminary data
has shown that hosting certain symbionts leads to a sharp decrease in the
expression of key immune genes in aphids. This suggests host immunity is of
central importance to the evolution of symbiotic relationships. The primary
objective of this project is to use transcriptome sequencing and immune assays
to test the hypothesis that host immune suppression is a key mechanism
explaining the distribution of symbiotic microbes across aphid species. A
secondary objective is to determine whether there is a trade-off in the ability
to harbor symbionts and resist pathogens across species. Genomes of virulent and
non-virulent symbiont strains will also be compared using a novel symbiont
culturing technology to identify genetic features that underlie pathogenicity in
symbiotic microbes. Together, this cross-species approach will transform our
understanding of how host immunity moderates relationships with symbiotic
microbes. This project will thus provide key insight into how invertebrates form
and maintain relationships with microbes that can drive rapid adaptive evolution
in species of central importance to food security and health. This collaborative
US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.