* 2152369
* Multimodal and Multiscale-driven Quantification of  Micromechanical Metrics for Location-specific Fatigue Microcracking
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Leslie Mushongera, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2025
* USD 161,434.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education activities aimed at identifying and quantifying the mechanistic
drivers for fatigue damage in metallic materials. Fatigue is a physical process
that is associated with the failure of crystalline materials under continuous
and repeated application of loads. The knowledge of fatigue is of immense value
in preventing the failure of metallic structural components in machinery,
equipment and structures. The accurate prediction of fatigue life requires the
need to know the governing mechanistic drivers for crack initiation at the
microscale (the scale at which cracks initiate). However, since the
microstructure in the vicinity of the crack initiation sites in metallic
materials evolves continuously with loading, the identification of these
mechanistic drivers is a challenging task. In this project, the PI will address
this challenge with an integrated computational and experimental approach that
will provide a deeper understanding of the factors influencing fatigue crack
initiation. The primary focus of the project will be on pure metals with very
large grains such as nickel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights and tools obtained
from the research will improve the accuracy of fatigue life predictions for a
variety of large-grained metallic structural components and thin film devices
that undergo cyclic stresses. Additionally, the project will support the
education and training of a diverse future workforce in data-intensive materials
research. To inspire middle and high school students to pursue materials science
and engineering degrees, the PI will develop brief, age-appropriate lectures
that explain how students’ basic classroom learning relates to the actual tools
and models that professional engineers use and give the students the chance to
perform very basic simulations using the tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education
activities to identify and quantify the micromechanical driving force metrics
for fatigue crack nucleation in coarse-grained face centered cubic materials
with a high stacking fault energy. Understanding fatigue damage in crystalline
materials is challenging because the microstructural features such as persistent
slip bands and their interactions, in the vicinity of the crack initiation sites
evolve continuously with cyclic loading. The continuous evolution of the
microstructure generates complex micromechanical fields and interactions which
makes it difficult to pinpoint the governing mechanistic drivers for crack
initiation. Specific goals of this work include: (1) identify how strain
localization affects the surface deformation during cyclic loading; (2)
establish a unifying understanding of mechanistic drivers for subsurface
deformation; (3) investigate the microstructural and micromechanical rationale
for strain localization as a precursor to crack initiation and, (4) identify the
influence of high strain gradients on microcracking at persistent slip band-
matrix interfaces. This will be achieved through an integrated computational and
experimental approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights and tools obtained from the
research will improve the accuracy of fatigue life predictions for a variety of
large-grained metallic structural components and thin film devices that undergo
cyclic stresses. Additionally, the project will support the education and
training of a diverse future workforce in data-intensive materials research. To
inspire middle and high school students to pursue materials science and
engineering degrees, the PI will develop brief, age-appropriate lectures that
explain how students’ basic classroom learning relates to the actual tools and
models that professional engineers use and give the students the chance to
perform very basic simulations using the tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.