* 2152103
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Stochastic reaction-diffusion equations on metric graphs and spatially-resolved dynamics of virus infection spread
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Wai Fan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2025
* USD 335,666.00

This award supports the development of new mathematical tools and biological
experiments that are essential to understanding the mechanisms of virus spread
and extinction. A new framework, to enable an integrated experimental-
mathematical study, will be developed to control the spatial distribution of the
host cell population and to quantify how such spatial structure affects viral
evolution and decay. The project has basic research, medical, and public health
impact, since the analytical and experimental methods can be extended to
elucidate mechanisms of infection spread by viruses of public health importance,
including influenza A virus, Zika virus, and coronaviruses. As an
interdisciplinary study, the research will cross-train mathematicians,
biologists, and engineers, contributing significantly to workforce development.
Broader objectives include increased participation and diversity in STEM fields
while promoting a broader understanding of science and technology by the public
through wide dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to
determine both the probability of virus extinction during infection spread and
the spreading speed in terms of the spatial structure of host cell populations.
A new mathematical framework, stochastic reaction-diffusion equations on metric
graphs, will be developed to study the dynamics of virus infections over any
network structure. The biological experiments are cutting edge: virus infections
will be performed on micro-patterned host cells that enable quantification of
population level features of infection spread in any network structure, a key
advantage over traditional Petri-dish studies. Analysis of the experimentally
informed stochastic equations has the potential to push the frontier of current
knowledge about the role of space and stochasticity in population dynamics. This
new framework motivates problems that cut across several mathematical
disciplines (probability, partial differential equations and mathematical
biology) and that are of interest to a large group of applied mathematicians and
applied scientists. These problems include (i) What is the probability of
extinction of virus and the propagation speed in terms of geometric properties
of the metric graph, such as the branching structure and the edge lengths of the
graph? (ii) What is the probability of coexistence of virus and defective
interfering particles during co-infection spread, and the effect of the
underlying spatial structure on this probability? The project brings new
probabilistic tools and perspectives to solve these problems and to generate
mechanistic insights about virus infection spread. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being co-funded by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
through the Mathematical Biology Program and by the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) through the Systems and Synthetic Biology and the
Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.