* 2152497
* CNS Core: Small: Practical Memory Access Pattern Obfuscation with Algorithm, Application and Architecture Co-designs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rujia Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 498,041.00

Emerging memory architectures are proposed to address the scalability issues of
current computing systems. However, they bring challenges when data security
support is needed. An attacker could capture sensitive information in a program
through side channels, such as memory access patterns. Moreover, emerging memory
systems further complicate security support due to the new properties such as
larger sharing space, data persistency, and concurrent accesses. This research
aims to enable high-performance and practical memory access pattern obfuscation
for current and emerging memory architectures. The approaches include co-designs
from the cryptographic algorithms, target applications that need protection, and
new memory architectures. The success of this project can keep improving the
performance of cryptographic protocols on real computing systems and
applications. The outcome will include a set of integrated, cross-domain secure
architecture designs and obfuscation schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
outcomes will have significant broader impacts on education, society, and
national security. This project will broaden computing participation by
recruiting undergraduate researchers and outreach to underrepresented groups.
With a closer interaction between security and computer architecture, the
proposed research will benefit a broader type of applications and thus help
protect national security in the long run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.