* 2152424
* NSF PD 19-125Y - Science of Science:  Discovery, Communication, and Impact (SoS:DCI) -Randomized Control Trial of the Registered Reports Publishing Format
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Brian Nosek, Center for Open Science
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 374,387.00

The Registered Reports (RR) publishing model could be transformative to how
research is conducted, peer reviewed, and published. RRs could alter incentives
for researchers toward focusing on asking important questions and using strong
methodology to test those questions, and away from the demand for exciting,
provocative results whatever their credibility. Ultimately, RRs can improve the
quality of peer review and scholarly communication, thus improving the rigor,
transparency, and reproducibility of research. Large-scale adoption of RRs could
fundamentally change how research is evaluated and
communicated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a RR, authors submit a paper detailing the
research question and proposed methodology to test the question prior to
observing the study outcomes. In the first stage of peer review, reviewers
assess the importance of the question and the quality of the methodology
proposed to investigate it. If the paper passes this stage of peer review, the
authors receive “in-principle acceptance” meaning that the journal commits to
publishing the paper regardless of outcomes as long as the authors follow
through with competent execution and reporting of the research. The second stage
of peer review, after the results are known and added to the paper, assesses
adherence to the original commitments, clarity of the distinction between
planned and unplanned analyses, and accuracy of interpretation of findings, and
not whether the results are positive, interesting, or consistent with
hypotheses. Given the potentially transformative impact of RRs on the research
process, it is essential to conduct a randomized trial to evaluate the model’s
qualities. By collaborating with journals, we will conduct a randomized trial of
RRs in an ecologically valid context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.