* 2152065
* Engineering Models of Neuroimmune Sensitization to Elucidate Mechanisms of Pain Resolution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rebecca Wachs, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 339,062.00

Chronic pain affects up to 20% of all people in the United States and involves
changes in peripheral tissues (i.e. skin, muscle), the spinal cord, and the
brain. Current models of chronic pain fail to replicate the complexity of the
body and thus fail to develop new treatments that translate to patients. This
project seeks to engineer new bench top models that accurately mimic the
features of chronic pain in the periphery; and increase understanding of how
chronic pain develops, is maintained, and can be resolved. This research will
also explore how the immune system can help resolve chronic pain. Project
implementation includes integrated education/outreach activities designed to
increase interest in science among diverse populations and across students of
multiple ages. The team will incorporate primary neuronal culture into the
Tissue Engineering curriculum at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to lower the
barrier to entry in the neural engineering field. Further, the team will develop
and implement fun, interactive lessons and labs to teach middle school students
and Osher Lifelong Learning Institute members (serving people over the age of
50) about biomedical engineering and chronic pain. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to create in vitro models that replicate the
physiological complexity in peripheral tissue present during chronic pain to
increase mechanistic understanding and identify novel targets to treat
peripheral pain. The most common peripheral feature of pain is a lowered
stimulation threshold of painful neurons termed nociceptor hypersensitivity. The
high rate of translational failure of pain therapeutics in clinical trials that
have demonstrated efficacy in animal models motivates the need for more
effective tools and mechanistic knowledge. In vitro models of primary sensory
neurons and associated cells that accurately mimic the peripheral features of
chronic pain hold great promise to understand mechanisms of chronic pain and
develop new treatment targets. However, to date, most in vitro models of lowered
neuronal thresholds or nociceptor hypersensitivity have limitations. Objective 1
will engineer a physiologically relevant multi-compartment model of nociceptor
hypersensitivity and validate its response using noxious stimuli. Objective 2
will establish a neuroimmune-specific model of nociceptor hypersensitization to
test anti-inflammatory macrophage mechanisms of resolution by co-culturing
macrophages of varying phenotypes in the neurite compartments. In vitro models
of peripheral pain features hold great promise to enhance understanding of the
mechanisms driving pain and translational efficacy of
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.