* 2152946
* CDS&amp;E: Rigorous formulas for industrial supercritical-fluid mixture properties via systematic evaluation of molecular virial coefficients, and methods to expand their applicati
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 366,817.00

Understanding material properties is vital to technological development: to
design, control, or optimize a device or manufacturing process, how that
physical object or material will behave when heat or mechanical forces are
applied to it must be understood. This behavior is governed by the
thermophysical properties of the material. While these properties generally can
be measured experimentally, such an approach is typically found to be
impractical due to the large number of variables involved. To remedy this,
scientists and engineers rely on mathematical models to predict material
properties by fitting physically based models to available data so that the
thermophysical properties at conditions outside the values of the measured data
can be computed. While useful, this approach can be limited in its predictive
capabilities by a lack of validation data. A better approach would be based on
computing material properties from molecular considerations using models
describing how the molecules that make up the material interact. Developing
accurate descriptions of molecular dynamics, however, is challenging, as is the
interpretation of these model predictions at the macroscopic scale. In response
to these limitations, this research program will expand upon a rigorous but
neglected approach to the computation of thermophysical constants (virial
coefficients) that model thermodynamic behavior deviations from idealized
representations, allowing for the prediction of properties under realistic
situations. This will be accomplished by using state-of-the-art molecular-level
simulations to identify virial coefficient values for 31 representative chemical
compounds that span a range of important chemical processing and energy
applications. This research has the capability to transform the thinking of
molecular-model developers on how they formulate and test their methods and
models as well as property-model developers on how they formulate and
parameterize models to match thermodynamic data. The research team is developing
and disseminating computational tools that can assist other developers to
perform their own calculations of virial coefficients, thereby broadening the
scope of mixture data well beyond what is targeted in this project. Positive
impact also will be made through training of students, with a focus on
underrepresented groups, community outreach, and dissemination of educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, several avenues will be pursued
to bring recent advances in computational cluster-integral methods toward
practical applications. First, the research team will engage in a systematic
effort to evaluate temperature-dependent virial coefficients from empirical and
first-principles intermolecular potentials for a collection of 31 species, and
all possible mixtures formed from them. These results will form a database that
will be a publicly accessible resource of hundreds of thousands of coefficients
that can be used to compute all thermodynamic properties of these mixtures in
the vapor and supercritical-fluid phases. Second, the coefficients will be
evaluated through a comprehensive comparison to available experimental data from
the literature. Such data encompass reported virial coefficients, volumetric
properties, and thermal properties of supercritical mixtures. This comparison is
valuable in assessing the quality of the molecular models and to pinpoint their
weaknesses. The database then will be used to further study the behavior of
mixtures including: (a) how knowledge of critical-point singularities in
mixtures can be used to accelerate convergence of the virial series; and (b)
studying the Joule-Thomson effect in mixtures. Finally, the feasibility of
applying these coefficients toward parameterization of thermodynamic models used
widely in engineering practice will be investigated to broaden the range of
application of these data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.