* 2152776
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Scalable Inference for Spatio-Temporal Markov Random Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Salar Fattahi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 99,619.00

Modern systems are known to be massive-scale, with a hierarchy of complex,
dynamic, and unknown topologies. For example, in genomics, the interactions
among genes can be modeled via spatio-temporal gene regulatory networks across
different cells. The inference of temporal and spatially-rewired gene expression
networks carries enormous implications for dynamic disease processes, offering
key mechanistic insights into the dynamic variations of interacting biological
processes in space and time. The behavior of such interconnected systems can be
captured via spatio-temporal graphical models. The existing methods for
inferring these models suffer from several statistical and computational
drawbacks which render them impractical in realistic settings. With the goal of
bridging this knowledge gap, this project aims at developing efficient
computational tools for the inference of spatio-temporal graphical models that
are not only provably optimal, but also adaptive, parallelizable, and
implementable in meaningful scales. The methods developed in this proposal will
be studied in the context of inferring gene networks underlying oncogenesis. The
datasets generated through these efforts will be accompanied with well-developed
analytics tools to derive mechanistic insights into the nature of gene-networks
underlying biological processes. More broadly, the proposed machinery will give
rise to models that are interpretable by domain experts, and will lead to a rich
set of publicly-available datasets that can be used as test-bed for different
inference methods, resulting in broader artificial intelligence (AI)-human
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the progress in the inference of
graphical models is based on the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) with
relaxed regularization, which neither result in ideal statistical properties nor
scale to dimensions encountered in spatio-temporal settings. This project will
address these challenges by departing from the regularized MLE paradigm, and
resorting to a new class of constrained optimization problems with combinatorial
nature that can systematically capture the hidden-but-useful structure of the
spatio-temporal graphical models. Due to the prohibitively complex nature of the
MLE-based methods, their practical implementations cannot simultaneously
guarantee computational efficiency and favorable statistical performance.
Therefore, the proposed approach will be the first systematic inference
framework that can achieve the best of both worlds in a unified fashion. The new
class of estimation methods will have a profound impact in statistical learning:
it will lead to a renewed interest in the use of tractable discrete approaches
and their statistical properties, and will pave the way towards the discovery of
new inference methods suitable for the large-dimensional and spatio-temporal
settings. In addition, the proposed project will be the first systematic study
of a class of discrete optimization problems that are currently poorly
understood, thus contributing to the combinatorial and mixed-integer communities
as well. Given its interdisciplinary nature, the project will also largely
contribute to training of future generations of researchers in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.