* 2152735
* Collaborative Research: Volcanism on the Edge - Basaltic Volcanism from Source to Surface across the Colorado Plateau/Basin &amp; Range Transition in SW Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Greg Valentine, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 298,571.00

The American Southwest is home to nearly forty basaltic volcanic fields that
collectively contain more than 2,000 Quaternary volcanoes, including many that
have erupted relatively recently (past 50,000 years). Most of these volcanoes
are considered to be “monogenetic” (i.e., they erupt only once), and they
generally produce relatively small volume eruptions (&lt;1 km3). Nevertheless,
it has recently become clear that such eruptions can pose significant hazards
due to their wide variety of eruptive styles, including explosive behavior, and
the fact that the location of any future eruption is unknown. In the southwest
US, neither the cause of this volcanism nor the frequency of recent eruptions is
well understood. This project will focus on volcanism in SW Utah, in the
transition between the Colorado Plateau and the Basin and Range provinces, an
area that is particularly enigmatic with regard to the causes of volcanism, and
poorly constrained with regard to the nature and frequency of recent volcanic
activity. By integrating detailed field observations and mapping, radiometric
dating, physical volcanology, and geochemical analyses, this project will
provide key constraints on the sources, processes, and timescales of magma
ascent and storage leading to eruption, and the link to eruptive style and
hazards. In addition to providing information about hazards to the public, this
work includes mentoring and training of two PhD students and several
undergraduate researchers in field, analytical and imaging techniques. PIs will
also engage in a variety of outreach activities related to the project,
including research-based educational activities for K-12 students and teachers,
public talks, and a summer course for middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southwest US contains at least
2229 Quaternary volcanoes, most of which are monogenetic. Significant questions
surround the causes and sources of the volcanism, the ages and eruptive
recurrence intervals, and the range of – and controls on – eruptive styles.
Understanding the processes that govern monogenetic volcanism in the Southwest
US, and the time scales over which these processes operate, is critical for
hazard and risk assessment. In addition, the mafic nature of many of these
monogenetic volcanic fields makes them ideal as probes of the mantle sources
that they tap, and spatial-temporal-compositional variations can thus provide a
unique record of the complex tectonic history in this area. We propose an
integrated physical volcanology and petrology/geochemistry study of Quaternary
volcanism in the SW Utah volcanic field, spanning the transition from the Basin
and Range to the Colorado Plateau, to elucidate links between tectonics, magma
sources, and eruptive styles and hazards. Primary objectives include: 1)
establishing age ranges and systematic age progressions, if extant; 2)
evaluating the range of eruptive styles and associated hazards; 3) determining
potential relationships of eruptive activity to local tectonic features; 4)
constraining the nature (lithospheric vs. asthenospheric), location (depth), and
spatial heterogeneity of the mantle sources tapped in the eruptions; 5)
assessing the relative importance of mantle versus crustal control on magma
composition and eruptive style, and the influence of magmatic water content; and
6) constraining timescales and the importance of magma storage systems in ascent
from source to surface. Our integrated approach will involve detailed field
mapping, 40Ar/39Ar dating, textural analysis of eruptive products, and elemental
and isotopic analyses at both the whole-rock and mineral
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.