* 2152014
* Harnessing the Data Revolution to Enable Predictive Multi-scale Modeling across STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Yingda Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,965,563.00

Development of lightweight materials for cars and airplanes, prediction of the
weather in space and on earth, and design of new drugs for medical treatments
are examples of important societal problems that require modeling of physical
processes that occur at multiple and vastly different scales. For example, the
external deflection of a composite airplane wing can be measured in inches but
the displacements of the molecules inside that composite material, which
ultimately govern the deflection, are a fraction of the thickness of a hair.
With continuing advances in computers and computational modeling, it is now
possible to reliably predict what happens at any of these scales. However, it is
still challenging to design predictive models across multiple scales. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) project will facilitate
research and training that combines novel artificial intelligence and machine
learning techniques with traditional computer simulations and high-performance
computing. The new methods will preserve physical structure from the small to
the large and enable the discovery of new science and engineering applications
of importance to society. The project anticipates training 100 Ph.D. students,
including 35 funded trainees, from a variety of areas, including Computational
Mathematics, various Engineering disciplines, Mathematics, Statistics and
Probability, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Physics and Astronomy.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research and training in this project are targeted at
modeling multi-scale phenomena where well-formed and validated modeling
hierarchies exist but where traditional modeling and simulation techniques break
down. Recent years have witnessed the development of machine learning approaches
and their broad impacts in computational modeling and scientific computing.
Despite the overwhelming success machine learning has had in other areas such as
natural language processing and image analysis, it is unlikely that modeling
exclusively based on machine learning can replace traditional simulations that
explicitly incorporate the domain knowledge arising from the physical
mechanisms, symmetries, and constraints. This project will advance training and
research in predictive modeling of multi-scale phenomena in complex fluids,
biophysics, and polymeric materials by advancing the hybridization of
traditional accurate, high-performance numerical methods with modern structure-
preserving machine learning techniques. The project will develop a systematic
approach to train a hierarchy of models that result in tractable simulations
using high-fidelity computed and experimental data. These will unlock
challenging problems in the application areas of the project and beyond. The
project will also deliver a model for educating tomorrowâ€™s graduate students and
STEM workforce in predictive modeling of multi-scale phenomena. It will include
core coursework leading to a graduate certificate, a course on scientific
communication, and targeted short courses in cutting-edge topics, as well as an
internship at a partner site and a rigorous professional development program.
Upon leaving the program, the trainees will be ready to pursue careers in
research and training in academia, industry, or national
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.