* 2152868
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: Interpretable Machine Learning for Microstructure-Sensitive Fatigue Crack Initiation from Defects in Additive Manufactured Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jacob Hochhalter, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,327.00

Advancements in experimental and computational methods in recent decades have
enabled production of a wealth of data for many engineering and science
applications. However, these data do not readily translate into engineering
knowledge. The objective of this project is to develop a machine-learning
approach to facilitate this data-to-knowledge translation to better understand
materials integrity. Such knowledge can help understand mechanical behaviors,
such as fatigue, in additive manufactured components. The developed approach
will improve the conventional process of materials certification, which is
prohibitively expensive. The outcome of this project could potentially reduce
consumer costs and increase adoption, which may ultimately advance the U.S.
economy. To engage future generations and promote inclusion, K-12 students will
interact with a user-friendly interface for hands-on demonstration of learning
natural laws at the Utah Engineering Day and Purdue Space
Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the success and reliability of translating
data into knowledge requires a shifted focus toward explainability and
interpretability to perpetuate sound science and engineering principles. To this
end, Genetic Programming based Symbolic Regression (GPSR) will be utilized to
model fatigue damage in structural materials. GPSR models will then be trained
using generated data sets from materials simulations, experiments, and guided by
existing knowledge to discover new underlying mechanisms, i.e., knowledge. The
research tasks will address a tractable means to model microstructure-dependent
mechanisms into fatigue life predictions and supplant current practices.
Specifically, GPSR models will be trained on a combination of high-energy X-ray
diffraction microscopy and crystal plasticity finite element simulation data.
The generated GPSR models will be a physics-regularized multiscale
homogenization of pore-induced, microstructure-dependent fatigue crack
initiation in an additive manufactured metal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.