* 2152718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: use of Eggshell Isotopes for Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Teresa Steele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,200.00

This doctoral dissertation research will investigate human mobility by analyzing
how a traditional group managed resource procurement in a marginal environment
using isotopic analyses of ostrich eggshell. Understanding how groups of humans
behaviorally adapted as they moved across the world is a core component to
understanding how humans came to be the most populous large mammal on earth. One
way people adapted to a diversity of environments and changing climates was by
adjusting their mobility patterns, resource catchment areas, and trade networks.
This project will utilize the stable isotopes in ostrich eggshell to create
paleoclimatic reconstructions while employing strontium isotope analysis to
discern mobility patterns and identify possible trade networks, assessing how
movement responded to climatic change. Ostrich eggshell is an often-overlooked
resource that is abundant in many archaeological deposits, signaling the
importance of these eggs as a subsistence resource. Because ostrich eggshell is
common in many archaeological sites, establishing standardized methods of
collecting clean samples and of producing maps of bioavailable strontium on the
landscapes of interest will allow researchers the benefit of generating data
that can be easily compared and serve as a baseline for future projects. Complex
human behavior is linked to ostrich eggshell through use in bead making,
symbolic engravings, and containers that carry or cache water in environments
where water is sparse. The archaeological record significantly informs
investigations into modern human origins and hunter-gatherer and pastoralist
lifeways before and after European colonization and provides a wide range of
ecosystems from which to study early human behavior and to explore how past
human groups made their living. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of
this project adoctoral candidate at the University of California Davis will
engineer the creation of a map illustrating regional biogenic strontium. This
map will be a valuable tool as a baseline to this project as well as to other
researchers in a variety of disciplines. McNeill will investigate mobility and
resource catchment variables by comparing strontium values in archaeological
ostrich eggshell to the map to assess the likely source of the eggshell,
allowing one to discern how far groups were willing to travel or trade to obtain
this valuable and versatile resource. The researchers will develop and refine
methods for extracting uncontaminated calcite from the eggshell to be processed
for strontium isotope analysis to facilitate the spatial assessment. This
uncontaminated shell material along with collagen from the organic component of
the shell will then be sampled for stable isotope analysis to facilitate the
paleoclimatic reconstruction of the study region. Incorporating multiple lines
of isotopic evidence enhances the interpretive power of these analyses for
understanding human mobility and the food webs humans exploited, especially in
the context of past environmental variability. The richness of data that can be
gleaned from ostrich eggshells will provide researchers with another resource to
employ in the mission to understand the human past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.