* 2152633
* Exploring Response Properties of Molecules and Extended Systems Using Theoretical Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jochen Autschbach, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 489,148.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jochen Autschbach of the University
at Buffalo, State University of New York, will develop quantum theoretical
methods and perform large-scale computer simulations, to learn how molecular
structure, chemical bonding, and molecular motion determine a variety of
molecular properties that can be measured in experiments. The project will
advance the understanding of the relationships between molecular structure and
measured properties of molecules. Furthermore, these studies will likely
contribute to a better understanding of the interactions between light and
matter. The project will provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students and opportunities for summer internships of high school students, for
example, in scientific computer programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on molecular properties that are of high practical value in informing
about the structures and functions of molecules, and the dynamics of chemical
systems. The theory developments and simulations will be crucial to establish
and refine the sought-after structure-property relationships. The project will
focus specifically on NMR relaxation phenomena, and on the structural and
electronic origins of optical activity. In addition, the behavior of a special
class of organic radicals will be studied by calculations, complemented by
experiments performed by PI Autschbachâ€™s collaborators. The radicals show an
energetic inversion of the singly and the highest occupied molecular orbital,
which has attracted much interest in materials science and related fields.
Specifically, the investigation of radicals that display what the PI terms SOMO-
HOMO inversion provides an interesting area of fundamental research;
collaborations with synthetic chemists will allow for examination/validation of
the computational predictions. Another important aspect of the planned studies
relates to NMR relaxation. NMR relaxation contains a wealth of information about
the dynamics and the characteristic dynamic time scales of a chemical system.
Relaxation will be predicted by ab-initio and force-field molecular dynamics
simulations. The optical activity-related part of the project will focus on
resonance effects in Raman vibrational optical activity, circularly polarized
luminescence, and magnetic-field induced optical
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.