* 2152869
* CDS&amp;E: A Validated Hybrid Echo-CFD Framework for Patient-Specific Cardiac Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Iman Borazjani, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2025
* USD 542,441.00

A computational model of the heart, built upon medical images, is invaluable for
assessing cardiac function, managing therapy, optimizing biomedical devices for
a specific patient, or better understanding the disease when data from a
population are available. 2D echocardiography (echo) is the main imaging
modality for a noninvasive evaluation of heart function due to its fast
acquisition time, lower costs, portability, and wider availability compared to
other imaging modalities. However, a computational model built upon 2D echo to
benefit from its advantages, circumvent limitations of echo in anatomic
depictions and yet, provide reliable and clinically useful applications, does
not exist today. In this project, a computational heart model generated from 2D
echo scans will be developed and validated to replicate cardiac flow and
function and compute in vivo tissue and electrophysiological properties for
specific patients. Considering that echo is the top imaging choice for
evaluating heart disease, the top killer in the US, accounting for about 21% of
deaths in 2020, a hybrid echo-CFD framework is anticipated to be most impactful
compared to a framework coupled with other imaging modalities. Undergraduate
students, in addition to graduate student, will be involved in the research
(e.g., delineating the echo images) to broaden the
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this research is to
develop a software package that can be utilized easily, based on echo images, to
help basic science and medical researchers model the heart to diagnose heart
disease, devise treatment strategies, optimize medical devices (e.g., valves,
left-ventricular assist devices (LVAD), pacemakers, etc.) for specific patients,
and contribute to better understanding the disease when data from a population
become available. The goal of this project is to create a validated
computational pipeline that takes standard echo scans as input, models cardiac
flow and function, i.e., a hybrid echo-CFD framework, and computes in vivo
mechanical and electrophysiological properties for a specific patient. To
achieve this objective and capitalize on previous work, the walls of heart
chambers and their valves will be identified in the 2D echo using deep learning.
The 3D geometry will be reconstructed, and valves/atria geometries will be
optimized by adopting an averaged-geometrical model. The resulting 3D geometry
generating code will be coupled with an in-house CFD code based on a sharp-
interface immersed boundary method to simulate large-deformation, fluid-
structure interaction problems. The convergence of the Newton-Krylov solver of
the CFD is accelerated by using an initial guess predicted from deep learning
methods. The in vivo properties will be obtained by solving the inverse problem.
Animal studies will be performed to obtain local reference flow, pressure
measurements, and echo scans to validate the computational framework. The method
will also be tested on retrospective clinical scans (human
data).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.