* 2152182
* FRG: Collaborative Research:  Definability and Computability over Arithmetically Significant Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Park, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2025
* USD 222,314.00

This collaborative project is dedicated to the study of an important
mathematical language and the objects that are described by this language. The
language we have in mind is the language of polynomial equations, the same
polynomial equations one first encounters in an Algebra class in high school.
Despite its basic nature this language possesses enormous complexity and
descriptive power which were not always well-understood by mathematicians. About
fifty years ago it was proved that no computer program can determine whether a
certain kind of statement in this language is true even when the objects being
described are sets of natural numbers, quite familiar to everyone since
childhood. In other words, no computer program can determine whether an
arbitrary polynomial equation in several variables has a solution in integer
numbers. On the other hand, if one asks the same question about rational
numbers, one is confronted with one of the many basic questions concerning
polynomial equations to which the answer is unknown. Understanding and trying to
tackle this question and other related ones requires interaction of and input
from several fields of Mathematics such as Logic, Number Theory, Algebraic
Geometry, and Topology. At the same time, the questions and methods developed
for the study of the language of polynomial equations lead to new results and
research directions in the areas of Mathematics mentioned above. This project
involves graduate student training and it will develop an online collaboration
platform.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project considers several
problems in definability and computability over arithmetically significant
fields, that is fields of importance to Number Theory, Algebraic Geometry, Model
Theory, Computability Theory and Valuation Theory. The research problems are at
the intersection of all these areas of Mathematics. While the methods employed
are for the most part (though most definitely not always) algebraic or geometric
in nature, the questions originate in Logic. More specifically, the Principal
Investigators intend to study computability and definability in the first-order
and/or existential language of rings over number fields, their rings of integers
and their infinite algebraic extensions. Another set of related problems
concerns computability and definability over function fields and rings of all
characteristics. Some of the main outstanding questions in the area concern
extensions of Hilbertâ€™s Tenth Problem to the field of rational numbers and rings
of algebraic integers, decidability of the first-order theory of the largest
abelian extension of rational numbers, definability of valuation rings in
function fields over global and local fields, algebraically closed fields, and
other classes of arithmetically significant base
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.