* 2152143
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Political Power and the Use of Geographic Space
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Frances Hayashida, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 18,192.00

The goal of this project is to evaluate how empires organized the architecture
of provincial settlements to communicate political messages. There are many
studies of how polities throughout history used monuments and ostentatious
buildings to communicate power. However, analyses of how settlement layout can
create and maintain inequality are few and focus mainly on modern examples.
Illuminating this issue within one case will add needed historical depth and
cultural breadth to the understanding of architectural communication. The
results will be useful to researchers and members of the public interested in
the exercise of power through the everyday experience of the built environment.
The research will also strengthen international partnerships and provide
materials for descendant communities to use in heritage planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A well-preserved site provides an uncommon opportunity to
examine in detail the relationship between layout and provincial architectural
communication. Researchers hypothesize that the Empire broadly reorganized this
local provincial site's layout to evoke other seats of central authority through
formal similarities, and to manipulate pedestrian movement through the
settlement to make monuments more visible during the daily, lived experience of
site inhabitants. The researchers will evaluate these propositions by conducting
two primary analyses. The first will date organic materials from archaeological
strata associated with wall construction to build an absolute chronology of site
growth and modification and determine if the formal similarities between this
and other seats of imperial power indeed reflect manipulation of site
architecture. The second uses high-resolution spatial data and a Geographic
Information Systems software platform to reconstruct pedestrian movement along
internal avenues and the visibility of political monuments within the
settlement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.