* 2152960
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Learning Regularizations of Inverse Problems with High Data Heterogeneity
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Xiaojing Ye, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 03/31/2025
* USD 101,411.00

In today's era of big data, massive amount of data are being collected in
various acquisition settings and different formats from diverse sources. Such
high heterogeneity has posed serious challenges in many aspects of analysis,
inference, and computation involving big data. This project aims at developing
novel modeling and computational methods, including highly structured deep
neural networks and novel training algorithms, to effectively address this
challenging issue. Results of this project will provide powerful computational
tools to a broad range of important fields involving large heterogenous data
sets, such as signal processing, medical imaging, computer vision, and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project includes three
major components: (1) Development of learnable optimization algorithms (LOAs)
which induce highly efficient schemes for solving nonconvex and nonsmooth
inverse problems. These LOAs effectively integrate residual learning
architectures into exact and inexact descent-type algorithms, which not only
have outstanding efficiency compared to the state-of-the-art methods in practice
but are also supported by rigorous convergence guarantees in theory; (2) Novel
training strategies based on bi-level optimization to learn the parameters of
the LOAs, which can explore the underlying common features across a variety of
tasks in heterogeneous data sets as well as the task-specific features; and (3)
Efficient methods to solve the bi-level optimization problems of parameter
training with comprehensive computation and sampling complexity
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.