* 2152609
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Data Enabled Phase Field Modeling and Data Assimilation for Coupled Two-Phase Fluid Flow and Porous Media Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Baojun Bai, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 47,818.00

The coupling of porous media flow and free flow arises in many important
applications. However, most literature considers only single-phase models, which
are not applicable for geophysical applications involving two-phase flows. With
the support of lab experiment data, the investigators will study a new coupled
multi-physics multi-scale model for describing the two-phase coupling, the
corresponding decoupling numerical methods for efficiently and accurately
solving this model, and two data assimilation methods for improving the model
prediction. Applications of this work include groundwater systems in karst
aquafer, carbon sequestration, petroleum extraction, geothermal systems in
fractured reservoirs, interaction between surface and subsurface flows, and
industrial filtrations. This project provides students training opportunities in
data-enabled modeling, development of numerical methods and code packages, data
assimilation methods, mathematical analysis, and engineering applications.
Students involved in this project can gain a solid foundation in computational
math and data science, valuable research experience, and extensive collaboration
experience with engineers. This project is also part of the expansion of the
computational and applied mathematics program and Missouri Institute for
Computational and Applied Mathematical Sciences at Missouri S&amp;T which has
the potential to benefit the entire engineering-based university and help the
state of Missouri enhance its research in computational mathematics. The
investigator at Clemson will continue high school outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupling two constituent models leads to a
complex system involving different scales in the two-phase porous media flow and
two-phase fluid flow, which demands accurate and efficient numerical methods.
The use of existing data to improve the model prediction further increases the
complexity and computational cost due to the large amount of data and the
iterative nature of the data assimilation methods. The interaction of
nonlinearity, time-dependence, realistic interface/boundary conditions, and data
information in a dynamic system increases the model complexity and computational
scale, leading to significant challenges for this intricate multi-physics multi-
scale model in coupling the two-phase porous media flow and two-phase fluid
flow. This project will carry out novel research on lab data enabled phase field
modeling, stable decoupling method, data assimilation, and mathematical analysis
for coupling two-phase flow in porous media with two-phase free flow, by using a
newly proposed Cahn-Hilliard-Navier-Stokes-Darcy model with varying densities
and viscosities. This research dynamically combines all of these components into
a hybrid system of research and development that will take advantage of the
inherent relationship between the novel mathematical modeling/methods/analysis
and the practical engineering advances in validation/data
assimilation/applications, laying the groundwork for reliable modeling of many
relevant applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.