* 2152694
* LEAP-HI: US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Control Co-Design for Ocean Wave Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Lei Zuo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,520,343.00

The United Nations has designated the 2020s as the “Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development”. Along the long coastlines of the US, Ireland, and the
UK, ocean waves represent a vast, untapped, high-density power source. It has
been estimated that wave energy has the potential to supply at least one third
of US electricity demand. In spite of the huge potential of wave energy to
provide power, wave energy conversion is still in its infancy worldwide with
none of the wave energy converters (WEC) to date achieving widespread
acceptance. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project will research the fundamental theory and design
tools needed to design practical wave energy converter systems in an integrated
fashion. It will be completed through interdisciplinary collaboration of five
investigators across three countries throughout the co-design process, from
early concept design and components innovation to system integration and field
validation. The success of the research on wave energy conversion will help
mitigate the global energy crisis, combat climate change, relieve environmental
concerns, accelerate blue economy development, and benefit society. It will also
serve as a demonstration to inspire worldwide collaborations to solve the global
crisis of energy sustainability and establish US-European collaborative
leadership in the emerging field of the blue economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
WECs to efficiently convert energy from wave to wire, multidisciplinary research
is required, including a wave capture structure (WCS) to capture the oscillating
irregular wave energy as mechanical energy, a power take-off (PTO) subsystem to
convert mechanical energy into electricity, and advanced control to adapt the
device to irregular wave excitations and optimize power capture. Each of these
modules takes domain-specific expertise, which is conventionally addressed
sequentially by domain experts. Such a sequential design paradigm neglects the
strong couplings among WCS hydrodynamics, PTO dynamics, and system control,
which generally results in a sub-optimal or even infeasible design. This
transdisciplinary research project aims to establish an integrated design
paradigm by testing and validating a radically new control co-design approach to
create mutually-efficient PTO and WCS, with active mechanical motion
rectification (AMMR), nested co-optimization, and advanced control. The program
is a disruptive paradigm switch from the common sequential “design and then
control” approach to a concurrent “design for control” and “control for design”
approach to holistically design and optimize the entire WEC device’s geometry,
system layout, PTO, and control system for significantly improved performance.
This research will create fundamental knowledge and tools for coupled modelling,
design and control of the WEC system to drive the convergence of wave energy
conversion technologies. The research will impact the quality and diversity of
education at four universities through multidimensional technical and
professional skill trainings, international internships, opportunities for
underrepresented minorities and women, and unique hands-on experiences for K-12
and community college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.