* 2152109
* An Integrated Project on Arecibo Incoherent Scatter Radar Data Processing, Archiving and Investigation of Ionosphere Dynamics, Energetics and Composition
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Qihou Zhou, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 02/28/2026
* USD 649,900.00

This award supports the effort of collecting and re-analyzing three decades of
Arecibo incoherent scatter (IS) radar data to study the dynamics, energetics and
composition of the neutral atmosphere and the ionosphere in the geospace region
between 70 and 1000 km. The original IS raw data collected in a variety of
specialized observing plans not associated with the World Day mode would first
be treated to remove antenna instrumental effects and then analyzed to generate
data products such as plasma density, ion and electron temperatures, and ion
drifts. These results would be used in three investigative studies. The first is
the characterization of atmospheric wave disturbances between 70 to 110 km and
between 200 to 400 km to study how they are being affected by background wind
and temperature variations. The second study would examine the electron energy
balance in the coupling between plasma in the 80 to 100 km region and plasma
located above 250 km using accurate measurements of the ion and electron
temperatures as well as plasma density. The third focus area in this award is to
study the possible coupling of atmospheric waves above 250 km with atmospheric
tides and large scale waves in the polar region that are associated with sudden
stratospheric warning events that may occasionally occur during the winter. The
research program focused upon these three objectives would begin by processing,
archiving, and documenting the Arecibo IS radar data taken in the last three
decades. These results would be made available to the aeronomy community with
complete documentation using a web site at Miami University and the Madrigal web
site at MIT. The award would support a total of 16 undergraduate students over
four years as well as a graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In studying
these atmospheric waves (gravity waves, GWs) in the lower and upper atmospheric
regions, the analysis supported by this award would yield substantive detail on
the altitude-time-frequency characteristics of the wave packets observed in
practically the entire GW spectrum from several minutes to several hours. High
resolution D-region measurements allow the determination of the dependence of GW
activities on prevailing wind and temperature variations and the conditions for
ducted waves. In addition, the award would support the investigation of the
connection between the low-latitude thermosphere activity and sudden
stratospheric warming events occurring in the polar region. Highly accurate
measurements of electron density, electron/ion temperature, plasma velocity and
molecular ions would be used to achieve the determination of the competing
processes controlling the electron energy budget under different
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.