* 2152526
* Linking Mass Spectrometry Computational Ecosystems to Enhance Biological Insights of Publicly-Available Data
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Pieter Dorrestein, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2025
* USD 585,702.00

Metabolite annotation is a key process to derive biological knowledge from
metabolic/metabolomic datasets. The number of metabolomics research projects
being published in peer reviewed scientific journals and whose data are being
deposited in metabolomics data repositories, including MetaboLights
(https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/ ) in the UK and Global Natural Products
Social Molecular Networking (GNPS: https://gnps.ucsd.edu/) in the USA, is
exponentially increasing (the volume of data increases by 300% every two years).
The volume of data now present in metabolomics data repositories can be
described as 'big data' and provides significant opportunities for reuse, re-
analysis and for meta-analysis studies to investigate the roles of metabolites
in biological systems including microbes, plants, mammals and other
invertebrates. The majority of data deposited into metabolomics data
repositories do not have a chemical structure assigned to it and no biological
data integration or interpretation is achievable without this information,
defined as the metabolite annotation. There can be hundreds or low thousands of
metabolites which do not have a chemical structure assigned in each study. The
majority of data present is derived from liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
chemical assays where the chromatographic retention time, mass of the intact
metabolite and mass of gas phase collision induced (MS/MS) fragment ions are
applied to derive a chemical structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and tools
available through GNPS and Metabolights have significant differences and this
limits their full benefit to all users. In this project the University of
California San Diego, the University of Binghamton, and EMBL-European
Bioinformatics Institute will collaborate to expand and strengthen the
computational workflow to further increase the number of metabolites annotated
and to increase the confidence of these annotations and will then subsequently
apply the additional tools to all datasets available in MetaboLights as well as
for all future submitted datasets. This international effort to develop a
workflow to apply to all deposited data in a metabolomics data repository and
combining data and expertise from two resources will greatly benefit the global
'omics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.