* 2152496
* RUI: Early Endings - Characterizing the Role of Hrp1 in RNA Polymerase II Transcription Attenuation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jason Kuehner, Emmanuel College
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2025
* USD 250,064.00

Life depends on information stored in DNA, which is expressed into RNA and
proteins that perform cellular functions. An initial step of gene expression is
transcription, where a molecular machine called RNA polymerase reads DNA to
synthesize RNA. As RNA polymerase moves along DNA, it can be interrupted by
regulatory stop signals that terminate transcription prematurely. Downregulation
of gene expression by early transcription stoppage occurs widely in cells
ranging from bacteria to human, but the underlying mechanism and selectivity
remains unclear. This research project will investigate premature transcription
termination in the yeast S. cerevisiae, a tractable model for studying many
conserved biological processes. Undergraduate student researchers will be
trained to use classical genetics and modern bioinformatic tools to dissect
transcription stop signals and discover mutants that alter recognition. New gene
targets will be identified, with a broader goal of identifying shared regulatory
features. Student trainees will have opportunities to present their work at
national research conferences and coauthor publications. This research will also
be incorporated into a core undergraduate biology laboratory course, mobilizing
50 additional students to validate gene targets. Course resources will be shared
broadly so additional educational communities may contribute and
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Premature transcription termination (attenuation)
of eukaryotic RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) is more prevalent than once appreciated
but remains ill-defined. The investigators hypothesize that a hybrid
transcription termination pathway involving the Hrp1 RNA-binding protein and
Sen1 helicase contributes broadly to yeast Pol II attenuation. This research
project will generate a comprehensive genetic profile of ten newly identified
attenuators and identify the larger repertoire of Hrp1-dependent attenuators
across the yeast genome. In Aim 1, a genetic selection will identify cis-acting
mutations that disrupt attenuator function in plasmid-based reporter genes,
followed by confirmation in CRISPR-edited genomic DNA. A genetic screen will
probe the effect of trans-acting mutations that alter termination factor
recruitment, Pol II CTD modification, and Pol II pausing. A direct mechanism
will be assayed using Hrp1 mutants defective for binding RNA or affiliated
proteins. In Aim 2, an auxin-inducible degron system will deplete Hrp1, followed
by precision nuclear run-on sequencing (PRO-Seq) to monitor genome-wide Pol II
read-through defects. This work will inform analysis of the Hrp1 ortholog
HNRNPDL, a human protein that likewise binds AU-rich RNA and regulates
transcription. In addition, engineered attenuators may be harnessed for dynamic
gene control in biotechnology applications, including yeast expression of
industrial enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.