* 2152537
* The Vorticity Dynamics of Tornadoes: Formation and Maintenance Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Johannes Dahl, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2025
* USD 320,846.00

Decades of research on tornadoes has resulted in significant progress in the
understanding of how tornadoes form in supercell thunderstorms. However, there
are still important questions that have not been answered conclusively. This
award will address processes that are related to the development and maintenance
of strong near-ground rotation though the use of sophisticated numerical models.
The downstream impact of the work is related to improving the ability of weather
forecasters to provide more accurate warnings of tornadic activity. The award
also provides funding for the training of a postdoctoral researcher and outreach
to enhance public understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to analyze the various mechanisms that lead to tornado
intensification and maintenance. The research team plan to develop an improved
theory for tornadogenesis and demonstrate a direct link between the ambient wind
profile and the rotation of a tornado. The research pursues two objectives. The
first is related to the intensification of the vortex during the transition of
the near-ground vorticity dynamics recently discovered by the research team’s
group, while the second explores the possibility of ambient vorticity being
utilized directly by the tornado. The project will be modelling-based, using the
CM1 numerical model at 50m resolution for tornado simulations and 100m
resolution for supercell simulations. Six hypotheses would be addressed, 4
related to tornado intensification and 2 regarding the environmental source of
vorticity:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;• The transition toward the in-and-up mechanism
results in rapid intensification of the vortex.&lt;br/&gt;• This transition is
accompanied by a feedback loop at the scale of the vortex.&lt;br/&gt;• Whether
or not the transition occurs depends on the strength of the initial vortex
patch.&lt;br/&gt;• Once the in-and-up mechanism is active, the influx of
vertical vorticity is no longer required (but not harmful) for vortex
maintenance. However, continued influx of vertical vorticity may influence the
diameter and intensity of the vortex.&lt;br/&gt;• In cases where there is large
ambient storm-relative streamwise vorticity at the origin height of the relevant
parcels, the barotropic vorticity reinforces, or sometimes dominates, the
horizontal near-ground vorticity that has been produced via surface drag and
baroclinicity. &lt;br/&gt;• In cases where there is ambient storm-relative
crosswise vorticity at the origin height of the relevant parcels, the barotropic
vorticity weakens the horizontal near-ground vorticity that has been produced
via surface drag and baroclinicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.