* 2152717
* Collaborative Research: Differential Equations Motivated Multi-Agent Sequential Deep Learning: Algorithms, Theory, and Validation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,999.00

Sequential data observed from multiple agents is ubiquitous in artificial
intelligence (AI) and scientific applications, for example, in computer vision,
natural language processing, robotics, computational biology and biophysics, and
knowledge graphs. Learning from sequentially observed data often provides a
global understanding of the underlying system and yields more reliable
predictions than learning from a non-sequentially (single-shot) observed data.
Sequential data is often irregularly-sampled in time and space and when this is
combined with the interaction between agents, it raises tremendous challenges
for machine learning. This project addresses these challenges by developing new
mathematical understandings of these bottlenecks combined with new
mathematically-principled deep learning algorithms for sequential and graph
learning. Anticipated results and algorithms from this project will have broad
applicability to important societal issues, such as pandemic spread, cooperative
robotics, and environmental change. The project includes research training
opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and partial differential equations (PDEs)
theory with multi-agent sequential learning practice. The project further
leverages ODE and PDE insights to advance theoretically-grounded algorithms for
deep sequential and graph learning. This project synergistically integrates
recent advances in neural ODE methods with recent advances in graph networks for
machine learning. The project develops and explores building next-generation
algorithms based on wave equations on graphs, coupling second-order continuous
dynamics in time with graph filtering. The research includes theoretical
guarantees for the new methods in overcoming the over-smoothing issue, to enable
sequential learning on graphs with deep architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.