* 2152638
* All-Printed Nanomembrane Sensors and Bioelectronics for Wireless and Continuous Monitoring of Vascular Health
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Young Jae Chun, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project promotes a comprehensive understanding of sensor mechanics, fluid
dynamics, wireless communication, and printing-based manufacturing to overcome
current limitations in implantable bioelectronics while advancing knowledge in
vascular health. Accurate blood flow monitoring can reveal a critically
important state of a patient's health, offering clinicians the information
required for diagnosis and treatment. Unfortunately, current methods for
detecting blood flow conditions are invasive with multiple procedures. In
addition, the existing implantable system shows significant knowledge gaps in
material integration and electronics manufacturing that can collectively serve
as a design guideline for a complete system, considering sensitivity,
compatibility, and wireless communication. This project aims to study and
understand essential engineering fundamentals in mechanics, material
integration, printing processes, and wireless methods for an implantable system.
These mechanical, material, and electrical design principles will offer a
broadly functional and adaptable foundation for a new class of implantable
bioelectronics with distinct advantages of soft microstructures for enhanced
contact to vessel walls, minimal disruption to hemodynamics, and enhanced
wireless detection quality and distances. The findings resulting from this
project will improve the understanding of blood flow dynamics to address the
widespread and significant impact of vascular diseases. The engineering
knowledge, including material preparation, fabrication, design, and sensing
strategies, will be broadly applicable to improving implantable electronics and
understanding many physiological processes. In addition, the interdisciplinary
understandings and gains of various scientific knowledge and engineering
materials will be used to educate abroad range of students in the field of
science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, various implantable devices have
been developed specifically for vascular applications. However, these devices
require the use of a bridging wire that is susceptible to fracture, while the
readout distance is limited to less than a few centimeters. Despite this
limitation, the standard procedure is to implant a biosensing system in the
vascular system. In addition, since blood vessels are narrow and highly
contoured, the required hemodynamic monitoring sensors must be compliant, soft,
and miniaturized for seamless implantation and avoiding flow interference. To
overcome the significant knowledge and technological gaps in the implantable
systems, this project aims to study and understand essential engineering
fundamentals in mechanics, material integration strategies, materials
processing, and passive wireless electronics for an implantable biosensing
system that seamlessly integrates with blood vessels for continuous hemodynamic
monitoring. This project has the following research objectives, including 1)
understanding of high-throughput printing of soft microstructures and
integration for enhanced sensitivity of biosensors, 2) study of passive wireless
sensing principles and 3D, multi-material integration for a high-performance
wireless stent, and 3) study of a biosensing system deployment and fluid
dynamics for long-term, multiplex wireless sensing. The fundamental principles
revealed through this project will define a new guideline for emerging
implantable systems subject to demanding requirements of low-profile form
factor, sensitivity, implantability, and wireless performance. The engineering
basics and biosensing system framework resulting from this project will advance
the field of implantable bioelectronics to monitor and understand vascular and
cardiac functionality, diagnostics, and therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.