* 2152737
* CDS&amp;E: Extracting Physics from High-Fidelity Simulations of Atomization using Geometric and Topological Data Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Owkes, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 375,271.00

Many applications simulate atomizing sprays that are found in engines, fire
sprinklers, spray painting systems, and manufacturing processes. These
simulations produce massive datasets that fully describe the spray. However, the
design of these systems is hindered by the lack of knowledge and physics-based
models of the atomization process. This work will combine geometric and
topological data analysis with these rich simulations results to create new
knowledge on how the liquid in a spray breaks up and ultimately lead to improved
atomization models. The project includes the development of a teaching module
that will bring geometric technics into undergraduate and graduate numerical
methods courses which will expose future engineers to ideas from different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of the project is to leverage
advances in geometric and topological data analysis combined with high-fidelity
simulation results to quantify how atomization occurs. The first objective will
add extraction algorithms into an advance computational fluid dynamics code to
produce a database of atomization events including the shape of and flow field
around liquid structures. The second objective will extend geometric and
topological descriptors to quantify the shapes of liquid structures and local
flow fields. The descriptors will provide a way to index and search for
quantitatively similar breakup events within the precomputed database from the
high-fidelity simulations. The third objective will develop physics­based,
reduced­order models using new knowledge on the process of atomization. At a
high level, the work couples geometric and topological analysis with
high­fidelity simulation results to provide a new perspective on a process. With
this view, the work will allow for advances in a wide range of fields that
involve the evolution of objects with changing shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.