* 2152267
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO Deciphering the Rules of Nucleus Architecture with Synthetic Cells and Organelles
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2024
* USD 672,155.00

A near-universal aspect of cellular life is the non-uniform spatial distribution
of molecules that make up cells, which most often takes the form of sub-cellular
organelles. Organelles within eukaryotic cells are well defined spatial
structures within cells that are specialized to perform defined biochemical
tasks. Technological limitations have meant that the fundamental understanding
of the underpinning principles that govern compartmentalization in cells is
lacking. In this project, the investigators will address this oversight using a
synthetic cell approach where new biological systems are constructed from
molecular building blocks. Their hypothesis is that synthetic cells can become a
unique and invaluable tool to study the fundamentals of organelles and cellular
architectures. Working with Imperial College London, the investigators are
developing a series of technologies and modeling tools that unlock the
manufacture of synthetic organelles. Specifically, they are building and using
synthetic systems to mimic the dominant feature of eukaryotes: the segregation
of transcription and translation by the nucleus. The ability to assemble
programmable membrane architectures, as well as integrating mathematical models,
will allow the investigators to use the synthetic cells as a testbed to
investigate outstanding fundamental questions relating to cell and nucleus
biology. Included in this collaborative project are two community objectives
that leverage the rapidly emerging interest in synthetic cells, their creation,
study and applications in both the UK and the USA: (1) Build an international
bridge for the Build-A-Cell (USA) and fabriCELL (UK) consortia. This
collaboration will serve as a focal point to shape the respective communities
and ensure the cross-fertilisation of ideas, expertise, and personnel that is
needed to achieve the grand challenge of building a synthetic cell from scratch.
(2) Actively engage with beneficiaries in the life sciences, biotechnology, and
microfluidics sectors. This will be achieved through a series of impact
activities, including organising an industry/academic horizon scanning workshop,
attending conferences and symposia, and participating in a host of outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative work between expert UK and
US teams is designed to achieve five scientific objectives and two community
objectives. The scientific objectives will directly build from existing pilot
work in their research groups: (1) develop microfluidic and membrane engineering
tools to build synthetic organelles and nuclei; (2) develop modeling platforms
for the design and analysis of compartmentalized synthetic cells; (3) examine
the effects of compartmentalization on coupled biochemical processes; (4)
investigate how transcription dynamics are affected by compartmentalization in a
nucleus; (5) explore rules governing the nucleus: cytoplasm volume ratio. The
first two objectives involve platform development for constructing and modelling
synthetic organelles. The final three objectives involve using our platforms in
fundamental studies relating to the role of cellular compartmentalisation and
the central importance of the cellâ€™s nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation
(NSF) and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC),
where NSF funds the US investigator and BBSRC funds the partners in the
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.