* 2152896
* LEAP-HI: A Data-Driven Fragility Framework for Risk Assessment of Levee Breach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jasim Imran, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,016,000.00

Levees are critical infrastructural elements for flood protection that are built
with earth materials. They run parallel to rivers and coastlines and are
designed to keep water out of the low-lying communities and agricultural lands
behind the levee. America’s over 100,000 miles of levees were built with varying
levels of quality using a wide variety of materials that are often dictated by
availability rather than engineering specifications and these aging levees are
being exposed to increasing stress due to climate change. Moreover, the
construction of levees presents the so-called levee paradox, in which the
presence of the levee system lowers public perception of risk in protected
areas, thereby reducing incentives to take auxiliary precautions and leading to
reduced preparedness. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health,
and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) research will enable riverside communities to
better analyze their options and resources for flood defense and plan for a
projected increase in the frequency of extreme weather events. The project will
expand our understanding of how infrastructure responds and fails during natural
hazards. It will include collaborations between universities (including a
Historically Black University), government agencies, and society. Finally, the
project will contribute to U.S. workforce development through training a diverse
group of students on the development and deployment of cutting-edge technology
for the assessment of flood and environmental hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address uncertainties in levee performance and levee breach
flooding through a convergent approach that integrates smart sensing of
geotechnical and hydraulic parameters with probabilistic and deterministic
modeling of levee failure and inundation of levee-protected floodplains. The
project will investigate an integrated levee monitoring and flood risk
assessment system consisting of unmanned aerial vehicle-assisted deployment of
novel sensors, automated data collection, and coupled data-driven,
probabilistic, and physics-based models. These high fidelity spatial and
temporal measurement and modeling capabilities will be leveraged by domain
expertise in the fields of hydrology and hydraulics, structural reliability, and
geotechnical engineering to create fragility metrics for levee reliability that
will be integrated into a system of models for the flood disaster chain. The
system will allow decision-makers and stakeholders to monitor and repair
vulnerable levees, develop countermeasures, and support a risk-based decision-
making process aimed at developing effective risk communication and flood
management policy. This project will expand the understanding of floodplain
hydrology as well as the dynamic interactions of soil parameters and hydraulic
loading. Given the potential for the project’s data, sensor designs, and
modeling tools to benefit the public good, the project’s artifacts will be open-
sourced and made freely available to enable other researchers and practitioners
to leverage the project’s advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.