* 2152803
* CDS&amp;E: Data-driven Discovery of Probabilistic Closures in Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Peyman Givi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Reliable predictive modeling of turbulent flows has remained one of the grand
challenges of classical physics. This is because turbulent flows are multi-scale
problems. Capturing all these scales using direct numerical simulations of
turbulent flows remains cost prohibitive for the majority of the scientific and
engineering applications. Therefore, in the predictive models for practical
turbulent flows the small scales cannot be resolved and as a result the effect
of these unresolved scales on the resolved scales must be modeled. However,
except for very simple canonical flows, the functional form of these models are
not known. This is the main source of uncertainty in turbulent flow predictions.
With the recent development of scalable scientific machine learning algorithms
as well as the growth of high performance computing resources, it is now
possible to generate high-fidelity data and train machine learning models with a
very large number of parameters. This opens up new opportunities to discover new
turbulence models for some of the practical engineering problems and
significantly improve the reliability of predictions in turbulent
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely known that one of the most accurate
frameworks to discover turbulent models is a probabilistic one. However,
probabilistic models are not as commonly used as the deterministic models mainly
due to their computational costs. These models are expressed versus the
evolution of probability density functions (PDFs), which can be very high-
dimensional. Discovery of probabilistic turbulence models requires solving both
the forward and inverse PDF transport equations. Classical scientific computing
techniques are unable to solve this problem due to the their high
dimensionality. In the project, a new physics-informed deep learning methodology
will be developed and utilized to solve both forward and inverse PDF transport
equations. If successful, this project will lead to the discovery of
probabilistic turbulence models for diverse turbulent flows. Along with the
development of technical tools, this work will also include integration with
education, organization of new conferences, interaction with industry and
governmental research labs, improvement of gender, ethnic and racial diversity,
and expansion through K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.