* 2152705
* CDS&amp;E: Reinforcement learning for robust wall models in large-eddy simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jane Bae, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 335,318.00

Simulations of wall-bounded turbulent flows have become a key element in the
design cycle of wind farms and aircraft, and a major factor in the predictive
capabilities of simulations of atmospheric flows. Due to the high Reynolds
numbers associated with these flows, simulations resolving all scales of motion
are not attainable with current computing capabilities. Specifically, wall
models are necessary to overcome the prohibitive grid resolution requirements in
the near-wall region. The abundance of data from experiments and simulations and
the advent of machine learning have provided a boost to turbulence modeling
efforts. However, simulations of turbulent flows remain hindered by the
inability of heuristics and supervised learning to accurately model the near-
wall dynamics. The principal aim of this project is to develop a robust wall
model that can accurately predict the near-wall dynamics. The project will also
encompass significant educational activities, including a multi-year
undergraduate summer research program for the under-represented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop a robust wall
model for large-eddy simulations through reinforcement learning. Presently, the
development of the state-of-the-art wall models relies on Reynolds-averaged
Navier-Stokes parametrizations with an explicit or implicit assumption of a
particular flow state close to the wall. These assumptions limit the robustness
and applicability of the model and often lead to erroneous predictions of
separation and laminar-to-turbulent transition, both of which are crucial
components in external aerodynamics. By utilizing reinforcement learning
methods, the project will allow the development of novel wall models that can
adapt to various flow configurations based on the instantaneous flow input. The
wall modeling problem will be cast as a control problem, where the discovered
model is optimized to accurately reproduce the quantities of interest by
automating the exploration of the relevant flow physics. The development of the
proposed wall model will advance the state-of-the-art in the simulation of high-
Reynolds-number turbulent flows in complex external aerodynamic applications.
This will provide a means to obtain cheap and reliable simulations of complex
flows such as flow over an aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.