* 2152834
* CAS- Climate: CDS&amp;E: Facilitating Sustainable and Fair Transformation of GSI through AI
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Bridget Wadzuk, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2025
* USD 499,536.00

As climate change exacerbates environmental challenges associated with urban
growth, green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) is a prevalent stormwater
mitigation strategy to provide resilience and mitigate the impacts of
development on flooding. In parallel, fully sustainable GSI systems must
confront the challenges of historically unequitable distribution of
infrastructure. The current data revolution has reached municipal stormwater
programs; however, these programs are limited by a lack of knowledge of GSI
life-cycle dynamics, high performance and emerging computational tools, and how
to integrate new science into design and planning decisions. There is a
scientific gap in the space formed among GSI design, performance function, and
planning decisions that requires bridging hydrologic science, urban planning,
and data analytics. This project leverages innovations in artificial
intelligence (AI), advancements in the empirical and theoretical understanding
of urban hydrologic science, and social data to produce a new model of GSI
dynamics that considers social and environmental equity issues. This model will
flip the paradigm of infrastructure planning and put the impact on society and
the environment on par with engineering solutions to flooding. The model will be
made available for use by public and private practitioners to plan, develop, and
manage more sustainable and equitable GSI, and by researchers to deepen
convergent knowledge of the complex social issues associated with urban
flooding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current state of GSI research is ripe for
the application of AI techniques to advance GSI knowledge to discern key
parameters, optimize GSI design and development, and enable future performance
forecasts in a changing environment. For this project, civil engineers, computer
scientists, and geographers are joining together to produce a new platform that
uses AI in a dynamic environment with multiple data modalities, ranging from
their spatial and temporal characteristics to data types. The research framework
acknowledges the wider implications of GSI and its high interdependency and
connection to the surrounding community and aims to improve social justice of
GSI design through an equity-aware AI model. This project will use a large GSI
monitoring relational database (housed at Villanova University) by combining GSI
performance data and city-wide open data and applying machine learning methods
to develop predictive models applicable across the US. This work targets
advancing understanding of GSI dynamics by forecasting the performance of GSIs
for a given array of conditions and constraints in urban settings to equitably
maximize GSI community benefits. The project will support a diverse faculty team
and engage students, urban communities, and industry and academic colleagues by:
(1) creating state-of- the-art research and mentoring opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds, (2) developing and
delivering GSI learning modules for practitioners, and (3) integrating and
promoting issues of equity and sustainability within urban stormwater
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.