* 2152935
* Equidistribution and Arithmetic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Paul Fili, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2022
* USD 29,220.00

This grant will provide support for participants to attend a week-long
conference on Equidistribution and Arithmetic Dynamics that will be held at
Oklahoma State University during June 2022. The conference will consist of equal
parts dissemination and education; that is, it will offer both a discussion of
current research, and the opportunity for education in the area, bringing
participants to the forefront of current techniques and research. Besides the
daily plenary presentations, this will be done by including mini-courses and
problem sessions for earlier career researchers and graduate students, and a
particular effort will be made to recruit women and participants from
historically underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topic of
equidistribution is classical in Number Theory. However, there have been many
fundamental advances in the study of distribution for algebraic numbers, and
more generally, for points of small height in various number theoretic settings,
during the latest two decades. Thus, a conference dedicated to this circle of
problems is both timely and necessary. It will summarize major achievements, and
will also facilitate exchange of ideas and methods between various directions of
research in this rapidly developing area. There will be several problem sessions
and discussion groups that will help to compile a list of problems and set
possible approaches to their solutions. This conference will greatly stimulate
future progress and collaboration on equidistribution problems between
mathematicians from different fields and backgrounds. For more information, see
the conference website https://cas.okstate.edu/department_of_mathematics/departm
ent_of_mathematics_ead.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.