* 2152030
* III: Small: Deep Interactive Reinforcement Learning for Self-optimizing Feature Selection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yanjie Fu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,985.00

Feature selection is a classic, yet fundamental, machine learning task that aims
to select a subset of relevant features (variables, predictors) to construct a
predictive model. Feature selection has a wide range of applications, such as
biomarker discovery, system monitoring, fault diagnosis, image recognition, text
mining, and financial fraud detection. However, a longstanding criticism of the
state of the practice in feature selection is that existing methods require
empirical specifications of hyperparameters, lack the ability to search for the
best feature subset, and ignore set-level feature-feature interaction. To fill
the research gap, this project will develop a deep and interactive reinforced
feature selection learning framework (RFSL). The project’s novelties are to
propose a self-optimizing feature selection concept to achieve two goals: 1)
self-optimization and 2) global optimality. The project's impacts are to improve
the automation and optimality of feature selection, enrich the availability and
applicability of predictive modeling that need feature selection, and advance
representative biomarker discovery for biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, we will address three
technical challenges. The first is the framework challenges: how can we develop
a machine learning framework to automate the self-optimizing feature selection
while providing an effectiveness guarantee? The second is interaction
challenges: which interaction mechanisms can help agents to leverage external
and prior knowledge to improve learning? The Third is feedback challenges: can
downstream tasks feed their intermediate results back to improve feature
selection? We will answer the questions by the following thrusts: (1) Learning
Framework: a new learning framework (RFSL) will be developed to balance
automation and effectiveness in self-optimizing feature selection. (2)
Interactive Learning Mechanisms: an interactive perspective will be proposed to
augment the external and prior knowledge learning ability of RFSL. Three novel
mechanisms (i.e., action level, reward level, and environment level) will be
developed to expand the interaction channels of RFSL. (3) Algorithm in The Loop
Feedback: new approaches for algorithms in the loop will be developed to take
advantage of feature tree structure feedback in a downstream predictive task to
provide adaptive learning of feature selection policies to overcome distribution
shifts and model drifts. (4) Embedding into Real Systems: the proposed framework
will be integrated into the recently developed next-generation sequencing
platform (e.g., mRNA-sequencing, whole-genome sequencing) with high-dimension
low sample-size genomic data to identify robust molecular signatures to better
understand the biological mechanisms behind different
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.