* 2152767
* CDS&amp;E: Machine learning enabled modelling of dynamic nanoparticle catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Philippe Sautet, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 364,346.00

Catalysis enables chemical and fuels manufacturing by promoting efficient energy
and resource utilization. As widely practiced in industry, catalysis is an
inherently complex process, which has led to heavy reliance on trial-and-error
methods for catalyst discovery and optimization. Advances in computational and
data science methods are seeing increasing application in catalyst discovery and
design. The project extends those methods to a range of catalyst particle sizes
that are common in both industrial and environmental applications, yet
challenging to simulate because of 1) the large number of atoms which must be
modeled, 2) the “massive” combinatorial space of their structural
configurations, and 3) dynamical changes in structure that occur in response to
changes in reaction conditions. In contrast to previous modeling approaches that
treat small particles as static, perfect polyhedrons, the project develops
methods that consider the effects of dynamic rearrangements and metastable
structures on dehydrogenation and hydrogenolysis reactions as catalyzed by
platinum and nickel nanoparticles containing 20 to 200 atoms. To that end, the
project employs several novel data science methods to model the vast
computational space needed to predict relationships between dynamic catalyst
structures and chemical reactivity. Beyond the technical aspect, the project
offers educational and outreach activities focused on underrepresented students
at the undergraduate and high-school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
built on the hypothesis that a transition metal nanoparticle, for example based
on Pt or Ni, presents several low energy metastable isomers, representing
accessible “defect-type” structures, that might fully dominate the catalytic
activity of the particle. The main difficulty for atomistic modelling of
metallic nanoparticles is the massive combinatorial space of their structural
configurations. Those challenges will be addressed by exploiting data science
methods leading to generalized models linking the structure and reactivity of
nanoparticles in dynamical situations. Data science methods will be used at two
places in the project, 1) interatomic potential fitting, and 2) identification
of structural motifs on nanoparticle surfaces. The first step involves
generation of an accurate inter-atomic potential using Neural Networks based on
the investigator’s previous experience modeling small clusters. The various
configurations of the surface atoms on the nanoparticle will be explored using
basin-hoping algorithms, in a grand canonical approach to handle a variable
number of adsorbates. This will allow us to efficiently explore the extremely
diverse structures for Pt and Ni particles of ~20-200 atoms, with realistic
adsorbate coverage. The obtained large structure database will be used to
extract local structure descriptors and learn the statistical distribution of
local structural motifs, using pattern recognition algorithms. This distribution
of local motifs is key to analyze the catalytic activity. The educational and
outreach aspects involve partnering with the UCLA Center for Excellence in
Engineering and Diversity (CEED) to involve both high-school and undergraduate
URM students in the research. A second initiative features a one-day workshop
for high-school teachers on the UCLA campus, targeting Latino schools in central
Los Angeles. The program will illustrate how computational chemistry can provide
key insights on how catalysts work at the atomic
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.