* 2152905
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: U.S.-Denmark program for advanced reliability analysis of ac/dc converters with INNOVAtive conTrols in glObe-spanning supergRid (INNOVATOR)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Masoud Davari, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2025
* USD 220,572.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) award provides
eighteen U.S. undergraduate students the opportunity to participate in an eight
week research program on power electronic systems at Aalborg University (AAU) in
Denmark. Principal investigators at Georgia Southern University (GSU) and
Mississippi State University will recruit and provide initial training and
preparation for cohorts of six U.S. undergraduates each year for three years.
The PIs have had previous and ongoing collaborations on advanced controls of
power electronic converters and interacted with the Center of Reliable Power
Electronics (CORPE) in AAU Energy (formerly known as the Department of Energy
Technology). Some European countries are currently leading the research on the
practical use of renewables in smart grids. AAU’s power program is one of the
largest and youngest in Europe, consistently ranked No. 1 across the continent.
AAU Energy and CORPE are ranked among the best for Research Impact Measures. It
is an ideal partner for the proposed project—offering U.S. students a unique
international research experience in all areas of power electronic systems. This
research benefits society and the environment by 1) increasing the penetration
of renewables, 2) increasing career interest in the field of power electronic
systems for modern power grids, and 3) improving the quality and quantity of the
U.S. power engineering workforce. Theories confirmed by project research may be
tailored and broadly developed for other systems in the power and energy
industry. GSU and MSU are ready, willing, and singularly able to recruit
underrepresented minorities, including women, African Americans, Native
Americans, and Latin American, to participate in STEM research and teaching.
Moreover, the women leading the power/energy system research at CORPE are
excellent role models in an area where women remain underrepresented. Students
will be engaged in multidisciplinary topics—advanced controls and reliability
analysis techniques of power electronic systems in modern power grids with the
integration of renewables—trained to conduct innovative STEM projects with broad
impacts on the energy sector’s reliability, resilience, and efficiency. They
will be exposed to cutting-edge laboratories, unique reliability analysis tools,
and international training to prepare them for national and international
careers. This program will facilitate a unique knowledge/experience transfer
mechanism, help students build international ties and confidence, and pave the
way for future NSF and Danish National Research Foundation
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Looking to the power system workforce of
the future, our students need to understand and analyze different power systems
as they may be involved in various projects worldwide while working at national
or international companies with technical teams in the U.S. Also, power systems
are rapidly and increasingly globalizing and modernizing in response to global
policies driven by climate change. In the IRES work, students will conduct
cohort-based research projects associated with ac/dc power electronic converters
[voltage-source converters (VSCs)] in a possible globe-spanning supergrid
(GS2G)—an essential component of the energy sector to integrate renewables to
respond to urgent environmental concerns caused by global warming at an alarming
rate and international agreements. Under the umbrella of smart grids, they
assess and improve the reliability of VSCs with innovative controls in GS2G. The
proposed research will advance fundamental knowledge related to 1) enhancing the
stability and performance of VSCs in GS2G, 2) integrating renewables into power
and energy systems via GS2G’s ac/dc grids, 3) achieving more reliable energy
exchange and secure power transfer through VSCs, and 4) employing state-of-the-
art technologies to test VSC performance and reliability. In this collaboration,
students will rigorously investigate technical aspects of VSCs with advanced
controls and reliability analysis techniques for GS2G’s VSCs. This project is
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE), and the
non-Lead portion is co-funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.