* 2152365
* Studies of Atmospheric Processes Using Imaging Science Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Carlos Martinis, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 03/31/2026
* USD 497,330.00

Different regions of the Earth’s upper atmosphere host different processes and
phenomena. Near the magnetic equator, ionized gas or plasma often develops into
highly structured plume forms, while closer to the poles either stable or
traveling large-scale plasma structures occur. Many of these upper atmospheric
phenomena have both radio and optical signatures, with radio communication
channels being adversely affected by the plasma structures. Much can be learned
about origins and impacts of upper atmospheric phenomena from observations of
their optical signatures, particularly at multiple locations in the opposite
hemispheres connected by the same geomagnetic field line (magnetically conjugate
locations). The work will utilize the global network of 11 optical imagers
previously deployed and currently operated by Boston University and focus on
improved understanding of three phenomena: (1) structured plasma plumes at low
magnetic latitudes, (2) medium-scale traveling disturbances at middle latitudes,
and (3) stable auroral red arcs and related optical phenomena at subauroral
latitudes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the role of the
geomagnetic field configuration in producing inter-hemispheric asymmetries in
upper atmospheric processes at different latitudes and longitudes. It will
further investigate conditions leading to intrusions from equatorial and
subauroral regions into middle latitudes, where most of the U.S. population
resides, and the associated effects of the generated structures. Furthermore,
this research will examine characteristics and magnetic conjugacy of subauroral
optical structures. The work will foster international cooperation by leveraging
imaging optical observations and science collaborators in South Africa, Mexico,
and Europe as well as citizen scientists in Canada, US, Europe, and New Zealand.
STEM educational opportunities for underrepresented minorities will be enhanced
by investigators giving guest lectures and serving as judges for the O’Bryant
School for Mathematics and Science, a grades 7-12 Boston Public School with a
very large minority population. Finally, this project will develop STEM
workforce by supporting and involving students and early-career postdoctoral
researcher in field observations and optical image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.