* 2152202
* Transdisciplinary Convergence in Educational Neuroscience Doctoral Training Program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Inge-Marie Eigsti, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,999,906.00

Two significant challenges facing the Nation's educational system are: 1)
designing and delivering education that helps all students reach their full
potential and 2) closing the achievement gap that negatively impacts individuals
who are members of groups underrepresented in their participation in STEM fields
of study relative to their representation in the general population. Through
investigations of the neurobiological mechanisms of learning and teaching,
Educational Neuroscience (EdNeuro) promises to revolutionize education. The
EdNeuro approach transcends the one-size-fits-all approach and personalizes
learning, thereby capitalizing on the strengths of individual learners while
also addressing areas where their learning can be improved. This NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) award, "TRANSdisciplinary Convergence in Educational
Neuroscience Doctoral (TRANSCEND) Training Program," will realize EdNeuro's
potential. The project will bring together transdisciplinary research training
in Cognitive Neuroscience, Education, Engineering, Computer Science, and
Mathematics, currently siloed within distinct degree programs, to transform
doctoral training. TRANSCEND anticipates preparing 50 Ph.D. students, including
25 funded trainees. Many of them will be neurodiverse learners â€” a group in
higher education whose relatively low participation in STEM fields of study is
particularly under-recognized. With a strong emphasis on neurodiversity, team
science, and co-creation of research and training opportunities with community
stakeholders, TRANSCEND will prepare diverse cohorts of trainees with the
technical and transferable professional skills needed to excel in the 21st
century STEM workforce within and outside of
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TRANSCEND's unifying themes include (1)
Innovation in EdNeuro: A bidirectional learning approach and a three-stage lab-
to-school cyclical model will lead to experimentally rigorous and ecologically
valid research grounded in practice, with the potential for its discoveries to
translate to practice rapidly. (2) Neurodiversity: TRANSCEND centers
neurodiverse learners (e.g., with ADHD, dyslexia, or autism spectrum disorder)
both as a key investigation population and as trainees. TRANSCEND will
prioritize recruitment and retention of neurodiverse trainees, capitalizing on
an expansive partner network including NSF INCLUDES partners. (3) Team Science:
TRANSCEND adds a deliberate and formal implementation of team science approaches
while promoting diversity to enhance team creativity and productivity. (4)
Community: The program will cultivate a culture of support and a sense of
belonging through internships, receiving and providing mentorship, and
participation of partners, community stakeholders, trainees' families, and
faculty and students from other institutions in program activities.
Transformations to graduate training and research will be sustained beyond NSF
funding by a planned graduate certificate in EdNeuro. Practices and strategies
will be disseminated widely for other institutions to follow the TRANSCEND
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.