* 2152491
* RAPID: Impact of extreme flooding on groundwater quality following Hurricane Ida
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Samendra Sherchan, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 49,989.00

Hurricane Ida landed near Port Fourchon, Louisiana on August 29, 2021, as a
Category 4 major hurricane. Ida was a deadly hurricane with devastating coastal
storm surges and destructive winds. It brought heavy rainfall in Southern
Louisiana and caused catastrophic flooding in many rural areas mainly Houma and
LaPlace, LA. Such large-scale flooding has the potential to transport chemical
agents and microbial pathogens and contaminate groundwater. Water wells in the
region affected by flooding will be sampled, to assess groundwater quality. The
goal of this study is to advance knowledge of the impact of extreme flooding on
groundwater quality in coastal Louisiana following hurricane Ida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sampling campaign includes collecting 150 samples from
groundwater wells, at 1, 3 and 6 months after Hurricane Ida. The study will
leverage sampling prior to the event for comparison to post-hurricane data. This
project is a time-sensitive and unique opportunity to collect perishable data
and improve understanding of the extent of contamination in floodwaters from
inland areas to groundwater. Specific objectives are to: (i) determine the
source(s) of fecal pollution, heavy metals, and pathogen loads in floodwaters
and groundwater post Hurricane Ida, ii) utilize 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing to
characterize groundwater microbial community changes and iii) Map the spatial
distribution of chemical and microbial contamination to identify households at
risk of toxic contaminant exposure. The findings from this study will bring
visibility the needs for protection and management of groundwater resources.
Information will be provided to well owners that can be used to develop guidance
for protection of groundwater supplies after severe flooding. It will also aid
in future research projects such as evaluation and development of small
disinfection technologies for the control and treatment of contaminants in
groundwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.