* 2152163
* Integrating Robots into the Future of Work
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Paula Niedenthal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Recent technical advances have enabled a new family of robotic technologies,
termed collaborative robots, or “cobots.” Unlike traditional “caged” industrial
robots that are limited to isolated factory environments, cobots make it safe
and practical for robots to work in the same environments in which people work
and live. These technologies have the potential to fundamentally transform how
physical work is performed in industries from manufacturing to services and in
occupations ranging from manual labor to highly trained professions. Rather than
automating away human labor, cobots have the potential to enhance productivity,
safety, and ergonomic conditions for human workers. Realizing this potential
will require not only advancing technology to create sufficiently capable robots
but also addressing human-centered questions ranging from how individuals
interact with robots to how the introduction of robots affects personal life,
the workplace, job satisfaction, communities and societies. Despite these broad-
ranging and interdisciplinary research challenges, robotic technology is
primarily driven by scientists with deep technical backgrounds but little
experience with human-centered and societal issues. On the other hand, social
scientists studying how robots might affect human work may lack an understanding
of the capabilities of robotic technology as well as the possibilities enabled
by them. Addressing these challenges will require a new generation of “STEM+”
researchers capable of marrying technical and social-scientific knowledge and
skills to carry out rigorous, groundbreaking fundamental research at the
boundary of people and technology. The INTEGRATE training program provides a
unique academic environment to train graduate students in STEM disciplines,
including computer science, engineering, psychology, and economics, to become
technologists and social scientists equipped to address the significant
technical and human-centric challenges at the individual, organizational, and
societal scales. The program achieves this goal through key innovations in STEM
curricula, experiential research training, professional development
opportunities, community development, and program evaluation. Trainees who
complete the program will help form a new generation of interdisciplinary
researchers who will work across disciplinary boundaries to shape robotic
technologies and the future of work in a way that maximizes individual and
societal benefit. In addition to advancing and enriching STEM training, the
program makes significant societal contributions through new technologies that
will improve the lives of workers; new knowledge and guidelines that will
improve organizations and industries; and new recommendations that inform labor
practices, technology policy, and the legal system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
INTEGRATE program provides a unique academic environment to enrich the training
of graduate students in STEM disciplines, including computer science,
engineering, psychology, and economics, to address fundamental research
challenges in realizing the integration of robots into the future of work. The
program achieves these goals through five key components and innovations. The
first is a flexible, personalized curriculum that combines core STEM training
with coursework from complementary human-centered disciplines in the form of a
set of concentration areas. The second component consists of hands-on,
immersive, and mentored research experiences through apprenticeship-based
industry-sponsored team research projects on real-world problems, called
“Expeditions.” The third element is comprised of opportunities for professional
development through internships and secondments at a network of partner
industrial and academic organizations. Fourth is the forming of an INTEGRATE
Research Community through weekly colloquia, an annual “INTEGRATE Week” event,
and significant online presence and activity. Fifth and finally is continuous
and rigorous assessment of program effectiveness in training, research
productivity, and real-world relevance and impact toward program refinement.
This highly interdisciplinary program brings together faculty from computer
sciences; mechanical and industrial &amp; systems engineering; psychology;
educational psychology; business; law; and public affairs/economics. Throughout
the program, trainees participate in research that investigates research
challenges at the micro, systems, and macro scales. At the micro level, research
includes the design of novel interfaces and algorithms to enable effective
teaming between people and robots; studies of how humans build working
relationships with robots; investigations of the impact of working with robots
on human health, safety, life and job satisfaction, and wellbeing; and
development of training programs for people to effectively work with robots. At
the systems level, trainees study the integration of robotic assistants into
home life, the workplace, and industrial processes; how they must be redesigned
to best utilize cobots; how robots change organizations; and the changes in
organizational behavior and adoption around robots. At the macro scale, trainee
research teams will investigate how the introduction of robots affects human
labor across demographic groups and communities and develops public policy
changes that might be necessary to maximize the societal utility of robotic
technologies. In the program, trainees build research skills that integrate
multiple disciplinary perspectives, knowledge, and skills as well as core
professional skills in communication, teamwork, and ethical decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.