* 2152254
* Design and Manufacturing of Medical Devices and Implants: Cultivating a Human- Centered Mindset
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Leila Ladani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Technological advances are revolutionizing the medical device industry; and
healthcare makes up one of the largest and fastest-growing job sectors in the
United States. However, due to the traditional separation between career
trajectories in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
those in the healthcare sector, STEM graduate students often do not have
training in a clinical setting. Consequently, many are not aware of the ethical
principles, laws, and policies associated with the development and use of
technologies in those settings. As a result, advancements and innovations made
in the design and manufacturing of biomedical devices in academic institutions
often do not appropriately address the application side of the technology. This
gap in STEM education can be addressed by developing a convergent research
program that weaves different disciplines together. Knowledge of the applied
side of medical technology research is necessary for effective and sustainable
innovation. This NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) project brings together the
awardee institution with the Mayo Clinic in Arizona, to address this gap by
creating and fostering a use-inspired, human-centered outlook in STEM graduate
students through a set of structured and convergent research and training
activities. The project anticipates training 34 Ph.D. students, including 17
funded trainees from engineering, design, manufacturing, and science
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will focus on research problems
associated with imaging devices and technologies, additively manufactured
implants and devices, personable diagnostic devices, tissue repair and
regeneration devices, and applications of cybersecurity, data science, and
artificial intelligence to medical devices. Trainees will follow a training
schedule consisting of NRT core curriculum courses, applied and experiential
learning components, including a Mayo Clinic residency, MedTech accelerator
participation, a Graduate-Undergraduate Mentorship (GUM) Program, and
experiential and professional activities. NRT trainees will learn aspects that
are not traditionally part of STEM education, such as limitations and
opportunities for technology-human interactions in medical and clinical
settings. They will also gain an understanding of ethical principles and develop
an entrepreneurial mindset and aptitude. This training experience will enhance
students’ education by providing breath in the three research thrust areas: (1)
Human-technology interface in medical devices, (2) Ethics in research and
innovation, (3) Law and policies in research and technology. Cross-disciplinary
teams of faculty are selected as the advising team for each NRT trainee; and
tudents will integrate at least one of these research thrusts into their
specific research topic through their dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.