* 2152233
* Radiative Cooling and Homogeneous Droplet Freezing in Laboratory Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* M. Brewster, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 02/28/2025
* USD 417,085.00

The current global imbalance between incoming solar radiation and outgoing
infrared radiation continues to warm our planet. The amount of water in the
warming atmosphere also continues to increase. Phase changes of
water—evaporation, condensation, and freezing—are the important processes that
drive tornadoes, super-cell thunderstorms, hurricanes and other severe weather;
but our understanding about these phase-change processes and their interactions
with radiation is still insufficient at present. To increase our understanding
of these phase changes of water and improve severe weather forecast and long-
term climate change prediction, laboratory and analytical/theoretical study will
be carried out in this study. This project will help to train a female PhD
graduate student who received her master’s degree at an HBCU institution. Local
workshops will be conducted for K-12 students on water properties, phase-change
heat transfer, and global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
radiatively induced cloud-droplet growth, cooling, and freezing will be studied
both experimentally in laboratory-produced clouds and computationally with
analytical and theoretical modeling. Laboratory experiments will be conducted in
which cloud droplets will be exposed to radiative cooling, similar to what can
happen in cloud-top generating cells in extra-tropical, cold-season cyclones or
other storm systems. Cooling will be such as to induce homogeneous freezing of
droplets. Changes in droplet size due to mass transfer (primarily growth via
condensation) will be measured as well as temperature changes. An analytical
model of the radiative cooling and condensation process will be developed. The
common modeling assumptions of homogeneous (droplet-non-specific)
supersaturation and droplet-non-specific radiation, which have recently been
questioned, will be investigated and improved upon. Laboratory measurements will
be used to develop and validate new modeling assumptions by comparing the
measurements with analytical predictions. New theory will be developed for the
effect of droplet-specific, non-homogeneous supersaturation. New basic
scientific information about the state of homogeneously frozen droplets with
solute will also be obtained. These results will impact a fundamental problem in
cloud microphysics: the problem of numerically modeling cloud droplet evolution
in a complex, constantly changing fluid dynamic, thermodynamic, and radiative
atmospheric environment. The results of this study could lead to a new and
deeper understanding of basic processes that will not only benefit the
environment and climate but other areas of engineering and technology such as
phase-change heat exchanger design and electronics cooling. The ultimate broad
impact of this study is a better scientific basis for understanding cloud
microphysics and for conducting weather prediction and global circulation and
climate modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.