* 2152140
* Research to Operations in Data-driven Hydrologic Forecasting and Decision-making
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Mary Davis, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,998,872.00

Water hazards related to droughts, floods, and tropical storms remain amongst
the costliest and deadliest natural hazards. For large sections of the U.S., an
increase and intensification in these extreme hydroclimate events are predicted.
Precise, accurate, early, and actionable forecasts of these hazards are needed
to save lives, protect property, and sustain commerce needs. The hydrologic
forecasting research community is responding with new ideas, techniques, and
tools driven by recent advances in data science, artificial intelligence (AI),
and machine learning (ML). Rapid and effective translation of these research
advances are urgently needed in water system operations to help improve water
hazard responses and planning. These advances must be developed and incorporated
with the operational weather/water forecasting community and the businesses,
industry, and the public that depend on them. Simultaneously, graduate students'
training requires greater inter- and transdisciplinary curriculum inclusion.
This change in training will allow these future water professionals and leaders
in water science to comprehend the practical significance of research advances
and develop skills to effectively translate them into forecast and decision-
making frameworks used in operational settings. This NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) project will address the multifaceted and integrated needs of researchers,
forecasters, and users of forecasts, by launching a unique hydrologic science
program focusing on the critical linkage of research to operations, or "R2O."
The program of study will be co-produced with those working in the water
prediction community to generate a pipeline of interdisciplinary scientists and
engineers capable of diagnosing water-hazard forecasting needs. This co-
production effort will result in the design of prediction tools and techniques
using the latest advances in AI, ML, and data science, and the dissemination of
the forecast products in actionable forms for a wide array of decision-makers.
The project anticipates training a diverse set of 115 master's and Ph.D.
students, including 28 funded trainees from civil engineering, geography, and
computer science. Student recruitment efforts will focus on groups traditionally
underrepresented in their participation in academia and water industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expose students to a variety of
professional and simulated professional contexts and strengthen student
competencies to be facilitators, innovators, and leaders. The training program
features unique modalities, content, and delivery to build competency through
team science, challenge-based learning, co-production, and iterative self-
reflection. Innovative educational aspects include domestic and international
study tours, mock operational forecasting, practical labs, roundtable
discussions, mixed mentoring, experiential learning, internships, broad-scale
and interdisciplinary team building, and professional development. Graduates of
the program will bring to the hydrologic forecasting workforce a unique
combination of attributes. The first two are: (1) deep disciplinary knowledge in
hydrologic science coupled with (2) comprehensive skills spanning the cutting
edge of AI and ML, and the use of advanced industry-standard software. Third and
fourth are: (3) a holistic understanding of the complex hydrologic forecasting
and decision-making system paired with (4) the competencies to be thought
leaders in the hydrologic forecasting community of practice. Trainees will
accelerate research advances in three focal areas: (1) creating new data science
workflows to characterize multi-scale geophysical and climate drivers of
hydrologic processes; (2) advancing models and predictive tools to reduce the
uncertainty of hydrologic prediction; and (3) improving the communication of
forecast products for practical operations. Coordinated internal and external
project evaluation from multiple disciplines, open-source software development,
data curation, and new pedagogical approaches to train at the interface of
computer science, engineering, and geoscience will support the project goals of
convergent research and the delivery of broader impacts in academia, government,
and the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.