* 2152577
* Asymptotics for Particle Systems with Topological Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Amarjit Budhiraja, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 329,870.00

Research carried out under this award centers around stochastic dynamical
systems that describe the time evolution of a collection of interacting
particles in which the most extreme particle, e.g. the leftmost or the farthest
particle, has different dynamical signatures than the remaining particles in the
system. Such systems arise from problems in queuing networks, evolutionary
biology, mathematical finance, and other areas of science. The goal of the work
is to understand the behavior of such systems as the number of particles becomes
large and/or when the system is in operation for a long time. One is interested
in characterizing typical behavior, probabilities of fluctuations from the
typical behavior, and also of non-typical large deviations from the expected
behavior. The work will lead to an understanding of divergence of predictions
based on deterministic models from the actual noisy systems and provide guidance
for operating procedures that incorporate the associated uncertainties. It will
also provide insight on properties of these systems over suitable spatial and
temporal scales. The project includes research training opportunities for
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under suitable scaling,
hydrodynamical limits of empirical measures of such particle systems can be
characterized through partial differential equations (PDE) for Stefan type free
boundary problems (FBP). Several types of asymptotic problems associated with
such particle systems will be studied. These include hydrodynamic limits,
diffusion approximations, large deviation principles, and ergodicity behavior
under suitable scaling of space, volume and time. Work on large deviations will
require the development of the theory for families of measure valued processes
whose scaling limits are described through FBP. A key component will be the
development of the uniqueness theory for families of controlled FBP and an
analysis of Euler-Lagrange equations associated with certain calculus of
variations problems. In another direction, the local stability structure of
extremal invariant distributions of some infinite particle versions of these
systems will be studied. In addition to this being a fundamental problem in the
ergodic theory of infinite dimensional Markov processes, here it also arises
from applications to load balancing algorithms for large queuing systems. The
behavior of multiplicity of invariant distributions for infinite particle
systems has counterparts in other interacting particle systems. Examples include
multiplicity of traveling wave solutions of FBP associated with scaling limits
of certain types of particle systems, and multiplicity of quasi-stationary
distributions associated with Markov processes with absorption approximated by
Fleming-Viot type particle systems. These related multiplicity phenomena will be
investigated by studying scaling limits under different types of initial
configurations and time and space scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.