* 2152357
* Utilizing Conducted Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) for Low-Cost Server-Level Power Monitoring in Data Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mohammad Islam, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The increasing dependence on the Internet and cloud computing has made data
centers indispensable in modern society. However, operating these data centers
requires a massive amount of electricity that contributes to the global energy
crisis. Therefore, managing data center power usage to achieve energy efficiency
is critical for a sustainable cyberinfrastructure. Towards that, server power
monitoring plays a crucial role by offering valuable insights for exploring the
optimization potential in data center operation. Moreover, fine-grained power
monitoring can be vital in safeguarding data centers from outages and downtimes
due to overloading and identifying anomalous server behaviors or malicious
cyberattacks. However, server-level power monitoring has not been widely adopted
due to the high cost associated with dedicated power meters at every server.
This project breaks the cost barrier by developing a novel low-cost server-level
power monitoring system that does not need dedicated power sensors at every
server. Instead, it extracts multiple servers' power consumption data from
single-point voltage measurements of the data center power distribution system.
Beyond cost savings, the fine granular power monitoring achieved through this
project can have a far-reaching impact by motivating data center operators to
adopt more efficient and environment-friendly techniques. This project's
research results and tools will be translated into educational materials for
undergraduate and graduate courses. The project will also incorporate research
activities involving women, underrepresented minority groups in STEM, and
persons with disabilities through lab visits and summer internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling insight for this project's novel power
metering approach is that the power factor correction (PFC) circuits in the
server power supply reveal their power usage information into the data center
power network through high-frequency (kHz level) conducted electromagnetic
interference (EMI). The conducted EMIs from servers can be measured from the
data center voltage for server-level power monitoring. However, there are
several technical challenges to realizing a conducted EMI monitoring system in
data centers. The generation and propagation of conducted EMI in a data center
environment are not well understood and how the data center architecture and the
environment affect the server EMI is unexplored. In addition, extracting many
servers' power consumption data from a single sensor poses fundamental
challenges of source separation. Lastly, high-frequency EMI extraction and
source separation require extensive and high-precision computation, while
developing a real-time and cost-effective sensing system is non-trivial. In
light of these challenges, this project's research efforts are organized through
three research thrusts. The goal of Thrust 1 is to bridge the knowledge gap in
conducted EMI in data centers through foundational research into conducted EMI
generation, propagation, and extraction. Thrust 2 focuses on developing novel
source separation algorithms to extract server-level power from a single sensor.
Thrust 3 develops computation and cost-effective sensor hardware and software
tailored to real-time monitoring. This project contributes to the knowledge base
of source separation techniques and efficient real-time sensor data processing.
The project advances the foundational understanding of conducted EMI in data
center power networks. Moreover, conducted EMI is generated by many different
types of equipment requiring regulated power. Hence, this project's outcome can
stimulate the development of novel techniques dealing with conducted EMI issues
in other domains. To foster such developments, all experiment data, codes, and
designs of this project will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.