* 2152524
* ADVANCE Partnership: Faculty Online Learning Communities for Gender Equity, Targeting Department Level Change in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Melissa Dancy, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2026
* USD 256,319.00

The Faculty Online Learning Communities for Gender Equity: Targeting
Departmental Level Change in STEM (FOLC-E) project offers a unique and valuable
opportunity to understand department level structures and culture related to
STEM faculty gender inequity. This project addresses the critical need to
improve the cultures, practices, and structures of STEM departments by
investigating features of the departmental setting. This project will engage
teams of faculty representing 5-7 departments per FOLC-E group. As a direct
result of this project, twenty-five to forty-five departments, across multiple
STEM disciplines, will make a significant department level change addressing
inequity, potentially impacting thousands of students and faculty. The potential
of this project to promote increased equity within STEM departments will
substantially improve the educational places where many of the students that
identify as being from groups that are underrepresented in STEM study and work.
Partners include the Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) a national alliance of over
4,000 STEM faculty from over 150 institutions of higher education to disseminate
information from the grant and PULSE (Partnership for Undergraduate Life
Sciences Education) which was initially funded by NSF, HHMI and NIGMS/NIH and is
now an educational non-profit organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will inform intersectional gender equity reform efforts in STEM by implementing
and studying five FOLC-Es. FOLC-E is a mechanism for increasing intersectional
gender equity that leverages social learning and support. It is grounded in the
concepts of faculty learning communities (FLC), communities of practice (CoP),
and departmental action teams (DATs). In a community of practice, people with a
common interest come together to fulfill both individual and group goals in a
spirit of learning, knowledge generation and sharing, and collaboration. Teams
of faculty will work with FOLC-E facilitators, intersectional gender equity
experts, and administrative mentors to engage in a process of deeply
understanding the power dynamics of inequity. They will engage structures that
contribute to inequity that can be leveraged to enact reforms within their
departments. Teams will create an action plan for change, utilizing established
theories of organizational change, and enact their plans with the support and
encouragement of the FOLC-E. The FOLC-E groups will use data to assess the
impact and success of their efforts and refine future plans for action. A study
of the FOLC-E intervention will result in new knowledge about the organizational
and cultural factors that create both barriers to and opportunities for systemic
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for projects
that scale-up evidence based systemic change strategies to enhance gender equity
for STEM faculty regionally or nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.