* 2152564
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-level Investigation of STEM Mentoring - Outcomes for Middle School Youth, their Mentors, and Partner Organizations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Bernadette Sanchez, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,540.00

Mentoring is a widely accepted strategy for supporting positive socioemotional
and cognitive development across a variety of sectors including education,
workforce development, and the justice system. An estimated 2.5 million
volunteer mentors support youth development in the United States each year.
However, there is broad concern that practice has outpaced empirical testing,
with significant gaps in the research literature on important modifiers of
mentoring relationships and their impacts. This is especially true for mentoring
youth ages 10-14 in STEM. Studying highly successful programs may be one way to
better understand the role of mentoring and moderators of mentoring
effectiveness. The Science Club, a community-based STEM mentoring program for
middle-grade youth in the Chicago area, will provide multiple sites for a
research study to examine three important issues for advancing theory and
practice for STEM mentoring. These issues include (1) understanding STEM
mentoring for youth in the middle grades, (2) identifying outcomes and
motivations for scientist mentors to more fully participate in mentoring
programs, and (3) examining a model of middle-school-focused STEM mentoring
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through a series of three studies, the team
will investigate which elements of the mentoring relationships are associated
with the demonstrated STEM identity gains in youth participants. The work will
also contribute much-needed data on the impact of STEM mentoring relationships
on the mentors themselves. Study 1 is designed as a retrospective study of
program alumni, both youth and mentors, about the nature and extent of each
their STEM identity shifts during their time in Science Club. A purposeful
sample of 160+ youth and 100+ mentor alumni will participate. Study 2 is a
prospective study of three consecutive cohorts of active Science Club
participants, built on data and findings from Study 1. In Study 2, the team will
design and implement a new Identity-Focused Mentoring Observation Instrument
specifically aimed at exploring the nature and quality of mentoring
relationships and their role in science identity development longitudinally.
Three independent cohorts of 40 youth and 20 mentors each will participate.
Study 3 is retrospective, examining how participating individuals and
organizations perceive and are impacted by mentoring. The three studies employ a
mixed methods approach utilizing surveys, observations, individual interviews,
and document review.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal will fill critical gaps
in the mentoring literature regarding the formative middle school years through
novel, empirical research. Building on the current literature and practice,
outcomes of the work will inform practice and enhance knowledge-building in the
field on both mentoring relationships and the collective impact of university-
school-OST partnerships. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.