* 2152596
* EAGER: Time-Resolved Measurements and Control of Vortex Breakdown via Heat Addition
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Anya Jones, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 266,011.00

This project was inspired by the discovery and ongoing study of the blue whirl,
an apparent breakdown mode of a fire whirl in which it unexpectedly transitions
to a small and seemingly benign blue flame. The blue whirl produces no soot and
minimal pollutants, suggesting optimal burning and a potential source of clean
energy. Creating a blue whirl without having to pass through the fire whirl
state would enable a safe and clean form of hydrocarbon combustion that could be
used in combustors, for propulsion, or for controlled burns (e.g., oil spill
clean-up). More broadly, because vortex breakdown occurs in a wide variety of
applications, a better understanding and ability to control and predict its
dynamics has broad implications for many fluid dynamics systems affected by this
instability. Controlling vortex breakdown would enable higher force production
and enhance aerodynamic stability on wings and blades ranging from small-scale
micro air vehicles to large-scale wind turbines, as well as more robust pump
operation in cooling and emergency operations. This project aims to characterize
and quantify the process of vortex breakdown in an incompressible non-reacting
flow, and to identify mechanisms by which breakdown might be controlled via a
new type of experiment wherein energy (in the form of heat) is introduced into
the core of a vortex flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to experimentally demonstrate the effect of heat injection on vortex
breakdown in a non-reacting incompressible flow, and to evaluate the parameter
space over which heat addition has a measurable effect on the breakdown process
and final state of the flow. A new type of vortex breakdown experiment will be
developed to enable time-resolved velocity field measurements in a swirling flow
with variable temperature (and thereby density) gradients. Complementary
numerical simulations (performed by collaborators X. Zhang and E. Oran) will
provide guidance in the development of the experimental facility and test
matrix, and will make it possible to explore regions of the parameter space not
easily achieved in the laboratory. Results from these experiments will include
quantitative time-resolved measurements of the changes in flow structure during
the process of vortex breakdown, with and without heat injection. The proposed
experiments are expected to provide new physical insight into the process and
mechanisms of vortex breakdown to inform theories and scaling laws, allowing for
a generalization of the results gained here towards new methods of vortex
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.