* 2152873
* Collaborative Research: Investigating tree rings as archives for atmospheric Hg concentrations using Hg, carbon isotopes, and comparisons to other proxies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mae Gustin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 573,814.00

In addition to recording atmospheric conditions, trees also take up atmospheric
pollutants, such as mercury, and store them in the wood they produce each year.
Thus, tree rings are a promising archive of historic mercury pollution, however
there remains a lot unknown about how trees take up and then store mercury in
their rings. This research project aims to address this by studying how tree
physiology influences how trees capture mercury from the air. Other archives of
mercury (e.g. ice cores) often have high uncertainty in their dating and record
mercury deposition. Comparing tree rings and other records will improve
understanding of historic mercury pollution. There are very few records of
mercury in the environment that are older than a few hundred years. One of the
aims of this project is to develop records of up to 2000 years of atmospheric
mercury, improving our understanding of natural atmospheric mercury, including
how mercury is influenced by volcanic activity, wildfire and past climate
changes. The knowledge and data generated in this project will be of immense
value to future research projects on mercury pollution related to historic
industrial practices and land-use changes, and will assist in our research into
the nature and scale of industrial era mercury pollution and provide new
insights to those seeking to further reduce atmospheric mercury. New reliable
records of pre-industrial atmospheric mercury are also extremely important for
current efforts to monitor and assess changes in mercury emissions as part of
the United Nations Minamata Convention. Information, insights and approaches
developed in this project will be used in exciting education and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underserved groups, and in hands-on science modules for K-12 educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although tree-rings are a promising high-resolution
archive for reconstructing past concentrations of atmospheric mercury (Hg) there
remain factors that need to be further investigated. This research project aims
to improve the utility of tree-rings as an Hg archive by 1) using concurrent
stable carbon isotope measurements to better understand how within-tree
processes related to stomatal conductance influence the incorporation of Hg into
tree rings; 2) comparing concentrations of Hg in tree rings to measurements from
small-catchment lake sediment and ice cores to test the fidelity of the Hg
signals observed; and 3) develop long-term records of Hg concentrations derived
from tree rings to investigate important natural drivers of atmospheric Hg (e.g.
volcanic activity, wildfire &amp; climate). Through the unique combination of Hg
concentrations and stable carbon isotope measurements, the biotic influences on
the incorporation of Hg into tree rings will be better understood. By comparing
concentrations of Hg in tree rings to Hg deposition measurements from small-
catchment lake sediment and ice cores, the differences and similarities between
these two types of records will improve understanding of how Hg is preserved in
these different archives, providing important information on post-depositional
processes in depositional archives. Finally, a long-term (up to 2000 year)
record of Hg concentration from tree rings will improve our understanding of
natural variability in atmospheric Hg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Geobiology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry Program, and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.