* 2152205
* Interdisciplinary Training in Data Driven Soft Materials Research and Science Policy
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Soft materials are those which at room temperature are easily deformed by
changes to the temperature of the material. Examples include foams, gels, and
many biological materials. Due to the complexity of the objects under study,
advances in soft materials research are becoming more challenging to achieve
using traditional approaches. At the same time, there is a growing need to
develop new soft materials designed to address pressing societal concerns, many
of which are environment- and energy-related. The associated technology
implementation landscapes are also complex from a policy perspective. They are
particularly challenging to navigate for classically trained scientists working
beyond the lab to provide technology solutions for society. These issues
highlight critical gaps in how students are trained to undertake both
discipline-centered soft materials research and to tackle societal issues
associated with the products of such research. This NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) award will address these gaps by implementing a new graduate education
model that equips trainees to leverage data-intensive strategies driven by
machine-learning for soft materials research and positions them to make
impactful contributions beyond the lab through science policy. The project will
provide a unique training opportunity for an anticipated 50 Ph.D. students (20
NRT-funded) and 40 Master’s students to develop and exercise a new paradigm for
tackling high complexity soft materials research and understanding societal
implications of technology through science policy. In addition, the project will
build a diverse, inclusive, and vibrant community of scholars working within a
network of internal and external mentors. The project’s investigators aim to
graduate leaders in academia, industry, and government, where the ability to
harness data and integrate knowledge from multiple disciplines is critical.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two objectives guide the project’s traineeship
experiences: (1) help students effectively harness data-intensive strategies to
facilitate breakthroughs in complex soft material systems and (2) enable
students to integrate information from multiple disciplines and the combined
effects from multiple system responses, to effectively confront vexing
scientific and societal challenges. The first objective is being met through a
trans-disciplinary research approach entailing the convergence of Computer
Science (machine learning; data science) and Autonomous Experimentation with the
traditional inter-disciplinary approaches (Physics, Chemistry, Engineering,
Biology) currently used to study soft materials. The second objective is being
attained through formal training and experiential learning in science policy to
equip students with tools (e.g., thought processes, teamwork, transdisciplinary
approaches) to thrive in convergence research and effectively address important
societal issues involving science and technology. This NRT project encompasses
three major research areas: Autonomous Experimentation, Colloidal and
Macromolecular Materials, and Living Soft Materials. Potential contributions
include the advancement of data-intensive methodologies, autonomous
experimentation as a mode of discovery in soft materials research, and the
development of new concepts at the interface of information theory, control
theory, and materials science. The project will implement a custom-designed
trans-disciplinary curriculum and associated certificate program that use best
practices to monitor and evaluate academic outcomes that are responsive to
trainees and other stakeholders. This award supports immersive experiences for
trainees in industry, government, and academia. Furthermore, the project targets
the recruitment of women and members of groups underrepresented in their
participation in STEM fields of study as a major goal of building a diverse
community. Towards this goal, the project's team will develop a network of
minority-serving institutions for research exchanges, student-focused bootcamps,
and trainee recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.