* 2152658
* CAREER: Wireless Collaborative Mixed Reality Networking: Foundations and Algorithms for Joint Communication, Computation, and Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Bin Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2025
* USD 361,472.00

Wireless collaborative mixed reality (WCMR) provides an interactive and
immersive experience for a group of people that can move freely in an open space
and will potentially revolutionize existing collaborative mission-critical
training, such as firefighter drills and disaster response training. In order to
provide the best immersive experience, WCMR differs drastically from traditional
wireless applications in that they demand not only coordinated information to be
transferred to collaborating agents in real-time but also fast computations in
mobile mixed reality devices. Hence, WCMR requires fundamentally different
designs than existing approaches that mainly focus on communication demands and
predominantly assume that they are independently generated at different network
agents. This project aims to develop joint communication, computation, and
learning algorithms that explicitly exploit unique characteristics of WCMR and
support emerging WCMR applications. Research outcomes from this CAREER project
are constantly integrated into both undergraduate and graduate courses taught by
the PI. This CAREER project also establishes outreach programs for both K-12 and
college students to be exposed to state-of-the-art wireless and mixed reality
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different from traditional wireless
networks, the design of efficient WCMR needs to enable both concurrent wireless
communications and fast computations. Therefore, the system performance relies
heavily on the extremely low-delay completion of all concurrent communication
and computation tasks across the network, instead of independent communication
tasks as in traditional wireless networks. As such, the proposed research is
organized into the following three interdependent thrusts: (i) Serving
concurrent WCMR traffic. This thrust focuses on the communication aspect of WCMR
and will establish analytical foundations of adaptive algorithm design that
efficiently serves the concurrent traffic with the goal of optimizing
throughput, latency, and seamless user experience. (ii) Offloading compute-
intensive WCMR tasks. This thrust addresses both communication and computation
needs of WCMR, and will develop joint offloading and scheduling schemes that
significantly boost the performance of WCMR to alleviate heavy computations in
mobile mixed reality devices by leveraging powerful servers. (iii) Leveraging
predictable WCMR user behavior. This thrust focuses on joint communication,
computation, and learning design, and will further enhance network performance
by exploiting predictable user behavior. Finally, we will implement the
algorithms developed in this project in our existing platforms, and evaluate
their corresponding performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.