* 2152746
* Computationally Tractable Inference for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 98,992.00

Multi-messenger astrophysics leverages multiple modalities of observations, such
as gravitational waves, light, neutrinos, and cosmic rays, to observe
astrophysical events and objects. Two specific issues arising in multi-messenger
astrophysics motivate much of this research project: detecting cross-correlation
between gravitational waves and electromagnetic sky maps and constraining the
neutron star equation of state. Addressing these issues formally with the data
produced from multi-messenger observations presents challenges that require the
development of novel statistical and computational methodology. This project
aims to develop improved (1) statistical techniques for detecting cross-
correlation between a conjectured gravitational wave background and the cosmic
microwave background sky map and (2) Bayesian algorithms for analysis of
gravitational wave signatures in binary neutron star mergers. The research will
provide interdisciplinary opportunities for professional development of the next
generation of statisticians and astronomers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus on developing methods for performing goodness-of-fit tests for
multidimensional parametric models characterized by high computational
complexity, paying particular attention to identifying the sources of
mismodelling. Another focus will be developing methods for convergence analysis
of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in both low-dimensional (fixed sizes of
state space and observed data) and in high-dimensional (size of observed data
and state space increase simultaneously) regimes. Convergence analysis in these
regimes should be viewed as complementary; without such convergence analyses,
practitioners have limited ability to assess the reliability of their MCMC
experiments and hence any subsequent inference. The new methods will be made
publicly available through open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.