* 2152264
* Upgrades and Acquisitions for the Collaborative Cal-State Fullerton Paleoclimate, Coastal Processes, and Archaeology Lithics Research Laboratories
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Matthew Kirby, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 247,680.00

Central to the National Science Foundation’s core values is the strengthening
and diversifying of scientific leadership. To fulfil this core value, funding to
recruit, retain, and develop the next generation of scientists, particularly
those students from historically underrepresented groups, is critical. A key to
recruiting, retaining, and developing these students is through conscientious
mentoring and the offering of real-life (high impact) research and technological
opportunities. Integral to providing these research opportunities is the
availability of technology that is both student-friendly, reliable (i.e.,
minimal required maintenance), and cost efficient per analysis. This equipment
acquisition will bolster the PIs’ student-oriented research laboratories through
technological upgrades and acquisitions to the collaborative California State
University, Fullerton (CSUF) Paleoclimatology, CSUF Coastal Processes, and CSUF
Archaeology Lithic Laboratories. Equipment acquisitions and upgrades will
provide new and continuing technological opportunities for our students both for
research and classroom activities. Of note, CSUF is a Hispanic Serving Institute
where 46% of the student population is from historically underrepresented groups
and 29.9% are the first generation in their family to attend a university. As a
result, our university and its professors interact with students from
historically underrepresented groups in the STEM and social science fields
daily. Notably, all 3 PIs have excellent track records recruiting students from
historically underrepresented groups for research opportunities and including
technology in the classroom. Exposure to technology benefits society by training
the next generation of scientists, developing analytical skills required for the
ever-changing workplace, instilling student confidence in their abilities, and
providing important problem-solving skills that are required (and expected) in
the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund three technological
acquisitions: 1) a Malvern Mastersizer 3000 laser diffraction system with the
Hydro LV large volume automated liquid sample dispersion unit, 2) a Mirion Small
Anode Germanium (SAGe) Well Gamma Detector, and 3) acquire a Bruker Tracer 5g
graphene window portable x-ray fluorescence (pXRF) analyzer. In addition to
providing new and continuing technological opportunities for our students both
for research and classroom activities, these equipment acquisitions will allow
the PIs to continue their exploration of creative, original, and potentially
transformative concepts in their fields and across their fields via state-of-
the-art data collection with student participation as an integral component.
Research in the geosciences focuses on California’s past climate including
droughts, floods, pluvials, fire, and vegetation as well as
assessing/identifying the drivers of these changes. Additional research focuses
on sedimentation, sediment processes, and human impacts within a variety of
coastal environments and over a range of time scales from event-scale to
millennia. Finally, archaeological research focuses on the way Late Pleistocene-
Early Holocene hunter-gatherers in the Mojave Desert and Great Plains organized
land use and lithic technology. Importantly, all 3 PIs collaborate on various
research projects and share lab equipment, thus advancing knowledge and
understanding within and across fields of study. This award is being co-funded
by the Marine Geology and Geophysics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.