* 2152412
* Collaborative Research: The role of oxide overlayers on adsorbate migration and metal sintering in reactions of CO2
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michael Janik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 212,328.00

Combustion of natural gas (chiefly comprised of methane, i.e., CH4) provides a
major portion of our nation’s energy needs. Although methane is a relatively
“clean” fossil fuel, its combustion produces carbon dioxide (CO2) which
constitutes the major component of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Methane can
also be reacted with steam (H2O) to produce carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen
(H2) in a process known as methane steam reforming. The product CO and H2 gases
are further reacted to produce a wide range of fuels and chemicals. The project
investigates an alternative approach – “dry” reforming of methane (DRM) - which
utilizes captured CO2, rather than steam, to generate CO and H2, thus decreasing
the overall GHG inventory. Methane reforming, via any technology, is an energy
intensive process. Catalysts are utilized to reduce operating temperatures,
improve process efficiency, and drive the reactions to desired products. Dry
reforming is even more challenging than steam reforming, thus creating a need
for research aimed at identifying more active and selective catalysts that are
stable under high-temperature reaction conditions. The project addresses those
needs by combining theoretical, computational, and experimental methods to
identify effective DRM catalysts. In addition, the project will investigate
economics of DRM technology, and incorporate educational and outreach activities
exposing high-school and undergraduate students to the field of chemical
engineering – so important to the fuels, chemicals, and environmental
industries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;DRM catalysts must operate at high
temperatures, which can destroy carefully designed synthetic structures or
promote secondary reactions (e.g., reverse water-gas shift reaction (RWGS) and
coke formation) that result in lower value products. One mechanism associated
with both the primary and secondary processes is the ability of some catalysts
to store and release oxygen during different parts of the cycle. Other catalysts
can avoid this oxygen-centric route at the expense of higher activation
energies. This work develops hybrid catalysts, using both reducible and non-
reducible oxides, to combine the best properties of both in generating highly
stable and chemically selective methane reforming catalysts which can be used to
operate at industrially relevant conditions. The simultaneous methane reforming
and RWGS reactions over ceria catalysts occur through mobile oxygen species.
Non-reducible catalyst overlayers have the potential to limit hydrogen spillover
from the active metal sites, preventing the unwanted secondary reaction and
stabilizing the carefully designed catalyst structure without limiting the role
of oxygen in the methane reforming. Using a combination of simulation (density
functional theory) and experimental work, the project will develop highly active
and structurally stable catalysts while limiting the undesired RWGS, which
decreases the H2:CO ratio. However, subsequent reactions to make chemicals
require higher H2-to-CO ratios than are possible under standard dry reforming
conditions. As such, the optimized hierarchical catalysts will be tested under
harsh conditions in the presence of low concentrations of water (i.e., a
steam/CO2 “bi-reforming” process) to further increase the H2-to-CO
ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.