* 2152548
* Elucidation of serine hydroxymethyltransferase-mediated mechanisms of nematode disease resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Lesa Beamer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 10/31/2025
* USD 624,059.00

The soybean cyst nematode (SCN), a microscopic soil-borne roundworm, is a
widespread pathogen of soybean and a billion dollar problem in US agriculture.
Decades of planting a single type of genetic resistance has led to widespread
virulence of this pathogen on commercially available SCN-resistant soybean
cultivars reducing their overall effectiveness. The goal of this project is to
better understand the resistance mechanisms of the soybean plant to gain insight
into how SCN are able to adapt to overcome it and enable the design of more
durable resistance in soybean. The investigators will study the genetic
differences found in a type of soybean linked with increased resistance to SCN,
but currently not broadly available to soybean producers. These genetic changes
affect a soybean enzyme involved in folate metabolism known as serine
hydroxymethyltransferase 8 (SHMT8). Using a combination of scientific
approaches, including structural biology and plant-based studies, the impacts of
the genetic differences in SHMT8 on the soybean plant will be characterized and
used to develop new ways to fight SCN infestations in soybean fields. This is a
collaborative effort between two investigators with complementary expertise: the
structural biology and biochemical studies will be performed at the University
of Missouri and the plant-based studies will be conducted at the University of
Georgia. Graduate and undergraduate researchers involved in the project will
participate in a 2-week experiential learning summer exchange program between
the PIs’ laboratories at the Universities of Missouri and of Georgia, to gain
exposure to the complementary disciplines in both laboratories. Undergraduates,
including women and underrepresented minorities, will directly participate in
the research efforts. A week-long Nematode Boot Camp each summer targeting K-5
underrepresented minorities will engage graduate and undergraduate students in
science outreach for improved STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The soybean
cyst nematode (SCN), a microscopic roundworm, is the most important pathogen of
soybean. Current management relies almost exclusively on the use of SCN
resistant soybean cultivars. Unfortunately, this approach has become less
effective over time as nematodes have adapted to the commercially available
resistant soybean genotypes. This project aims to provide a molecular
understanding of the basis of SCN resistance in soybeans and thereby enable the
development of more durable resistance and potentially novel strategies for
combating this destructive agricultural pathogen. Specifically, this project
will focus on studies of the soybean enzyme serine hydroxymethyltransferase 8
(SHMT8), which has genetic differences linked to SCN resistance: the “resistant
version” of SHMT8 differs by only two amino acids relative to SHMT8 found in SCN
susceptible soybean cultivars. Structural, biochemical and biophysical
characterization of SHMT8 is proposed to help unravel how the molecular
differences in SHMT8 translate to SCN resistance in soybean. This work will be
complemented by plant-based studies to elucidate SHMT8-mediated metabolic
perturbations in soybean roots in response to SCN infection and host pathways
that affect soybean resistance. Plant-based studies employing modern genome
editing tools will also be critical for confirming novel hypotheses regarding
SCN resistance derived from the in vitro studies. In addition to benefits for
soybean agriculture, a critical part of the U.S. economy, this collaborative
research project spans the areas of X-ray crystallography, protein chemistry,
plant-pathogen interactions, and soybean molecular
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.