* 2152201
* Integrative Training in Quantum Assembly and Technology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Dirk Bouwmeester, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,981,841.00

Future advances in quantum science and technology will require the combination
of insights and techniques from multiple fields and will benefit from recruiting
talent from diverse areas. Achieving the promise of a “quantum leap” will
require moving beyond the siloed and specialized instruction in separate
departments that is the dominant model for graduate education today. Future
discovery and development will be driven by the emerging generation of quantum
scientists, making the development of truly interdisciplinary training programs
in quantum science an urgent national priority. The Integrative Training in
Quantum Assembly &amp; Technology (InTriQATe) project aims to build a well-
trained, creative, and welcoming interdisciplinary quantum science community.
InTriQATe is an intrinsically multidisciplinary traineeship program focused on
the central theme of quantum assembly: the integration of disparate quantum
elements, and the bringing together of a diverse team of quantum scientists, to
achieve new functionalities and behaviors. This NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
award will prepare students for leadership in a diverse quantum workforce. The
project anticipates training 75 Ph.D. students, including 30 funded trainees,
from Physics, Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, Molecular Biology,
Chemistry, and Materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The InTriQATe NRT project will
transform the graduate curriculum with new courses on the modern toolset of
convergent quantum science; professional training in oral and written
communication, collaboration, and research ethics; and pro-active and
coordinated mentoring. The new courses will be at the core of a new Ph.D.
emphasis in Quantum Science &amp; Technology, open to all doctoral candidates in
participating departments. Trainees will form an interdisciplinary quantum
community, hosting regular campus-wide workshops, student-led seminars, and
informal lunches. Trainees will gain collaborative experience through team
research projects and build leadership and communication skills by engaging in a
reciprocal “superexchange” program with other institutions. Finally, trainees
will network with representatives from the quantum industry through a Quantum
Career Day to gain a broader perspective on opportunities in the quantum
workforce. A central goal of this project is to accelerate advances in quantum
science by combining insights and techniques from multiple fields. Physicists,
engineers, chemists and biochemists, materials scientists, and others will be
working together to create the quantum devices of the future and give trainees
the technical skills, professional training, confidence, and interdisciplinary
perspective necessary to lead this revolution. A threefold focus on
biomolecular, metamaterial-based, and trapped-atom approaches to quantum
assembly will ensure interdisciplinarity and nucleate convergent approaches to
open scientific questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs. Because of its alignment
with the research thrusts within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS), the project is receiving co-funding from the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.