* 2152040
* Collaborative Research: Using Uncertainty Quantification and Validated Computational Models to Analyze Pumping Performance of Valveless, Tubular Hearts
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* John Cain, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2025
* USD 176,957.00

Valveless, tubular hearts drive many animals' circulatory flow through muscular
contractions. This flow carries oxygen, nutrients, and waste around the body. It
also drives the development of blood vessels and other organs in vertebrate
embryos. So, understanding how these hearts produce flow is key to understanding
the development of vertebrate embryos and the evolution of their circulatory
systems. This project will develop a computational model of the most essential
features of this system: the electrical activity of the heart, muscle
contractions of the tube walls, and the fluid-structure interactions of the
heart walls and blood within. This computational framework aims to be faithful
to that of a real, model animal (tunicate, or sea squirt). The model will then
be analyzed with mathematical tools to determine the physical limits of the
pumping system. Results of this project will improve the understanding of human
heart development at the earliest stages. Also, it will point to how the large,
multi-chambered hearts of vertebrates could have evolved from smaller
structures. The results will be released through university courses, scientific
conferences and seminars, online repositories, and regular publications. This
project will also provide interdisciplinary training to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An accurate
computational model of flow produced by valveless tubular hearts will be
developed and validated using observations and experiments on the solitary
tunicate, Ciona savignyi. The Immersed Boundary Method with Adaptive Mesh
Refinement and a Windkessel model will be used to mathematically model fluid
flow within the system. A Mitchell-Schaeffer model of cardiac electrodynamics
will be tuned using optical mapping of heart electrical activity. Measurements
on live C. savignyi circulatory flow with micro-Particle Image Velocimetry will
be used as model validation. With the completed model, uncertainty
quantification (UQ) techniques based on physics-constrained generalized
polynomial chaos (gPC) and Dempster-Shafer (DS) theory will be used to study the
uncertainty and analyze the parameter sensitivity on the model. The physics-
constrained gPC expansion can construct a computationally cheaper surrogate
based on the fluid flow simulations at the properly chosen input points in the
parameter space. The mixed types of uncertainty in the fluid flow quantities of
interest will be determined using DS theory combined with the gPC method, and
the sensitivity of parameters will be used to develop hypotheses regarding
parameter evolution. The performance data corresponding to various parameter
combinations in live animals will be collected and used to improve the 2D
computational fluid dynamic model by utilizing model correction methods. The
improved model can be used to provide more accurate
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.