* 2152617
* ECCS-EPSRC: Towards Quantum-assisted Reconfigurable Indoor Wireless Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Zhen Peng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 357,994.00

Indoor scenario has emerged as one of the most congested, contested, and
competitive wireless environments. With the need of resilient Internet of
Everything (IoE) and Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0)
infrastructures, thousands of devices are expected to be connected wirelessly
within a confined indoor environment, interfering with each other and contending
for limited electromagnetic spectrum. The combination of growing demand for data
traffic, confined space, and congested spectrum creates a major technical
challenge and opportunities for innovation. The research objective of this
project is to investigate new fundamental communication models and schemes,
which dynamically program and customize indoor wireless propagation environments
for enhanced wireless communications. This objective is attained by integrating
the physics of wave-chaotic dynamics, the mathematics of random matrix theory,
the engineering of reconfigurable electromagnetic surfaces, and the computing
power of quantum hardware. The success will open new pathways from compensation
to exploitation of chaos and randomness towards more energy-efficient and
intelligent indoor wireless communications. The research has the potential to
support a variety of highly desirable functionalities for beyond-5G/6G indoor
wireless infrastructure, such as maximum signal deposition at desired locations,
energy and bandwidth efficient indoor wireless communications, accurate and
reliable indoor positioning. While the project is focused on electrodynamics,
the methodology developed by this research can be applied to many other related
fields including acoustics, quantum mesoscopic transport, imaging in complex
media, and light scattering in disordered media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indoor
wireless is qualitatively different than outdoor wireless. The inherently
complex, dynamic interaction between wireless devices and radio environment
presents its own unique challenges. This project will investigate a physics-
oriented, mathematically tractable computational framework that can enable
statistical design and optimization of deliberate perturbations to dynamically
program and customize indoor wireless propagation environments. The perturbative
force is realized by the emerging reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RIS)
technology. The optimization procedure operates on the physical degrees of
freedom that are accessible in the prescribed perturbation. To enable an ultra-
fast optimization adapting to dynamic wireless environments, the research will
leverage the power of quantum adiabatic optimizer to overcome the computational
complexity. The proposed research consists of three components: (1) a rigorous
mathematical model for the statistical analysis of wave physics in complex
confined indoor environment; (2) the configuration and control of wave chaos
using the RIS technology; (3) quantum-enabled, ultra-fast large-scale
optimization of RIS configuration. The proposalâ€™s vision is that the physics of
complex systems fused with quantum computing will constitute a game changer for
the modeling and design of large network of RIS devices cooperating to transform
indoor radio environments into a resource for future wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was submitted through the NSF
Engineering - UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead
Agency Opportunity (ENG-EPSRC), a collaborative partnership between the National
Science Foundation and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC) of United Kingdom Research and Innovation
(UKRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.