* 2152340
* CAREER: Testing Evolving Complex Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Tingting Yu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 197,328.00

Modern computer systems span a wide range of domains, ranging from consumer
electronics (e.g., smart-phones) to safety-critical systems (e.g., avionics).
These systems evolve rapidly because the competition for market share pushes
developers to come up with new features or improve capabilities over existing
ones. These software changes may require hardware replacements or upgrades to
capitalize on software upgrade opportunities. As such, developers must ensure
that changes do not cause any unintended impact to the existing quality of the
systems. Regression testing has been widely used to assess whether changes have
adversely affected system behavior. While significant work has been accomplished
by the software engineering community in improving effectiveness and efficiency
of regression testing, most of the existing techniques focus on traditional
software that is environment-independent and non-distributed. Real-world
software systems, however, are far more complex: they frequently interact with
the environment via hardware devices, and employ various concurrency mechanisms
to coordinate interrupts, signals, threads, and processes. These characteristics
affect various techniques on which existing regression testing approaches rely.
Therefore, applying these approaches may lead to problems during maintenance and
thus impair software quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
proposal is to create a novel regression testing framework that can be applied
to real-world complex software systems, focusing on the hardware dependence and
concurrent control characteristics, throughout their lifetimes. Specifically,
this research will develop, evaluate, and make available a family of techniques
and tools that can: 1) create comprehensive models of the whole system to
analyze change impact across hardware and software layers and across concurrent
events, 2) retest the systems accordingly using existing test cases, and 3)
generate new test cases when needed. The analytical underpinnings of this
research will be applicable not only to the software engineering community, but
to industry and other disciplines in which software dependability plays an
important role. The associated education agenda paves the way for teaching that
cross traditional boundaries among multicore computing, embedded systems and
software engineering, which may ultimately, through the dissemination of new
curricular materials, have impacts to the broader scientific community.