* 2152059
* Codes For Life - Artificial Intelligence and Sustainable Software for Biomolecular Interactions
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Andrey Grigoriev, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,999,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern study of biology is
increasingly digital. Ever-expanding databases of genome sequences, protein
structures, electronic health records, and biometric data may hold the key for
solving crucial problems in many domains, such as biomedicine, agriculture,
ecology, and forensics. Gathering useful information from this data requires
advanced computer science skills as well as a deep understanding of biology.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Rutgers
University-Camden will meet this national need by training Master’s and doctoral
degree students in the fundamental biology and biophysics of DNA and proteins,
artificial intelligence (AI) methods, and professional best practices for team
software development. The traineeship follows a new model for students and
faculty mentors that combines innovative training support with increased
expectations. While the program is designed to make science graduate training of
any discipline more efficient, effective, and accessible, the NRT is
specifically designed to overcome the challenges in training students in new
fields between traditional domains of expertise. The project anticipates
training 30 M.S. and 25 Ph.D. students, with an additional 300 M.S. and Ph.D.
students expected to participate in a subset of the activities. Trainees will
graduate with a combination of skills that are highly in-demand across academic,
government, and industrial workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and
training activities of this NRT award are particularly focused on using AI and
sustainably developed software to overcome the widening communication gap
between genomicists and proteomicists. This communication gap, worsened by
diverging scientific dialects, has prevented the synthesis of research advances
and the development of new unifying biological principles. AI is a generalizable
approach that is being increasingly used by both fields. Software is a powerful
method for communication and bridging disciplinary divides. However, it must be
accessible to both disciplines and developed to a standard that academic
software rarely meets. The team proposes a new model for graduate training that
combines evidenced-based methods, redesigned for improved sustainability, and
original activities that satisfy an identified need. Training activities will
include revised curricula, the introduction of efficient “just-in-time” short
format high-quality training, an industry mentorship program integrated with the
trainee’s research, and peer mentoring for expanding perspectives and sharing
strategies. The traineeship will introduce the new “Codes for Life” track into
an interdisciplinary graduate degree program at Rutgers University-Camden. Many
activities will be extended to all students enrolled in this broad graduate
program. As a result, this will provide a unique opportunity to evaluate
activities with a large graduate student body without historical departmental
constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.