* 2152441
* Studying Undergraduate Curricular Complexity for Engineering Student Success (SUCCESS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Matthew Ohland, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 03/31/2025
* USD 349,936.00

As the demand for engineering graduates grows, there has been mounting interest
in understanding what prevents students from completing their degrees. Not
everyone follows the same pathway to an engineering degree; current longitudinal
research suggests that subpopulations of students take different routes to
either completing or abandoning their studies. Accordingly, the BPE program
seeks to support research on understanding systematic barriers that push out
students from underserved communities. This project will examine a barrier that
all students must overcome when pursuing an engineering degree, the curriculum
itself. An emerging framework called Curricular Analytics has provided a new
method of thinking about how curricula in engineering can be analyzed. The
framework quantifies features of the curriculum that make it “complex” such that
they can be connected to outcomes like graduation rates. This project will use a
longitudinal dataset called the Multi-Institution Database for Engineering
Longitudinal Development (MIDFIELD), which contains nearly two million records
from undergraduate students at 21 U.S. universities from 1987 through 2018 –
14.4 % of which are engineering students. Using these data, student course-
taking trajectories will be created, clustered to find patterns based on
measures of curricular complexity and compared to established curricula across
engineering disciplines, then disaggregated into subpopulations. This project
has the potential to empower administrators, curriculum designers, and advisors
to understand how the complexity of the curriculum as defined by faculty and
students’ deviances from it affects the success of different subpopulations of
students. The project will use the perspective of curricular complexity to
examine what kinds of programs such as first year experiences, enrollment
models, and course sequencing that support the retention and graduation of
different subpopulations of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore what
barriers curricular factors impose on different students, the Curricular
Analytics framework’s measures will be applied to capture a curriclum’s
sequencing and interconnectedness quantitatively and study diverse student
pathways - both as codified and as experienced. The guiding research question
is: what is the variation in curricular complexity among the following strata –
institutions, disciplines, matriculation models, populations, and pathways – and
to what extent does curricular complexity relate to outcomes for diverse
population subgroups? This project will combine curricular complexity with
student outcomes and course-taking data from the Multiple-Institution Database
for Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development (MIDFIELD) to understand
curricular factors in broadening participation in engineering, including
retention and degree completion. This project will involve creating trajectories
from student course-taking data using association analysis. The curricular
complexity for these trajectories will be calculated and disaggregated across
the strata of interest. These new data will be used to explore how curricular
complexity for ecosystem metrics like discipline stickiness and migration yield
are related to the complexity of a curriculum. The combination of the MIDFIELD
database with the curricular complexity framework can bring a new perspective on
differences in longitudinal studies on engineering student degree attainment and
retention in the context of broadening participation. Currently, curricular
complexity is a nascent framework with descriptive and explanatory potential,
such as correlating program quality with curricular complexity measures. The
empirical results can directly inform future curriculum revisions and policy
efforts at the studied institutions through unique reports delivered to the
appropriate administrative stakeholders. By disseminating these results directly
to institutional stakeholders, The project will leverage MIDFIELD’s potential
for disaggregation to impact inclusion efforts of underrepresented students in
engineering at the curricular and programmatic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.