* 2153807
* Excellence in Research: De Novo Protein Modeling, Beyond Topology Determination Problem
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wei Chen, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 535,066.00

Three-dimensional (3D) structure has a large impact on the behavior of
biological systems. For example, proteins can speed up reactions, recognize and
kill pathogens, or shuttle material into and out of a cell. Protein structure
helps determine its ultimate function. Viruses are protected by proteins that
form an outer coating, creating a viral particle. The structure of viral
particles helps determine how effective a virus is in slipping past the immune
system and infecting cells. Machine learning will be employed to try to
understand the relationship between a protein's 3-D structure and its function.
This project is expected to contribute to protein modeling and drug design. This
project will also provide research and educational opportunities for students at
Tennessee State University (TSU), an HBCU. This will increase the diversity of
the workforce prepared to contribute to the emerging biotechnology
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most pharmaceutical drugs target membrane
proteins. Conventional determination techniques such as X-ray crystallography
and traditional computational techniques are unsuccessful with many types of
proteins, such as membrane proteins, proteins that are hard to crystallize, and
macromolecular proteins. Cryo-Electron Microscopy (cryo-EM) is a relatively new
biophysics technique with the capability to generate volumetric images of
macromolecular complexes and ensembles like ribosomes and viral capsids.
Usually, cryo-EM images are large and noisy datasets. The project will
investigate a novel idea to reduce the size of the image and build volume
components using a geometric graph model that can drastically reduce the
complexity of the problem. The volume components will be analyzed and classified
to identify the secondary structure elements (SSEs) of proteins using advanced
machine learning and geometric properties of the volume components. The goal of
this project is to develop efficient algorithms in a fully automatic framework
to identify the spatial information of the SSEs. The project has three
objectives:1) Build a new mathematical model based on geometrical graph theory
to reduce the size of cryo-EM images. 2) Develop efficient algorithms, including
convolutional neural networks and other machine learning approaches, to process,
analyze, and extract the SSEs from the volumetric images of protein
macromolecule. 3) Integrate the new methods with an existing visualization and
modeling platform for molecules like Chimera. If successful, this project could
advance the state-of-the-art methods recently developed in protein modeling
using cryo-EM by providing an automated framework that is less sensitive to
noise and is segmentation-free.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.