* 2153282
* Pile-supported Wharves Subjected to Combined Inertial and Lateral Ground Deformation Loads in Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Arash Khosravifar, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 415,687.00

This award will improve the resilience of maritime transportation systems in
earthquakes, including ports, terminals, and Navy facilities which are key
components of economic prosperity, emergency response, and national security. In
addition, ports are often designated centers for post-earthquake staging and
relief efforts. However, seismic evaluation studies of port structures often
encounter a knowledge gap related to soil-foundation-structure interaction in
soils that are susceptible to liquefaction – a phenomenon that causes severe
softening of soils in earthquakes. The knowledge gap becomes even wider for
foundations that are supported in silty soils (commonly encountered at port
facilities) as there is no consensus in the geotechnical community on how to
predict the behavior of silty soils in earthquakes. This research will address
these knowledge gaps by performing a series of advanced physical experiments and
numerical simulations. The findings of this research will result in safer, more
resilient maritime transportation systems. Close collaborations with industry
partners will ensure that the knowledge produced in this study will benefit the
broader engineering community. Characterizing the behavior of silty soils in
earthquakes will have a significant effect in assessing, and reducing, the risks
associated with an imminent Magnitude 9 Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake in
the Pacific Northwest of the U.S. with substantial economical and societal
impacts. The research will also be complemented by a partnership with the LSAMP
program at Portland State University to help enhance STEM education with
emphasis on diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two specific
objectives: (1) to investigate a collapse mechanism due to incremental yielding
in in-ground pile plastic hinges when subjected to many cycles of loading in
long-duration earthquakes, and (2) to quantify the interaction of inertial and
kinematic loads on piles with respect to various ground motion characteristics,
pile properties, soil profiles, and soil properties. These objectives will be
achieved by performing a series of large-scale geotechnical centrifuge tests at
the Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) facility at UC
Davis combined with numerical parametric simulations. The results of this
research will provide an in-depth understanding of the interaction of inertial
and kinematic loads on piles in liquefiable soils which are needed for seismic
evaluation studies of new and existing ports as well as other pile-supported
structures including highway bridges, buildings and nearshore
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.