* 2153111
* 55th Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Meddaugh, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 40,168.00

The 55th Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference (STDC) will be hosted by Baylor
University on its campus in Waco, Texas, from March 9th through March 12th,
2022. For the first time in the history of this conference series, the STDC will
be open to both in-person and remote participants. By allowing for both in
person and remote participation, the 55th STDC will be able to bring together a
broad and diverse group of mathematicians to disseminate research and establish
connections for future collaboration. The organizers expect to host more than
100 participants from the United States and from abroad on-site, as well as more
than 100 remote participants. A crucial part of the STDC is its involvement of
researchers at all career stages—graduate students and early career researchers
as well as established researchers—allowing for younger generations of
mathematicians to find mentors and to establish their research trajectories. In
addition, the STDC makes a conscious effort to promote diversity in mathematics
in its recruitment of organizers and speakers, with a focus on ensuring
representation of women and underrepresented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 55th STDC is structured around five special sessions,
each with a focus on one aspect of topology—continuum theory, dynamical systems,
geometric group theory, geometric topology, and set-theoretic topology. The
invited and contributed talks of these special sessions and their associated
plenary and semi-plenary speakers provide an opportunity for the announcement
and discussion of the most significant advances in the various subfields of
topology over the last year. In addition, the STDC reserves a plenary address
for the winner of the annual Mary Ellen Rudin Young Researcher award, which is
given to an early-career topologist with outstanding contributions to the field.
This year, the STDC will also host a workshop on Linear Dynamics, a relatively
young subfield of dynamics, aimed at graduate students and early-career
mathematicians, as well as a series of open problem, collaboration, and
mentoring sessions. These talks and activities provide an excellent framework
for the establishment of new collaborative efforts in mathematical research and
for encouraging full participation of graduate students and early career
researchers. The project will support the travel of invited speakers, graduate
students, and researchers without external support. More information can be
found on the conference webpage, which is located at
https://sites.baylor.edu/topology-conference/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.