* 2153191
* Electrostatics and Structure at Electrode:Electrolyte Interfaces from Nonlinear Optics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Franz Geiger, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2025
* USD 537,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Franz Geiger of Northwestern
University is using advanced laser methods to study how charged species (ions)
and water molecules are arranged in solution near a metal electrode. The
textbook model describing this arrangement goes back to the 19th century but
describes only the location of the ions and it does not account for their
motion. The actual situation is more complicated because the water molecules are
arranged differently near the metal surface than they are in the liquid, and the
ions move in and out of this interfacial layer near the electrode, called the
electrical double layer, or EDL. However, studying the EDL is challenging, as it
is only a few nanometers thick, or about 100,000 times thinner than a sheet of
paper. Professor Geiger and his students are using laser techniques to directly
observe the structure of the water molecules and the ions near the metal
surface. Their discoveries could provide fundamental insight that advances
technologies ranging from clean energy generation and energy storage to
environmental remediation. The project is also contributing to the development
of the Nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
workforce by creating research opportunities for students, and the team is
integrating their research into the Evanston high school chemistry curriculum to
increase participation in STEM through a science ambassadorship program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By measuring the amplitude and phase of heterodyne-
detected second harmonic generation (HD-SHG) signals from electrode:electrolyte
interfaces, Professor Geiger and his students can directly probe the structural
and electrostatic properties of the Stern and diffuse layers . Using this
technique, the team is studying the dynamic exchange of ions between these two
components of the electrical double layer that occurs in response to external
stimuli (applied potential, pH, electrolyte concentration) and measuring the
total interfacial potential drop across the EDL. The HD-SHG methodology is also
being implemented in a wide-field microscopy mode capable of imaging spatial
variations in the EDL across an electrode surface during electrochemical
reactions. By quantifying the Coulombic and non-Coulombic contributions to the
interfacial potential drop, and by learning about the structure of interfacial
water molecules and ions, they are aiming to improve century-old models for
describing electrode processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.