* 2153297
* SHF: Small: Massively Parallel Server Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Michael Ferdman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 598,773.00

Ever-growing demand for online services places data centers under constant
pressure to achieve higher performance and improved energy efficiency. However,
server CPUs have not made significant improvements in performance and efficiency
in more than a decade. Notably, during the same time frame, GPUs made
breakthrough improvements in both performance and energy efficiency in the
Artificial-Intelligence / Machine-Learning (AI/ML) and High-Performance-
Computing (HPC) domains. These massive improvements in AI/ML and HPC come from
GPUs embracing the Single-Instruction-Multiple-Threads (SIMT) organization. This
project aims to demonstrate the benefits of applying the SIMT organization to
the server CPUs responsible for running online
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of the energy spent by modern server
computing is not in the functional units, but in the peripherals responsible for
fetching, decoding, and scheduling instructions and memory accesses. The SIMT
organization amortizes these overheads across many concurrent threads of
execution. This project leverages the observation that busy high-performance
servers frequently service similar or even identical requests concurrently,
leading to the opportunity of applying SIMT across server threads. This research
offers a detailed cross-layer study of the microarchitecture and memory system
toward the development of a high-performance energy-efficient SIMT server
architecture. The project will yield innovations in SIMT microarchitecture
(branch prediction, out-of-order execution, register files and other core
parameters), memory subsystems (cache and memory hierarchy, virtual memory,
coherence, instruction and data prefetch), and operating systems (vector system
calls and thread scheduling) in the context of server systems. The team plans
extensive hands-on training of students in cross-stack (Architecture, Operating
System, Compilers) research work. Public infrastructure development and release
for exploration of server-space micro-architecture studies are planned. The
simulator that will be developed has the potential to become a community
resource for processor parameter design space
explorations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.