* 2153341
* CRII: CPS: Leveraging Convex Relaxation Techniques to Improve Power System Surveillance
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Mohammad Rasoul Narimani, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 01/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to strengthen
dependability and robustness of the electric power grid by improving the
capability to aggregated power system state estimation (PSSE) methods to monitor
and assess the health of a power grid. The electric power grid is a cyber-
physical systems, essential for modern daily life that is always available on-
demand nearly anywhere at any time. The grid is arguably the largest global
engineered structure. The goals of this project are to (1) understand
vulnerabilities intrinsic to traditional PSSE methods, and (2) improve the
dependability and robustness of PSSE algorithms to potentially disruptive
conditions. This project extends recently developed power system optimization
techniques to enable better situation awareness of the operations of the overall
power system. The project will work with the Arkansas State University’s
outreach program “P-20 Educational Innovation Center” to share this research and
encourage careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends
convex relaxation-based techniques for large-scale cyber-physical power system
in order to improve the monitoring, analysis, and controllability of these
systems. The project presents an efficient convex relaxation-based approach to
the PSSE problem. The project leverages semidefinite programming relaxation and
extreme point approaches for large-scale alternating current (AC) power systems
to provide tighter bounds on flow analyses than traditional PSSE. This project
also presents an analysis showing the infeasibility of transitioning between
certain operating regions in the power system that can be used to provide safety
and security guarantees before initiating state transitions. This approach can
identify specific types of sparse false data, that might arise from corrupted
sensors by nature or design, and go undetected by current power systems' bad
data detection algorithms. The proposed tighter relaxation schemes will be
broadly applicable to a wide variety of nonconvex and nonlinear optimization
problems in large flow-system models and in complex optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.