* 2153946
* Ergodic Quantum Processes: Localization, Diffusion, and Steady States
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jeffrey Schenker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 04/30/2025
* USD 451,130.00

The focus of this project is the study of quantum systems with time and space
dependent disorder. While the basic scientific question "What are the effects of
disorder?" is always relevant, it is particularly urgent today in the context of
quantum systems due to the recent advent of noisy, intermediate scale quantum
devices. The aim of this project is to deepen our theoretical and mathematical
understanding of disorder effects in key models of the quantum evolution of
"open" quantum systems, with non-negligible environment interactions. The
equations studied in this project arise in the theory of disordered materials
and quantum information science but are of general interest because of the
fundamental nature of both wave motion and disorder. Progress in understanding
the solutions to these equations will improve basic understanding of models of
theoretical physics and applied mathematics. The project will entail extensive
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is a program of research on the effects of disorder in models of quantum
system models, and will focus on three main investigations: 1) Evolution of
ergodic quantum processes. Building on the recent discovery, by the PI and his
collaborator, of a general ergodic theorem in the context of open quantum
systems, this investigation will aim to bring the tools of probability and
ergodic theory to bear on questions relevant to quantum information science. 2)
Quantitative analysis of diffusion in open and noisy, extensive systems. The
main goal of this investigation is to develop quantitative methods to estimate
the diffusivity for a quantum particle subject to thermal noise. 3) Study of
Anderson localization in many body systems and systems with correlated
randomness. It is known that interference effects due to strong static disorder
can trap the wave function, a phenomenon called Anderson localization. However,
the exact nature of localization in many body and open quantum systems is poorly
understood. The goal of this investigation is to prove the existence of, and
clarify the nature of, Anderson localization in many-body systems and systems
with strongly correlated randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.