* 2153326
* CRII:III:Towards Advanced Filtering and Pooling Operations for Graph Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Yao Ma, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, we have witnessed
a rapid growth in our ability to generate and gather data from numerous
platforms in the online world and various sensors in the physical world. Graphs
provide a universal representation for a variety of data including online social
networks, knowledge graphs, transportation networks, and chemical compounds.
Entities can usually be represented as nodes while their relations can be
denoted represented as edges. Many important real-world applications on these
data can be treated as computational tasks on graphs. A crucial step to
facilitate these tasks is to learn good vector representations either for nodes
or graphs. Recently, graph neural networks, which generalize deep learning
techniques to graphs, have been widely adopted to learning representations for
graphs. Though graph neural networks have advanced numerous real-world
applications from various fields, they still suffer from many limitations in
terms of efficacy and efficiency. This project aims to address these limitations
by conducting theoretical analysis and developing innovative algorithms. This
project is specifically motivated by applications to computational social
science, computational biology, and fraud detection in e-commerce. Furthermore,
this project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in pursuing their
theses or honor projects. Discoveries and research findings of this project will
be tightly integrated into several current and new courses at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project
are divided into two tasks corresponding to the two major building components of
graph neural networks: graph filtering operations and graph pooling operations.
The graph filtering operation aims to refine node representations for all nodes
in a graph. On the other hand, the graph pooling operation aims to summarize
node representations to obtain a graph representation. The first task aims to
investigate graph filtering operations under heterophilyâ€”a setting typically
poses great challenges for graph filtering operations. In particular, the
investigator will conduct theoretical analyses on graph filtering operations to
gain deeper insights into their intrinsic mechanism, especially under the
scenario of heterophily. Then, based on these understandings, more advanced
graph neural networks models will be proposed to handle heterophilous graphs.
The second task aims to develop more efficient and effective graph pooling
operations. The investigators will explore and develop graph pooling operations
based on clustering and down-sampling process. To improve the efficacy and
efficiency of the graph pooling operations, the clustering/down-sampling process
will be nicely incorporated into the entire learning framework in an end-to-end
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.