* 2153352
* CRII: CCF: AF: Decomposition Algorithms for nonconvex nonsmooth constrained stochastic programs
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Ying Cui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2024
* USD 174,866.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advance of technology,
massive, noisy and unstructured data are prevalent in almost every aspect of
modern scientific research. It is crucially important to harness big data
effectively via more complicated optimization models to make reliable decisions.
The handy properties of convexity and smoothness have become the norm of the
field traditionally, and the most challenging features of the optimization
models, nonconvexity and nondifferentiability, are abandoned and ignored. The
pervasiveness of latter properties in the modern science and engineering
applications calls for new theory and computational algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-stage stochastic programs are optimization models
where partial decisions have to be made before the observation of any uncertain
parameter, while the remaining decisions are determined after the full
information is revealed. This award focuses on designing computational
frameworks for large-scale nonconvex and nonsmooth two-stage stochastic programs
that are both theoretically rigorous and numerically efficient. The crux of the
approach is a novel lifting technique that exposes an implicitly convex-concave
structure of the complex value function. The investigator aims to (i) design
decomposition schemes and analyze their convergence; and (ii) investigate a
fusion of the sampling technique and the decomposition algorithms to accelerate
the convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.