* 2153688
* Collaborative Research: CSEDI: Integrating Seismic Anisotropy, Mantle Flow, and Rock Deformation in Subduction Zone Settings
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 07/31/2025
* USD 118,889.00

Subduction zones are locations where one tectonic plate dives underneath
another. They are an essential component of plate tectonics and the setting of
the most hazardous earthquakes and volcanoes. Mantle flow above and below the
subducting plate is driven by the motion of the subducting slab. The primary
tool for investigating mantle flow at subduction zones is measuring the
directional dependence of seismic wave speeds. Variations in wave speeds -
called seismic anisotropy - arise from the alignment of minerals caused by
mantle flow. However, this technique requires linking seismic observations to
data on the alignment of mineral grains in deformed rocks, in the context of
mantle flow. Here, the team combines state-of-the art rock-deformation
experiments with models of mantle flow and models of seismic anisotropy in
mantle rocks. They generate synthetic seismic waves that are compared with
observations in Alaska, Cascadia, and South America. The overarching goal is to
improve the understanding of mantle flow in subduction zones and better
constrain plate tectonics. The project provides support for graduate and
undergraduate students trained in a rich interdisciplinary environment. It also
fosters outreach to K-12 students and teachers. The project outcomes will be
shared with the community, notably through a multi-disciplinary conference on
this topic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project activities yield a holistic view
of mantle flow, olivine texture development, and seismic anisotropy observations
in subduction zones. The project is organized around three tasks. First, the
researchers conduct a new set of high pressure and temperature olivine
deformation experiments using the Large Volume Torsion (LVT) apparatus at
Washington University in St. Louis. The aim is to determine how strain produces
and subsequently modifies crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO). They use
these results to produce a suite of experimentally validated parameters for use
in the D-Rex texture modeling program, which simulates the formation and
evolution of olivine CPO. Second, the updated D-Rex model is incorporated into
new 3D models of subduction zones; these models use a nonlinear rheology and a
set of alternative assumptions on the distribution of water in subduction zones.
Third, the team uses the results of the numerically modeled subduction zones to
simulate shear wave splitting in the mantle wedge and sub-slab mantle, using
full-wavefield simulation techniques. Through these steps, the researchers
define an ensemble of potential interpretations of mantle flow near subduction
zones that are supported by existing and new data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.