* 2153056
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: WebSheets: A New Privacy-Centric Framework for Web Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* I. Ramakrishnan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,035,291.00

The success of spreadsheets stems from an average user's ability to create
applications in a tabular format without needing traditional programming skills.
This project develops a novel formulation of spreadsheets called WebSheets for
developing privacy-centric web applications. A WebSheets user need only master a
skill set comparable to a conventional spreadsheet user in order to develop web
applications centered around organizing and interacting with sensitive, tabular
data. Key outcomes will include a WebSheet formula language and compiler, a
secure and efficient evaluation engine for this language, and novel analysis and
learning techniques to help users understand and improve policies and debug
policy errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WebSheets addresses many key intellectual
challenges in securing today's web applications. As defenses against lower-level
vulnerabilities (e.g., SQL injection) are more widely deployed, attackers target
higher-level errors such as missing or incorrect access policies and their
enforcement. These attacks are effective because today's data owners cannot
directly express their desired policies. Moreover, ensuring the correct
placement of all necessary security checks is a hard problem. Finally,
implementation vulnerabilities may be exploited by attackers to bypass policies.
WebSheets addresses these challenges by globally enforcing data owners' privacy
policies, and using least-privilege evaluation to bound damage from
vulnerabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data privacy and security are important
problems facing the society. This project provides a technical basis for data
owners to gain control over the use and dissemination of institutional and/or
personal data. Project results will be disseminated via publications and open-
source software hosted at
http://seclab.cs.stonybrook.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.