* 2153776
* NSF ADVANCE Catalyst: Research, Educate and Value Equity at All Levels in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Lyn McQuaid, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,875.00

The ADVANCE Catalyst Research, Educate, and Value Equity at All Levels in STEM
(REVEALS) project at Kutztown University of Pennsylvania aims to identify and
address systemic inequities affecting STEM faculty and the entire University
community, which is important to better understand and to change the
underrepresentation of women, especially women of color, and other groups in
STEM disciplines both locally and nationally. The REVEALS project will examine
the faculty experience at Kutztown and underlying causes of inequity with
constant consideration of intersectional aspects of identity. This project will
study underlying drivers of inequity for women and underrepresented faculty,
including a lack of work-life balance, recognition for work that is invisible or
undervalued, and sense of belonging within one’s academic unit and
institution—all of which serve as barriers to tenure, retention in academia, and
scientific advances. The project will use data collection, analysis,
institutional self-assessment, and knowledge sharing from other ADVANCE projects
to better understand drivers of inequity and barriers to the retention and
advancement of underrepresented STEM faculty. The project will pilot a faculty
equity advocate position and an online clearinghouse to centralize and improve
access to needed faculty resources. The REVEALS project’s formative assessment
will lead to the creation of a five-year equity strategic plan responsive to
faculty equity challenges through sustainable, tailored strategies. Grounded in
the theory of intersectionality and deploying evidence-informed strategies
modeled through ADVANCE resources and other institutions nationwide, REVEALS is
intended to substantially contribute to the knowledge base in improving equity
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the REVEALS project are to collect
data to identify STEM faculty inequities; analyze existing and novel data to
determine drivers of inequity and barriers to retention and advancement of
underrepresented STEM faculty; identify potential solutions and implement pilot
equity strategies; and create a five-year equity strategic plan for faculty in
STEM that is linked to Kutztown University’s strategic plan. The qualitative and
quantitative research methods of the REVEALS project include gathering and
synthesizing existing institutional data; developing and administering a
comprehensive faculty survey that focuses on family obligations, a sense of
belonging and connectedness, and service commitments/ invisible labor;
conducting semi-structured interviews and focus groups with campus leaders and
administrators, existing Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion groups, and women
faculty, including women of color; reviewing institutional policies; and
studying other institutions with ADVANCE grants. The comprehensive scope of this
study is intended to enable Kutztown University to implement cultural systemic
shifts in STEM equity. The REVEALS project will be documented in an online site,
and results will be disseminated within Pennsylvania State System of Higher
Education (PASSHE) schools, the ADVANCE community, and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional equity assessments
and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic plans at academic,
non-profit institutions of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.