* 2153331
* CRII: AF: RUI: Breaking Ground on Circulant TSP
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Samuel Gutekunst, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2024
* USD 155,823.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Traveling Salesman Problem
(TSP) is one of the most famous problems in theoretical computer science. Its
origins are deceptively simple: a salesperson needs to visit a set of cities
(visiting each city exactly once in a cycle, starting and ending at a home
office) and wants to find the least expensive way to do so. Despite these simple
origins, it has important applications ranging from producing circuits to
understanding protein-protein interactions, and research on the TSP has fueled
progress throughout the broader algorithms research community. This project
focuses on an important special case of the TSP known as the Circulant Traveling
Salesman Problem (Circulant TSP). This special case was first motivated in the
1970's by applications in reconfigurable network design and waste minimization,
and the innate hardness of Circulant TSP has often been cited as an important
question in TSP research. This project proposes to capitalize on recent
Circulant TSP results, and to develop a new approach to studying Circulant TSP
with potential to resolve long-standing open questions. Further, the TSP's
notoriety and succinct statement make it an engaging problem for use in
outreach. The project will train and support undergraduate students to become
researchers in theoretical computer science, and the project will lead to a new
short-course for high school students on the TSP showcasing modern research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the TSP is a notoriously and formally
hard problem. As such, some of the most exciting recent TSP results have stemmed
from studying special, more structured cases of the TSP. This project proposes a
new approach to one such special case, Circulant TSP. In Circulant TSP, the
input costs of travelling between cities have to be particularly structured
(specifically, they must exhibit a type of circulant symmetry). Fundamental open
questions revolve around the complexity of Circulant TSP. The proposed approach
to addressing these questions bridges techniques from polyhedral combinatorics
and number theory. Specifically, it focuses on using these techniques to
describe the combinations of edge lengths that can be put together to form a
feasible solution to the TSP (i.e., a Hamiltonian cycle visiting each of the
input cities exactly once). Because these techniques focus explicitly on
understanding the edge lengths of feasible TSP solutions, they will likely
extend beyond Circulant TSP and contribute to the broader TSP
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.