* 2153371
* CRII: CIF: Coordinate-based Neural Networks for Inverse Problems in Computational Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Gregory Ongie, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 05/31/2024
* USD 173,184.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern image processing relies
heavily on pixel representations of images. However, in the context of
computational imaging, working with pixel representations requires making
approximations which may bias the image-estimation process and therefore
negatively impact image quality as a result. This project seeks to overcome
these limitations through a new type of image representation based on neural
networks that is more compatible with standard computational imaging models. The
main research aims are to develop a theory quantifying the expected accuracy of
computational imaging techniques using these neural-network image
representations, and to derive efficient estimation algorithms applicable to
practical high-resolution imaging problems. This research has foreseeable
applications in all areas of science and engineering where computational imaging
plays a critical role, including medical imaging and diagnostics, security
screening, seismic imaging, and environmental
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the use of a class of
neural networks, known as Coordinate-Based Neural Networks (CBNNs), for image-
reconstruction problems in computational imaging. A CBNN represents an image as
a continuous domain function mapping spatial coordinates to image intensities.
Because common imaging-forward models, such as continuous Radon or Fourier
transforms, can be implemented more accurately for CBNNs, they have the
potential to improve the accuracy of model-based iterative reconstruction
techniques. Specific objectives of this project include (1) developing a
sampling theory for the unique identifiability of CBNNs from a finite set of
linear projection measurements and recovery guarantees for the associated non-
convex optimization problem, and (2) developing efficient algorithms for
accelerated training of CBNNs that scale to practical imaging scenarios. The
theory and algorithms will be demonstrated on large-scale applications with real
data, including compressed sensing magnetic-resonance imaging and low-
dose/sparse-view computerized tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.