* 2153316
* IRES Track I: Characterization and Modeling of Grain Boundaries in Hexagonal and Body Centered Cubic Alloys: Linking Processing and Properties
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Carl Boehlert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed NSF IRES program will provide support for 19 students pursuing
research in materials science and engineering. These students will engage in
collaborative international research with the IMDEA Materials Institute (IMDEA)
in Madrid, Spain. Each year, 7 students will spend 7 weeks performing research
on grain boundary formation and evolution during processing and its effects on
the properties of hexagonal and body centered cubic (BCC) alloys. The IMDEA
mentors are world leaders in physical and mechanical metallurgy, and modeling of
advanced alloys, and the program focuses on the development of hexagonal
magnesium alloys, which are targeted for application in the transportation and
biomedical industries. The participating IRES students will gain experience with
advanced computational and experimental methods, present their research in an
international setting, write reports and manuscripts for publication in
scientific journals, and build professional and personal networks in Spain with
scientists from all over the world. Given the prominence of IMDEA in Spanish
science and its interactions with industry, IMDEA is uniquely-positioned to
provide students with new perspectives to prepare them for a variety of future
careers in which collaborations with European agencies are desirable. Building
on their experiences at MSU, this program will expose students to a different
approach to research as well as to everyday life in a different culture. Walking
tours in Madrid and excursions to nearby cities will be included in the program
along with other cultural activities supervised by the IMDEA mentors. The
broader impacts of the program will extend beyond the number of participating
students and will include the following: This program is part of a larger push
to make education abroad opportunities an integral part of undergraduate and
graduate education at Michigan State University (MSU) offering a pipeline for
future research-intensive educational abroad opportunities that are currently
lacking. The experiences and collaborations the participating students bring
back to MSU will enhance the development of an international, diverse, and
inclusive culture at MSU, which is a high priority within the MSU College of
Engineering and the greater university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will
work on innovative projects that involve advanced concepts in solidification
experiments and modeling, in-situ microstructural characterization techniques,
deformation and its modeling, and processing-microstructure-property
relationships. The unifying theme of these projects is characterizing and
modeling grain boundaries. The projects are tied together by a rigorous
structure- and mechanism-based approach whereby students examine hypotheses
using advanced experimental and computational tools. The studentsâ€™ contributions
will bring new insights to designing hexagonal and BCC metals for targeted
properties and applications. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
understanding processing-microstructure-property relations of hexagonal and BCC
alloys to help produce polycrystalline microstructures with a balance of
properties that are attractive for industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.