* 2153858
* IRES Track II: A US-France ASI for Industrial Risk Management in Active Diagnosis, Accurate Characterization, and Reliable Mitigation with Resilience
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 02/29/2024
* USD 269,210.00

Industrial risk management deals with quality degradation, contingency, faults,
and accidents of industrial systems that bear immediate, severe, and potentially
catastrophic consequences on property, personnel, communities, and the
environment. This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES)
Advanced Studies Institute (ASI) will train U.S. students to be well-prepared
professionals in the field of industrial risk management to improve reliability
and efficiency of industrial systems. This ASI’s trainees will become
ambassadors to promote the critical importance of risk management, reliability,
resilience, and safety of industrial systems. Additionally, this project will
train highly skilled professionals with international vision and experience in
this field. Through strategic outreach and recruitment, this project will
further broaden opportunities and enable the participation of under-represented
minorities and female students in STEM fields. Students will develop global
views in their research to be conscious and innovative on advanced technology,
environment, and international collaboration. The ASI will be hosted in France
by a university plus a research institution noted for their work in industrial
risk management, ensuring that students are immersed in a diverse and vibrant
learning and research environment. This ASI will recruit 14 U.S. graduate
students (28 total in two years) and provide a comprehensive two-week training
program with short courses, hands-on experience, industry engagement, and
international collaboration to engage students in active learning and research
at the frontiers of industrial risk management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme
of this ASI is industrial risk management with focus on advanced methodologies
for active diagnosis, accurate characterization, and reliable mitigation of
various industrial risks and their applications to renewable energy systems,
smart grids, and autonomous systems. The institute is hosted in INSA CVL at
Bourges which is an excellent French university and INRIA Lille that is a French
national research institution. The topics covered in the ASI include: Active
Diagnosis of Industrial Risks in the Form of Faults/Failures in Industrial
Systems, Active Risk Diagnosis using Non-asymptotic Algebraic Methods, Risk
Characterization in terms of Detectability in Discrete Event Systems, Analysis
of Nonlinear Systems for Risk Characterization with Robotic Applications,
Information-Based Risk Assessment and Mitigation of Network Systems with
Applications to Renewable Energy, Reliable Mitigation of Autonomous Quad Rotors,
and Risk Analysis and Mitigation Design of Homogeneous
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.