* 2153944
* In situ Investigations of Physical Vapor Deposition of Organic Glass Formers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ranko Richert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,672.00

With support from Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mark Ediger of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and Professor Ranko Richert of Arizona State University are
studying low-temperature molecular glasses. When liquids are cooled to low
temperature, they form solids. Often that solid is a crystal in which molecules
are arranged in an ordered structure. However, sometimes the liquid freezes into
an amorphous glass and in this case the properties of the solid depend strongly
upon how it is made. Working with their students, Professors Ediger and Richert
are creating glasses by vapor-depositing molecules onto cold surfaces and using
sophisticated experimental methods to understand the unusual glasses that form.
Their discoveries could have implications for advancing technologies based on
organic electronics, such as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). The project
contributes to the development of the Nation's scientific workforce by providing
research opportunities for graduate students in advanced experimental methods.
The team is also working to prepare high school students from under-represented
groups for college, through partnership with the University of Wisconsin-
Madisonâ€™s Pre-college Enrichment Opportunity Program for Learning Excellence
(PEOPLE).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In contrast to crystallization, fundamental
questions about glass formation remain unanswered, including the possible
existence of underlying phase transitions and diverging time scales. Professors
Ediger and Richert are creating amorphous molecular films through physical vapor
deposition (PVD) of low molecular weight organic molecules onto cold surfaces.
The resulting films are then characterized by in situ dielectric relaxation
measurements, nanocalorimetry, and spectroscopic ellipsometry. Experiments
performed at (or near) the glass transition temperature (Tg) aim to determine if
a single component system can possess multiple long-lived liquid states.
Dielectric relaxation measurements performed during vapor deposition directly
characterize surface mobility and test a proposed model for vapor-deposited
glasses based upon surface equilibration. Finally, the kinetic stability of co-
deposited PVD glasses made from two different organic glass formers are
investigated for cases where each component forms a highly stable glass as a
pure material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.