* 2153439
* IRES Track 1: U.S.-Australia Innovations of Solar Materials and Solar Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Dawen Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This IRES Site (Track 1) proposal will recruit six U.S. undergraduate students
per year for three years (18 students total) from The University of Alabama (UA)
to attend a 10-week summer research experience focused on cutting-edge
innovation solar materials and solar cell technologies at the University of New
South Wales (UNSW) in Sydney, Australia. To address climate change through clean
solar energy, the emerging solar materials, and solar cell technologies are
critically important to promote the harvest and conversation of solar energy
into electricity. Moreover, new solar materials design, and discovery through
computational modeling and experimental realization can accelerate new
technologies that convert solar energy to chemical energy for hydrogen
generation and carbon dioxide reduction. The need for research into solar cells
based on these newly developed light-absorbing solar materials is in high demand
and necessary to achieve carbon-neutral realization. To date, there are limited
opportunities for students to learn about advanced solar materials and related
solar cell technologies beyond general materials science and semiconductor
physics. This IRES site supports US students with research interests in solar
materials and solar cells under the mentorships of faculty members at UNSW,
working on materials design, synthesis, characterization, and solar cell
fabrication and measurements. This unique experience will provide opportunities
for the US students’ professional development in areas of climate change
mitigation through the use of solar energy technologies. UNSW is a world-leading
institute in solar cell research, and the school of photovoltaic and renewable
energy engineering is world-recognized in various solar cell technologies
investigation and commercialization. Its high-quality faculty mentors, graduate
students, and facilities make UNSW a unique place to host this IRES Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide undergraduate students learning
experience focused on solar materials and solar cells at the University of New
South Wales in Sydney, Australia, and The University of Alabama. The students
will gain experience in the world-class research laboratories and facilities at
UNSW for solar materials synthesis, solar cells fabrication, and measurement. In
this three year project, six students per year will participate in solar energy
projects. These students will be mentored by faculty members and graduate
students with expertise in ongoing projects at UNSW. Through this international
collaboration, these US students will be trained to continue their studies in
solar energy and promote US research leadership in solar energy. This IRES
project will (1) improve the international collaborative research between the
U.S. and Australia, (2) consolidate the student's scientific and fundamental
knowledge in the STEM field, (3) encourage underrepresented and minority
students to pursue a STEM career. The undergraduate students involved will gain
research experience, stimulating their interest to pursue a graduate degree in
STEM fields. Exposure to the multicultural research and study environments will
help prepare the students to enter the solar energy technologies workforce, and
increase U.S. global competencies in clean energy. This IRES site at UNSW will
be a bridge to establish institute-level international collaboration and
education to enhance STEM education in the U.S. The project will be assessed by
students’ presentations of research in US and Australian
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Office
of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.