* 2153042
* LEAP-HI: Systemic, Anthro-centric Packages for Protecting Households In Realistic Exposure Situations (SAPPHIRES)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Marilee Long, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,999,998.00

Infrastructure in the United States includes 100 million existing homes. Because
people spend an average of 70 percent of their lives in the home environment, it
is the site of exposure to air contaminants that originate either indoors or
outdoors, and which are a leading cause of ill health. This Leading Engineering
for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project advances
understanding of how airflows through homes transport pollutants and how
occupants interact with homes and technology. With this background, systems that
match home performance, occupant behavior, and contractor delivery can be
designed and deployed to reduce indoor concentrations of airborne contaminants.
Attention is given to knowledge generation and solution delivery for low-income
homes and their occupants, and providing information for home contractors who
work in these settings. This deliberate, human-centered approach to managing air
quality in home environments can reduce exposure to common air pollutants and
provide resilience in a changing world with increased natural sources of
pollution, such as wildfire smoke. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project redefines
the residential indoor environment as an engineered system that includes homes,
technology, occupants, and delivery mechanisms. Surveys will be used to explore
how human attributes, including cognitive load and user trust, affect occupant
priorities, responses to hazards, and the likelihood of engaging in maintenance
and usage behaviors. Two models will be developed to determine when air
treatment may be beneficial: an anticipatory model based on statistical analysis
of observed outdoor air concentrations and machine-learning and a deterministic
model that forecasts indoor concentrations based on physical principles and is
adjusted to observed pressure differences. The project also develops whole-house
pressurization to eliminate contaminants in outdoor air entering the home,
contrasting this new approach with stand-alone air cleaners. Success of these
models and treatments will be tested first in well-controlled homes, then in
homes participating in City of Fort Collins programs. Finally, the project will
test understanding of the system components that minimize air contaminants by
measuring air contaminants in real homes with real occupants over several weeks.
Home contractors involved in energy-efficiency upgrades will share information
about physical and behavioral limitations, and in turn will gain knowledge on
home air management through newly developed curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.