* 2153762
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Hurricane-Induced Windborne Debris to Reduce Damage in Urban Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kurtis Gurley, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 423,690.00

Numerous post-hurricane investigations have reported excessive and costly damage
to glass cladding and fa√ßades of buildings located in urban areas. The resulting
interior rainwater damage and extended periods of loss in building functionality
can have substantial adverse effects on the socio-economic systems within and
surrounding urban communities. Past studies of damage after high wind events
have recognized that more than 80% of glass breakage was caused by windborne
debris (such as broken glass pieces and materials from neighboring buildings)
rather than direct wind pressure loading the glass. Appropriate cost-effective
solutions begin with a comprehensive understanding of this vulnerability.
However, the highly turbulent urban wind field around densely clustered
buildings significantly complicates the accurate modeling and prediction of
windborne debris transport and impact. This project will model the underlying
physical process of the debris impact on clustered urban buildings through a
combination of 1) a novel wind tunnel test program at the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) boundary layer wind tunnel
at the University of Florida, 2) data-driven computer simulation approaches, and
3) physics-based models of debris origin, flight, and impact. The result will be
a new debris damage vulnerability assessment platform that enables risk-
consistent efforts to reduce wind damage to the urban building envelope.
Concurrent with the research, an interactive augmented reality tool will be
developed to visualize the three-dimensional flow around building clusters and
debris flight trajectory. This will be the centerpiece of a summer program that
exposes high school students from underrepresented groups to engineering and
encourages STEM career paths. Data generated by this project will be archived
and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will advance the
understanding and modeling of the underlying physics of debris transport in
urban winds through explicit modeling of complex urban flow features and debris
flight trajectories around building clusters. This will directly address the
current knowledge gap present in modeling of urban windborne debris hazard
mechanisms. New wind tunnel experimental techniques will enable the project team
to capture three-dimensional urban wind fields and debris trajectories,
resulting in first-of-its-kind data necessary for developing the data-driven
wind field models and systematically validating numerical trajectory models for
complex urban winds. A novel integration between the wind tunnel experiments and
data-driven modeling will be developed through active learning to efficiently
predict wind fields for generic building clusters where wind tunnel data is not
available. A probabilistic uncertainty quantification procedure will be
developed to evaluate windborne debris damage risk through rigorous propagation
of uncertainties from debris sources, urban wind fields, debris trajectory, and
impact models. The outcome of this project will enable assessment and
improvement of hurricane resilience for urban building clusters, which is a
significant research gap present in community resilience
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.