* 2153500
* CRII: HCC: RUI: Transparency and Access Control in Life Science Data Sharing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,07/31/2022
* Sarah Morrison-Smith, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 173,044.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Generating and sharing large quantities of data are now
a fundamental part of life science research and have taken a key role in such
collaborations. This project will contribute a deeper understanding of the
challenges of data sharing in life science research, while placing usability at
the forefront of design. It will explore new approaches to facilitating data
sharing between collaborating life scientists by diving deep into the issues
surrounding the challenges associated with access control through ethnographic
interviews and by developing new systems that simplify and expedite data
sharing. Data sharing is considered one of the biggest challenges faced by life
scientists, as different disciplines produce data with different
characteristics, methods, and data sharing needs and criteria. Improvements to
the data sharing process will aid life scientists in advancing biological and
biomedical research, which could dramatically improve the health and well-being
of individuals in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four key insights regarding
current access control systems guide this research: (1) Lack of default or
transferable access settings leads to inefficiency. (2) Lack of visible sharing
settings can result in accidental data sharing. (3) Inconsistent ownership over
files can lead to inaccessible data once researchers leave the collaboration.
(4) Data-sharing technologies that are institution agnostic are the most used.
The research will clarify such challenges that are associated with access
control when sharing data with collaborators, through semi-structured interviews
and observation of life scientists when they are sharing data. A software system
will be developed and released open-source, that addresses potential usability
breakdowns in existing systems and provides features that may be missing from
commonly used off-the-shelf products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.