* 2153913
* RAPID/Collaborative Research:  Examining Household Movements and Evacuation Decision-Making in a Compounding Risk Event
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Satish Ukkusuri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

Selecting protective actions in response to hurricane threats can be a
challenging process for households. Adding to the complexity of this process are
the risks stemming from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the compounding risks
posed by lingering utility outages, high heat, and the remnants of Hurricane
Nicholas in the weeks following Hurricane Ida. While many studies have examined
protective action decisions of households in response to natural and human-
induced risks, less is known about this process in instances where households
face simultaneous disasters and compounding risks. The purpose of this grant for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) collaborative project is to examine household
protective action decisions during two simultaneous events: Hurricane Ida and
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Time-sensitive data gathered through online,
phone, and mail surveys and supplemented with GPS/mobile phone data will be used
to examine household protective action decision-making and mobility patterns
before, during, and after Hurricane Ida. The findings from this project are
expected to save lives and minimize stress during evacuations and return trips.
Additionally, the findings of the research will benefit the emergency management
community and society as new knowledge related to protective action decisions
during simultaneous hazard events can help maximize safety and efficiency in
coordinating and managing the movements of displaced
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decisions pertaining to whether one evacuates or
shelters, where to evacuate to, and when to return after a disaster all entail
consideration of multiple factors related to risks, warning messages, household
socio-demographic characteristics, and available resources. While numerous
studies examine these decisions in the context of a single hazard scenario, very
little is known as to how protective action decisions are selected during
simultaneous disaster events. Furthermore, the nature of tradeoffs and their
impact on decisions during dual risk scenarios are not well understood. The goal
of this study is to collect ephemeral data to examine household decision-making
during Hurricane Ida and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. By advancing the
Protective Action Decision Model, this study will gather household data using
surveys and GPS mobile phone data that will allow the understanding of three
primary research questions: 1. How do households make evacuation, sheltering,
post-event relocation and return-entry decisions during simultaneous disasters?
2. What factors influence evacuation and return-entry timing, the selection of
evacuation destinations, and shelter-in-place decisions? 3. What is the nature
of the multiple movements undertaken by households throughout the response and
short-term recovery process? This project will advance theory pertaining to
protective action decision-making during simultaneous disaster events and
provide important insights into how risk tradeoffs inform these decisions.
Specifically, new knowledge will be generated through: 1) gathering ephemeral
data of household movements and protective action decisions undertaken during
Hurricane Ida and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in order to advance
understanding of this dynamic process; 2) documenting locations household move
to during the disaster response and short-term recovery phases and why these
locations were selected, and 3) providing new insights into how households
perceive the tradeoffs in risks when making decisions during simultaneous
disasters. Findings from this study will offer a more nuanced understanding of
household decisions and movements in response to disasters and provide better
insight into the experiences of displaced households during and after
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.