* 2153867
* Research Initiation Award: Antagonistic Bacteriophage and Metal Combination Treatment to Combat the Spread of Antimicrobial Resistance
* EDU,EES
* 10/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Rasheena Edmondson, Shaw University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 242,188.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. This study seeks to
determine and elucidate the evolutionary adaptation&lt;br/&gt;of the Escherichia
coli bacteria and how their acquired resistance mutations influence their
fitness and susceptibility to common
antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary trade-offs are ubiquitous in
nature and have important consequences for organismal adaptation, especially to
harsh environments. The discovery of evolutionary trade-offs and/or trade-ups is
imperative to determine the sustainability of bacteriophages as antimicrobial
agents. Understanding these interactions is essential in addressing the global
health concern of antimicrobial resistance. This project seeks to explore
potential evolutionary trade-offs and co-selection mechanisms that occur because
of acquired resistance to a class of natural antibacterial agents,
bacteriophages, and to explore their potential trade-offs against metal
resistance, specifically excess amounts of iron. The primary focus will be on
the evolutionary adaptation of Escherichia coli to bacteriophage T4 and how
acquired phage resistance mutations influence bacterial fitness and
susceptibility to metals and common antibiotics. Bacteriophage T4-Ferric iron
(Fe3+) resistance interactions are of significant interest since phage T4 and
iron (III) share similar targets including outer membrane proteins used for
phage attachment and iron entry. The work seeks to discover if antagonistic
interactions, in which phage resistance reduces metal resistance (or vice versa)
occur within bacterial populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.