* 2153258
* Convex Polycycles: Synthesis, Structure, and Chemistry of Heterotriquinanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2024
* USD 217,828.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Mark Mascal of the University of California-Davis is studying
molecules that have defined curvature, in particular a class of substances
called "heterotriquinanes" which are bowl-shaped. This curvature can be
increased until the molecules become spherical and such systems are also a
subject of investigations. Molecules with the properties of interest allow the
limits of chemical bonding theory to be tested and they also provide unique
building blocks for the production of materials with novel properties of
potential utility to science, engineering, and commerce. The broader impacts of
the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to society as Professor Mascal
and his coworkers engage in a range of K-12 outreach activities and the
promotion of undergraduate research, particularly via programs that increase the
participation of individuals belonging to underrepresented groups. Coworkers on
the project will have the opportunity to serve as teaching assistants on a
scientific and cultural study abroad program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded
research revolves around conformationally rigid polyquinane heterocycles that
range from gently curved (heterotriquinanes) to spherical
(heterododecahedranes). The chemistry of these polycyclic ring systems proves to
be uncommon and multifaceted, enabling synthetic objectives that embody
extraordinary species with properties at the limits of canonical chemical
bonding and structural theory, including unheard-of models of hypervalency
(e.g., tetravalent oxygen), unknown zwitterionic species (e.g., stable oxygen
ylides), and novel, non-planar aromatic ring systems (e.g.,
heteroacepentalenes). These projects will both advance fundamental science and
provide new building blocks for advanced materials. The activities carried out
under this award will also provide excellent opportunities for the participation
of undergraduate students belonging to underrepresented groups through multiple
programs at UC-Davis specifically established for such outreach, as well as the
development of new educational materials that incorporate aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.