* 2153678
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track 1/IRES Sites: CUNY India Pollution Study (CIPS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Brian Vant-Hull, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 30,022.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUNY India Pollution Study (CIPS) will
engage thirty-three (33) undergraduate students from Bronx Community College
(BCC), City College of New York (CCNY), and other City University of New York
(CUNY) colleges, over a period of three years in collaborative research focused
on two neighborhoods in Mumbai, India; one of which is Dharavi, the largest slum
in India and the other is Santacruz, an upper middle-class neighborhood. The
project will be performed in collaboration with two Indian institutions, the
India Institute of Technology Bombay (IITB) and the Indian Institute of
Technology Delhi (IITD). CUNY students will travel to Mumbai and work with
Indian students from these two institutions to collect and analyze micro-scale
(neighborhood and block-level) data about air pollution levels using both fixed
and mobile sensing equipment. In doing so, they will explore urban patterns and
sources of pollution, and fill a gap in data collection that could provide
critical findings to inform further research and public policy in India and in
urban centers worldwide. CUNY students will work virtually with US and Indian
faculty and students to plan routes, calibrate instruments, and become oriented
to Indian language, culture, and geography. CUNY students will then travel to
India for four weeks of research over the winter (January) intercession, which
will include monitoring pollution in Mumbai and a weekend visit to New Delhi to
compare pollution findings. Delhi traditionally has high levels of pollution
during this period. Upon their return, students will analyze and then present
their findings to students, faculty, and staff at CUNY and beyond. The database
they create will be used for research and instruction at both CUNY and at IITB
and IITD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to develop
underrepresented students’ STEM competencies and research skills through high-
quality, collaborative international research experiences to support their
retention, college graduation, and persistence in STEM studies. There have been
many air pollution studies in Indian cities, but this one will be unique based
on the combination of fixed and mobile measurements taken at the micro-scale
level. Indian cities are far more polluted than American cities, so students
will experience a more data-intensive environment with greater societal impact.
Second, the focus on matching demographic data to pollution measures will allow
for an assessment of pollution exposure of marginalized populations. Third,
weather in the tropics tends to change seasonally rather than daily, greatly
simplifying the analysis for student-level science. Until now, pollution and
climate data have not been captured at the micro-scale (neighborhood and block)
level in urban areas in India. This proposed research will introduce to Mumbai
and New Delhi the approach of measuring air pollution on a micro-scale,
combining mobile sensors and similar fixed sensors with supporting data from
fixed weather stations. Near simultaneous vertical profiles of pollution and
climate parameters will also be possible with the use of drones available at BCC
that will be transported to India. This will allow researchers to see air
pollution gradients and urban heat island structure of the selected
neighborhoods, literally block by block. The proposed research will provide
better assessment of the process of interpolation of data between fixed sensors
in urban environments. The use of LoRAWAN sensors and the Vernier backpack
weather stations mobile platform makes it possible to identify point sources of
pollutions in the city and to determine the concentration gradient as a function
of distance from the source, which can be paired with vertical gradients
obtained by the drone flights with the sensors LoRaWAN sensors mounted. This
will aid the development and fine-tuning of air quality models already in use to
model the city’s air quality. As a coastal city, Mumbai will allow us to observe
land and sea breeze influence on air quality on a micro-scale to aid in
forecasting pollution alerts. Matching demographic data to pollution observed on
fixed routes will allow an assessment of pollution exposure of marginalized
populations, particularly in Dharavi, the largest slum in Asia. The project
design will allow for the correlation of air pollution data retrieved by
satellites to air pollution data collected on a street-by-street and block-by-
block levels using mobile sensor platforms. Ground-truthing on such a microscale
has not been previously performed in India and may provide a model to extend the
application of satellite observations to urban
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.