* 2153608
* IRES Track I: At the Frontier of Big Climate, Disaster Capitalism, and Endangered Cultural Heritage in Barbuda, Lesser Antilles
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Isabel Rivera-Collazo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project will provide immersive field and laboratory experiences to IRES
students through the study of different cultural horizons on the Caribbean
island of Barbuda (of the nation Antigua &amp; Barbuda). This project will
support 3 cohorts of 6 graduate students. The primary objective is to assess
cultural heritage sites and gather base-line data for continued monitoring.
Barbuda cultural and environmental heritage sites had been relatively unspoiled
but are now under threat from big weather and developers rushing in post
disaster (in this case, Hurricane Irma) to claim property rights from
communities in their most vulnerable socio economic state. In addition to
producing primary research on archaeological sites in Barbuda, the project will
develop methodologies for community-driven strategies for cultural heritage
preservation in the face of tourism development and severe storm damage.
Additionally, this project will generate meaningful scholarship of interest to
those working in cultural resource management, science education, and
communicating research to public audiences. Beyond reporting findings to
Barbudan stakeholders and policy makers affected by the aftermath of Hurricane
Irma, the project will train students in interdisciplinary methodologies, cross-
cultural communication practices, their ethical role as researchers in a global
economy, and how to develop and maintain collaborative work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small Island Developing States (SIDS) of the Caribbean,
such as Barbuda, are vulnerable to the effects of climatic change. The damaging
impacts of contemporary sea-level rise and changing big weather patterns of
increasing hurricane activity have had a significant influence on the region’s
physical, economic and socio-cultural landscapes. Students will explore the
longue durée from a transdisciplinary viewpoint, from the first peopling of the
Caribbean to the present day, so as they move into their chosen
anthropological/archaeological subfields they are better prepared to address the
unprecedented effects of the Anthropocene using a holistic perspective. The
proposed project will run for 36 months in the island nation of Antigua and
Barbuda, Lesser Antilles. There will be 3 cohorts of 6 graduate students
collecting data for individually supervised research that will continue from the
summer field season into the academic year. The students will be actively
involved for four weeks in the field and four weeks of online cohort building
activities and learning via zoom with US and international mentors. Mentors will
work with the students throughout their year of participation. Student
researchers will be hosted for their four week field work at the Barbuda
Research Complex (BRC), the first non-profit scientific research facility to be
established in Barbuda. BRC is committed to preservation and conservation of
heritage and the environment through collaborative research and educational
initiatives by local stakeholders and international interdisciplinary scholars.
BRC bridges natural sciences, social sciences, humanities, arts, Traditional
Ecological Knowledge (TEK) and citizen science in a dialogue of discovery and
innovation striving to support Barbuda’s cultural and environmental integrity.
BRC ensures ownership of research on Barbuda by hosting international
researchers through a permit system. Dr. Reg Murphy will head the international
collaboration in Antigua and Barbuda. Prior to departure, students will
participate in cohort building activities and workshops to prepare them for
fieldwork. While in Barbuda, students will collect field data using a variety of
methodologies from Bioarchaeology, Zooarchaeology, Geoarchaeology,
Archaeomalacology, Historical Archaeology, Photogrammetry and Critical Museum
Studies. BRC researchers and PI/Co- PIs will act as mentors for students in the
field with each student focusing on a specific project with their
specializations/expertise in the named subfields. Once students have finished
their fieldwork and returned to their home institutions, they will work with
PI/Co-PIs to disseminate their research in academic and informal settings.
Ultimately, students will learn how archaeological research informs
environmental and cultural heritage policy and its real world impacts and
applications. The project will facilitate research partnerships between BRC and
US institutions and collaborate with K-12 schools to demonstrate how research
can support the actions of those seeking to address environmental challenges and
social issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
International Research Experience for Students program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.