* 2153100
* IMAGiNE: The genetic, developmental, and physiological mechanisms of plant local adaptation to oceanic salt spray
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Lowry, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 772,572.00

A fundamental goal of biology is to understand how and why biological organisms
evolve, from the level of genes to ecosystems. This research explores these
evolutionary processes by studying the yellow monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus,
and how it adapts to oceanic salt spray. For a long time, scientists have known
that salt spray influences which plant species can survive near the ocean.
However, little is known about how plants evolve adaptations to live in coastal
areas in the first place. The research focuses on understanding how coastal
monkeyflower populations evolved to 1) avoid salt spray by remaining short and
not flowering during windy periods, 2) resist salt spray by preventing it from
entering plant tissues, and 3) tolerate salt spray by transporting salt to parts
of the plant where it will cause the least amount of damage. Overall, this
research should uncover multiple dimensions of these adaptations from the gene
to the population level. The research will also result in the development of new
tools for genetic engineering of monkeyflowers. Ultimately, the work will expand
understanding of plant evolution and aspects of plant resilience in challenging
environments, with potential applications for agricultural crops. The results of
the research will be incorporated into educational materials, including a comic
book and audio podcasts. To evaluate these educational materials, the
investigators are working directly with teachers and hundreds of low-income
minority high school students in Flint, MI through hands-on inquiry-based
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to understand the
genetic, developmental, morphological, and physiological mechanisms of local
adaptation of the coastal perennial ecotype of Mimulus guttatus to oceanic salt
spray. The extensive tools available for M. guttatus will facilitate studies of
adaptation for multiple genes within gene networks. The research is divided into
three aims, each of which is focused on a key component of salt spray
adaptation: avoidance, resistance, and tolerance. Aim 1 is focused on
understanding the mechanisms of locally adaptive salt spray avoidance by the
coastal ecotype through the evolution of a compact growth form and a late-season
flowering time. The research will test whether the developmental divergence
between coastal and inland ecotypes underlying salt spray avoidance is caused by
the evolution of genes within the gibberellin hormone gene network. Aim 2 will
evaluate the role of morphological divergence between coastal and inland
ecotypes in resistance to salt spray entry into plant tissues once it has landed
on aerial plant organs. Aim 3 will evaluate the genetic and physiological
mechanisms of salt spray tolerance once salt has entered aboveground plant
tissues. Sodium transport at both the level of entire leaf organs and individual
leaf cells will be examined to test the hypothesis that the coastal ecotype has
higher tolerance by pumping sodium out of the cytosol into the apoplast and
vacuoles. Overall, the research will lead to an increased understanding of how
fitness in stressful environments is an emergent property of multiple complex
organismal adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.