* 2153399
* Collaborative Research: DMS/NIGMS 1: Mesoscale Kinetic Theory of Early Mitotic Spindle Organization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 242,111.00

For life to proliferate, cells must faithfully divide their genetic material
equally into two new daughter cells during cell division. The highly dynamic
bipolar mitotic spindle, built from protein filaments called microtubules, is
the cellular machine needed to accomplish this essential task. Errors in the
spindle assembly process have been linked to diseases such as cancer. A critical
initial step in building the spindle involves the separation of duplicated
centrosomes that form the spindle poles. This involves a variety of proteins
that bind and generate a force on the microtubules. While the mechanical
interplay is complex, the relevant factors appear small enough in number that
their collective action can be analyzed in precise biophysical terms. This
project will combine biophysical laboratory experiments, computational physical
models, and statistical parameterization frameworks in order to build detailed
understanding of how spindle formation is affected by the interaction of the
diverse protein components. Methodologically, the research aims to coherently
evolve a physically interpretable structural theory of early spindle formation
that is built bottom-up with clear linkages between stages of complexity.
Additionally, the research team from mathematical sciences, biology, and physics
will develop educational outreach activities for students at the universities
and local high schools, emphasizing how collaborative methodologies from
mathematics, physics, and biology can be deployed to better understand vital
processes in the life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical novelty
of this project will be the construction of a mesoscale kinetic theory
framework. The framework will treat the spindle and associated protein
concentrations through statistical summaries and be parameterized in increasing
stages of complexity through in vitro experimental configurations designed for
this project. The theoretical model will be developed through interaction with
computational simulations and newly proposed in vitro experiments involving
microtubule bundles with virtual asters in simplified geometries, probed by
optical tweezers. The project will exploit the coarse-grains existing kinetic
theory to model crosslinker-mediated interactions between pairs of microtubules
to aligned and non-aligned bundles of microtubules. A reduced statistical
description will be sought relative to highly detailed kinetic theories and
direct simulation based on a detailed accounting of individual crosslinkers and
microtubules. The research will identify and exploit key collective variables
for a more computationally tractable and transparent connection between
regulatory and environmental factors and the resulting spindle dynamics, which
can aid in generating hypotheses for future experiments. The graded complexity
integration process will enable interrogation of and corrections to physical
assumptions regarding understanding how crosslinker behavior for microtubule
pairs scales up quantitatively to microtubule bundles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.