* 2153938
* Graph Edge Decomposition and Graph Toughness
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Songling Shan, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 121,831.00

This project focuses on two central topics in graph theory: optimal edge
partition into classes that avoid certain conflicts and the Hamiltonian cycle
problem. Both problems have significant theoretical importance and have broad
applications in fields such as combinatorial optimization and computer science.
In general, finding an optimal edge partition of a certain kind is an NP-
complete problem, so is determining the existence of a Hamiltonian cycle in a
graph. Under the background of two famous conjectures from the two areas, this
project dedicates to developing sufficient conditions that guarantee an optimal
edge partition of a given type or the existence of a Hamiltonian cycle in a
graph and developing novel techniques for both areas of research. The project
also contains research problems that are suitable for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PI will continue her
investigation of two longstanding conjectures: the Overfull Conjecture of
Chetwynd and Hilton from 1986 and the Toughness Conjecture of Chvatal from 1973.
The PI and her collaborators have recently made significant contributions to
both conjectures, but they remain open. For the Overfull Conjecture, extending
some techniques that she and her collaborators developed recently, the PI will
first investigate it for large graphs of order n and minimum degree arbitrarily
close to half of n and explore algorithmic aspects. Then she will attack the
conjecture for large graphs with only maximum degree constraints by applying and
extending results obtained from the first step. She will also expand the
techniques to attack the related Linear Arboricity Conjecture. For the Toughness
Conjecture, the PI will gain more insights into it by working on a series of
problems in finding spanning substructures under a given toughness condition.
The problems include two challenging questions posed by Bauer, Broersma, and
Schmeichel in a survey on graph toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.