* 2153206
* Biomimetic and Rubisco-Inspired CO2 Capture from Air
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Rainer Glaser, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2022
* USD 257,093.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Rainer Glaser of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Missouri, Columbia is developing carbon dioxide
capture and release (CCR) systems for the reversible carbon dioxide capture from
air. The design of this biomimetic CCR systems is informed by the understanding
of the binding of carbon dioxide in the active site of the enzyme rubisco. A
simple device for carbon dioxide enrichment in agricultural greenhouses is
developed to demonstrate the CCR concept in a field test. Future use is
envisioned for large-scale, distributed carbon dioxide removal from air and its
subsequent permanent capture and storage. The project provides cross-
disciplinary training (mechanistic, structural and computational chemistry;
protein synthesis, and biomaterials). Additional broader impacts are achieved
through the development of the "Chemistry is in the News" project in science
communication and the scientific writing curriculum to instruct students about
the scientific process, scientific writing, scientific peer review, and
professional ethics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed thermodynamic analyses
performed for the carbon dioxide capture reaction with a small molecule model
demonstrates the promise of rubisco-inspired, small peptide biomimetics as CCR
systems with low energy requirements for carbon dioxide release. The realization
of energy-efficient CCR systems requires the development of carbon dioxide
capture reactions with negative reaction entropies of substantial magnitude. It
is the goal of this research to identify small peptides with capture
thermochemistry most suitable for effective capture and energy-efficient
release. For this purpose, libraries of free and immobilized tetrapeptides are
synthesized. Specific experiments include (a) silica particle synthesis and
surface functionalization,(b) peptide immobilization on various supports,(c)
characterization by spectroscopy and by peptide crystallography,(d) quantitative
measurements of carbon dioxide sorption/desorption,and (e) the fabrication of a
simple device for carbon dioxide enrichment. The experimental effort is
accompanied by theoretical studies of the library of tetrapeptides to determine
the thermochemistry and the kinetics of the carbon dioxide addition to the
magnesium complexed tetrapeptides, to assess alternatives to magnesium.