* 2153109
* CAREER: Catalysis with copper complexes bearing redox-active ligands with tunable hydrogen-bonding donor
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Isaac Garcia-Bosch, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 573,108.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Isaac Garcia-Bosch of Southern Methodist
University is studying new copper compounds and their interactions with oxygen
and hydrocarbons. The long-range goal is to discover new routes to compounds
that could be useful as pharmaceuticals, polymers, and other industrially useful
chemical compounds. The approach is inspired by the roles of copper catalysts in
nature, which are known to promote the oxidations of hydrocarbons. These
oxidations convert inexpensive hydrocarbons into high-value products. The
research examines how the structure of the copper catalysts influences their
interaction with oxygen, which in turn influences the course of the reactions.
Dr. Garcia-Bosch is introducing bioinspired experiments into the teaching
laboratory. The grant also supports outreach activities aimed at making
chemistry attractive to Hispanic students, especially women. These activities
include hands-on laboratory training and demonstrations, which are provided in
Spanish and in English. These outreach activities are expected to increase the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation,
Dr. Isaac Garcia-Bosch of Southern Methodist University is developing copper
complexes as oxidation catalysts. Of particular interest are challenging
transformations, such as the functionalization of carbon (C)-hydrogen (H) and
C=C bonds, under mild conditions, using cheap and non-toxic reagents. Taking
inspiration from natural metalloenzymes, the catalysts are designed to contain a
redox-active ligand with tunable H-bonding donors, which allows for control of
the reactivity of the intermediate species that are formed during these
transformations. Through collaborations, the structure and spectroscopy of these
copper complexes and the reaction mechanisms are being elucidated. In parallel
with the research project, Hispanic high school students are invited to
participate in one-day science fairs, which are conducted in Spanish and
English. The goal is to improve both the communication and scientific skills of
the young students. A new training program is being developed (Hispanic Women
Summer Research Program, HWSRP), in which Hispanic female students are provided
mentoring and hands-on training in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.