* 2153802
* EAR-Climate: Forest, Frost, and Flow: Snow Dydrology of spatially Heterogeneous and Hydrologically Connected Peatland Catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Salli Dymond, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 505,165.00

Although peatlands cover only ~3% of global land surfaces, they store around
one-third to one-half of Earth’s soil carbon. The stability of this large carbon
source is strongly regulated by the flow and storage of water. However, the flow
and storage of water within peatlands remains difficult to understand due to
their spatial complexity and seasonal variations, especially during a critical
period in the spring when water fluxes are driven by snowmelt. This project aims
to better understand how snow controls water storage and movement in peatland
catchments and improve their representation within Earth System Models. This is
done through collecting new field data, analyzing existing long-term data, and
integrating these data into a modeling framework. This project will train
multiple graduate students and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary
research. Foresters, water resource managers, and the public at large will
benefit through field tours highlighting the importance of snow and frost in
regulating spring streamflow, as well as through public events celebrating the
cultural connections that many Minnesotans have with snow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northern peatland landscapes consist of a mix of upland
and peatland forests, bogs, and open water, which complicates their hydrology.
This is especially the case during the winter-spring transition period when the
landscape is the most hydrologically active, with high recharge and streamflow
rates. This project will investigate the feedbacks between forests, snowpack,
and soil frost as they influence snow accumulation, snowmelt generation, and
recharge of shallow groundwater in complex peatland systems. Specifically, new
field data will be collected to (1) examine the role of forest cover in
controlling snowpack size and duration; (2) study the role of soil frost in
controlling the infiltration of snow into soils or over the soil surface; and
(3) monitor the movement of water between forests and peatland bogs. The project
team will use the new data and existing long-term data from the Marcell
Experimental Forest in northern Minnesota to model the hydrology of low-relief,
peatland systems. With the field site situated at the southern edge of peatland
distributions, this study has the potential to provide a “window into the
future” for other northern peatlands across the globe. These efforts are
especially timely as the climate system approaches tipping points that may be
further accelerated by carbon-water feedbacks within
peatlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.