* 2153693
* I-Corps: Low-Cost Holographic TelePresence System
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Tao Han, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 44,714.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
commercialize a low-cost holographic telepresence system for the professional
sports industry. The system can effectively improve performance and reduce the
cost for the sports clubs and coaches in recruiting and training athletes from
anywhere in the world. The holographic telepresence may significantly improve
the efficiency of remote working and online training and spur new use cases and
services improving quality of life. Through this project, the team aims to
translate their fundamental research on ubiquitous machine vision systems to the
market place via customer discovery. The team plans to integrate the knowledge
learned from this project into their courses, senior design projects, and the
mentoring of graduate students. In this way, they will cultivate next-generation
engineers and researchers who can translate technologies into commercial
products and help grow the economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
explores the commercial potential of a low-cost holographic telepresence system.
The holographic telepresence system involves core technologies from advanced
wireless communications, edge computing systems, and computer vision. The
current market segment for this project is the sports industry, specifically
collegiate sports and professional gymnasiums. The outcomes of the project will
provide insights into the commercialization of new technologies that enable
future holographic communication systems including multi-camera intelligent
fusion methods that reliably construct the point cloud (a set of data points in
space) from multiple cameras with temporal consistency, real-time adaptive point
cloud compression and transmission methods that efficiently compress the point
cloud based on the requirement of the service quality, and real-time network-
aware artificial intelligence (AI)-powered point cloud reconstruction and
transmission that can be efficiently transmitted to the smart mixed reality (MR)
glass via wireless links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.