* 2153960
* Aquifers, Science, and Spatial Imaginaries
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrea Ballestero, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 452,988.00

Despite remaining largely out of public view during the twentieth century,
aquifers are emerging from their relative obscurity as governments invest
considerable resources in scientific research and experiment with new governance
models to face the looming global water crisis. This interdisciplinary research
project investigates how, as aquifers gain more public attention, social life
above the surface of the Earth intersects with the material world below it. The
projectsâ€™ central research question examines how spatial imaginaries of the
underground change when aquifers acquire a prominent place in the public sphere.
With water becoming one of the most endangered resources globally, policy makers
and experts increasingly understand the urgency of engaging local actors in
aquifer protection. However, their ideas of who those actors are and how they
conceptualize aquifers often assume single-issue representations of human
experience. This project counterbalances those representations by investigating
aquifers as spatial formations laden with cultural
meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of a longitudinal,
ethnographic, and multi-modal study of how increased circulation of scientific
knowledge about aquifers recasts the relations between surface and subsurface,
and reshapes the legal and cultural relations between property and environmental
responsibility. The project investigates two recently created participatory
aquifer management plans and focuses on the work that local residents, property
owners, and public servants do to implement them. Specifically, the project (1)
identifies the scientific ideas that circulate through participatory aquifer
management plans, (2) documents how everyday citizens understand spatial
features (surface and subsurface), (3) maps the projects through which
participants enact their responsibility to protect aquifers, and (4) identifies
the points of friction and the complementarities between demands to protect
aquifers and the surface-based notions of property that participants hold. The
project develops theoretical resources to conceptualize aquifers as more than
water quantities waiting to be extracted. Methodologically, the project combines
ethnographic research, data visualization techniques, and collaborative maping.
Additionally, the project supports junior scholars with scientific training and
professional mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.