* 2153380
* CRII: RI: A Deep Gameplay Framework for Strong Story Experience Management
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Joseph Robertson, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 174,894.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experience managers are
intelligent agents that produce personalized stories that change based on
decisions a player makes in a digital game. These agents create new and powerful
types of interactive stories for art and entertainment, training applications,
and personalized education. A central problem for experience managers is
avoiding dead ends, which are situations where story structure is broken due to
a choice by the player. This problem results in experiences with un-interesting
stories, missed training sequences, and long spells without appropriate targeted
educational content. This project will develop a novel experience management
architecture to quickly navigate around dead end situations during real-time
interaction with a human participant. The architecture is based on recent
advances in deep reinforcement learning for general game playing. This
experience management platform will enable new forms of real-time training and
education applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses a fundamental
gap in existing experience managers that do not adversarially plan against
sequences of player actions that lead to dead end situations. The specific
research objectives are to create a deep reinforcement learning-based gameplay
agent platform that (1) builds state spaces described by an action language, (2)
identifies dead end states without performing exhaustive search, (3) relaxes
assumptions of zero-sum and symmetric gameplay, and (4) solves narrative
planning problems by compiling specialized narrative reasoning into a standard
action language domain description. If successful, this research will
significantly improve the speed and control of experience management agents and
provide a pipeline to controlling existing and future specialized interactive
narrative formalisms. These improvements will allow control of larger and more
immersive narrative, training, and pedagogical environments compared to current
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.