* 2153029
* Energetic Variational Inference: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Chun Liu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 205,131.00

Variational Inference is a powerful tool used to boost efficiency and
flexibility in machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms,
particularly those based on large amounts of data. In this project, the
investigators plan to create a unified and systematic framework for variational
inference methods, making two key contributions. First, the investigators will
establish the theoretical foundations for the proposed framework, which will
support and justify using existing and new variational inference algorithms in
machine learning applications. Second, the investigators will provide a systemic
procedure to create new variational inference algorithms and apply them to
emerging machine learning problems. In addition to these new scientific
developments, the investigators will create new courses and workshops on machine
learning, recruit both undergraduate and graduate students for summer, project-
based research programs, and provide mentorship to local high school students
through hands-on machine learning training programs. Collaborations are planned
with industrial data science partners to apply these new algorithms in practice
and to train the workforce with the start-of-the-art machine learning
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed "Energetic Variational Inference"
framework is based on an energetic variational approach, which has been
successfully used to study complicated non-equilibrium systems in physics and
biology. The investigators will provide a blueprint for generating new
algorithms by introducing various options for the four essential components of
the proposed framework: the divergence functional, the dissipation functional,
the representation of the probability density, and the temporal discretization.
The investigators will study convergence in the continuous formulation as well
as estimate the error bounds after temporal discretization of the underlying
continuous dynamic system. More importantly, these theoretical results can be
applied or extended to other flow-based variational inference approaches. These
methods will be applied to problems in supervised learning, density estimation,
and generative learning. Additional novel applications in machine learning,
statistics, and statistical physics will also be developed. The algorithms will
be packaged into open-source software for public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.