* 2153958
* Interacting Particle Systems and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Alisa Knizel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 202,091.00

The project focuses on the study of lattice models in statistical mechanics. The
algebraic structure inherent in such models allows for many exact computations,
while their probabilistic nature provides a new point of view and interpretation
of the underlying algebraic data. For instance, these systems can be used to
study how crystals melt, how neurons move through the brain, how a fire front
advances, how a cancer spreads, how a plankton colony grows in the ocean. The
research project aims at achieving a better understanding of the macroscopic
behavior of some important models as the size of the system
grows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models under consideration are usually referred
to as “integrable” or “exactly solvable.” Though exactly solvable systems are
very special, their asymptotic properties are believed to be representative for
a larger family of models. In this way, besides being interesting themselves,
exactly solvable systems are exemplars of their conjectured universality classes
and can be used to build intuition and make predictions. The aim is to obtain a
variety of robust methods to study the universality classes. This research
program seeks to establish a better understanding of some “universality”
features in the context of certain interacting particle systems. The research
program consists of three main directions— the study of log-gases (ensemble of
particles on the line confined by an external potential that repel each other
logarithmically), the study of the stationary measures for the Kardar-Parisi-
Zhang equation (a non-linear stochastic partial differential equation that was
originally proposed as a model of surface growth), and the study of traffic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.