* 2153083
* CRII: SCH: Towards robustness to data disparities: a framework for efficient and reliable data-driven decision-making tools for all
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Maggie Makar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most promising
applications of machine learning (ML), is its ability to guide personalized
decision making, especially in the context of healthcare. Predictive ML models
can help clinicians identify patients at high risk of adverse outcomes, enabling
them to make informed decisions about preventative measures. Causal ML models
can help clinicians and patients understand the effects of interventions
enabling them to make more informed decisions about the treatment options.
Importantly, the reliability of predictive and causal ML methods depends on the
quality of data used to develop them. Unfortunately, data quality often reflects
systemic inequalities in both access to and quality of healthcare leading to
data disparities. Examples of unequal quality of care include settings in which
Black patients are less likely to receive referrals to specialists or in which
women’s pain is less likely to be taken seriously, both leading to potential
delays in diagnosis and treatment. This means that data collected from specific
subgroups of the population are more prone to missingness. In terms of access,
data reveal that Black and Hispanic groups are more likely to be uninsured and
less likely to have a usual place to go to for medical care. This results in the
underrepresentation of subgroups of the population in observational data such as
electronic health records typically used to develop ML models. In this proposal,
we will develop and theoretically analyze robust ML methods (both predictive and
causal) that ameliorate the effects of data disparities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two main prongs. The first prong focuses on
developing prediction tools for diagnosis that are robust to inaccuracies due to
underrepresentation of minorities. We will develop model training methods that
discourage the models from learning patterns that are reflective of data biases
rather than true causal mechanisms. We will theoretically analyze the robustness
and efficiency of our models. The second prong focuses on developing methods for
estimation of causal effects of interventions that are robust to data
missingness and measurement error. While most existing work attempts to estimate
the causal effect of an intervention, this project will study the estimation of
intervals or bounds on the causal estimates which reflect the uncertainty in the
quality of the collected data. We theoretically analyze the credibility and
tightness of our bounds when trained using limited
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.