* 2153429
* Four Challenging Questions in Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Richard Durrett, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 168,884.00

Mathematicians and physicists have long studied stochastic spatial models, like
the Ising model and percolation that give important insights into the phase
transitions of the physical systems that they model. Stochastic spatial models
are important for applications, so it is important to develop methods to
understand their qualitative behavior. For many systems like the contact
process, which is a simple model of the spread and competition of species, the
nontrivial stationary distribution is unique and its density is a continuous
function of its parameters. The research carried out in this project will
investigate some systems that are exceptions to this rule. The PI's work on
nonlinear voter models seeks to produce examples that can be rigorously shown to
have two nontrivial translation invariant equilibrium states. The PI has
recently shown that a susceptible-infected epidemics in which individuals drop
connections to infected individuals can have a discontinuous phase transition.
One of the goals is to extend this to the more realistic SIR model. In the other
direction there is a process called explosive percolation that was conjectured
in 2009 based on simulation to have a discontinuous transition, but one year
later a rigorous mathematical proof showed that this system and a number of
similar systems have continuous phase transitions. One of the goals of this
project will seek to prove qualitative results about the phase transition in the
explosive percolation model. The project will provide research training
opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work will be carried
out on four challenging and long-studied problems in probability. For brevity
only three are mentioned here: (i) Explosive percolation occurs on a dynamically
grown random graph in which m potential new edges are chosen on each step but
only is chosen to be added. Achlioptas, Dâ€™Souza and Spencer claimed in 2009 that
these models could have discontinuous transitions, but one year later Riordan
and Warnke showed that for a broad class of rules the transition is continuous.
One of the goals of this project is to extend their results to other systems and
to obtain more detailed information about the phase transition. (ii) In many
cases the existence of stationary distributions for a stochastic spatial model
has been proved by showing that the particle systems converge to reaction
diffusion equations with positive wave speed. Recently Huang and Durrett have
shown that several particle systems that converge to reaction-diffusion
equations with zero wave speeds converge to motion by mean curvature as time is
further sped-up. This opens up the possibility of proving the existence of
discontinuous phase transitions. (iii) Durrett and Yao have recently given an
almost necessary and sufficient condition for a discontinuous phase transition
in the SI model on an evolving configuration model graph. One of the aims of
this project is to extend this result to more realistic SIR and SIS epidemics.
The latter question is a long standing open problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.