* 2153768
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: The Next Generation of Leakage Attacks and Defenses for Encrypted Databases
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Charalampos Papamanthou, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 129,055.00

growing number of works explore the area of encrypted databases as a practical
approach to searching on encrypted data stored at a server. The client encrypts
the data before uploading it to the server. The server is not given the
decryption key, yet the server can execute searches on the encrypted data
requested by the client and return the corresponding encrypted answers. An
encrypted database efficiently achieves the above functionality by allowing some
leakage about the original (plaintext) data that appears harmless but could be
exploited by an attacker who attempts to reconstruct the original data by
synthesizing leakage from the encrypted answers and encrypted queries over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop the next generation of
methods for building efficient encrypted databases and for analyzing their
resilience to reconstruction attacks. To achieve this goal, it uses methods from
algorithms, statistics, geometry, databases, and computer systems. Specific
research activities include cryptanalysis of the leakage from encrypted
databases with suppressed leakage as well as cryptanalysis and schemes for high-
dimensional encrypted queries. Informed by the above research thrusts, this
project will develop a principled analysis of defenses as well as a framework
for quantifying the impact of leakage in the context of encrypted databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward achieving broader impacts, this project includes
curriculum development for computer security courses, efforts to include members
of underrepresented groups in research activities, and outreach to industry and
government audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.