* 2153730
* CAS: Developing Nickel-Catalyzed Methods to Prepare High-Value Organofluorine Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* David Vicic, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor David Vicic of Lehigh University will study ways to introduce
fluorine-containing groups into organic substrates using the earth-abundant and
environmentally friendly nickel metal as a catalyst. The percentage of
fluorinated pharmaceuticals among the total number of registered synthetic drugs
is extraordinary (43% in 2019), and 47% of all agrichemicals that were assigned
new ISO common names contained fluorine from 1998-2020. As such, developing
cheaper and more efficient catalytic methods to incorporate fluorinated groups
is paramount to the health and food industries. Professor Vicic and team will
prepare well-defined nickel complexes bearing fluorinated groups in order to
systematically determine the experimental conditions that will allow nickel to
release the fluorinated groups onto organic scaffolds that are of interest to
the pharmaceutical and agrochemical fields. The realization of clean and high-
yielding transfers of fluorinated groups to organic substrates is necessary to
transform wasteful processes into more sustainable catalytic ones would be of
significant value in n both academic and industrial circles. This project will
also create a web-based spectral database for fluorinated compounds so that
entry into this field can be more accessible to beginning researchers of diverse
backgrounds in order to promote a more inclusive workforce. Training graduate
students to perform science outreach at surrounding schools is also planned with
Lehighâ€™s Academic Outreach Office. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop methodology on how to access the higher-valent states of nickel under
mild conditions using anionic fluoroalkyl nickel complexes that have been
developed in the Vicic lab. Next, the Vicic group will work to determine which
state is necessary for the release of fluoroalkyl radicals. The team will then
identify the scope and selectivity of radical additions to substrates containing
alkene and arene functionalities, study the effect of light on the homolysis
reactions, and investigate methods to transform catalytic processes into
electrocatalytic variants. The team will also prepare a family of anionic nickel
precursors bearing organic and fluoroalkyl ligands and monitor the elimination
of fluoroalkylated organic products by a variety of analytical techniques. In
this way, the effect of oxidants, metal oxidation state, light, and other
reaction parameters on reductive elimination at high-valent nickel will be
established. The team will also identify strategies to prepare nickel complexes
containing chemically and photochemically derivatizable fluorinated groups, and
then develop methods for directly preparing libraries of molecules containing
such groups for discovery chemistry. These activities are synergistically
providing important training in organometallic chemistry and catalysis for a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students at Lehigh
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.