* 2153715
* IRES Track 1: Guatemala Geohazards International Research Experiences for Students-Understanding the Long-term Records of Volcanic, Seismic, and Landslide Hazards
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tina Niemi, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 297,732.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Guatemala Geohazards
International Research Experiences for Students (Guatemala Geohazards IRES)
project is for U.S. undergraduate students to develop skills in conducting and
communicating scientific research, to utilize an integrative field and lab
research approach using digital technology and modern analytical lab equipment,
and to learn international cooperation by collaborating side-by-side with
Guatemalan students, professors, and industrial partners to address research
questions on the long-term Quaternary record of geological hazards in the
Guatemala City Graben. The plate boundary setting of Guatemala exposes the
country to numerous natural hazards including earthquakes from four source
areas, volcanic eruptions along the active Central American Volcanic Arc, and
landslides and floods that have intensified by more frequent tropical storms and
hurricanes in a warming Earth. The Guatemala Geohazards IRES project has the
potential of increasing both the number of women and under-represented
minorities conducting research, completing a bachelor's degree, and continuing
to graduate programs and careers in geosciences. Our IRES also brings diversity
to the face of our role models with six Hispanic mentors and three women faculty
mentors. Our collaboration with Guatemalan colleagues, industry mining
geologists, and the international nature of the fieldwork will provide an
unparalleled avenue for cultural enrichment for the students as well as an
experience in global cooperation that will be invaluable for a student's future
success in an increasingly global workforce and economy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Guatemala City (GC) Metro sprawls over a high plateau composed of
volcanic tuff and lava flows from active volcanoes that border the region to the
south and southwest including Pacaya, Fuego, Acatenango, and Agua, and other
volcanic centers along the arc, although the actual volcanic stratigraphy is
poorly defined. The GC Metro area is cut by a system of active faults that
define the N-S-trending Guatemala City Graben. Steep ravines or barrancos, that
are likely fault-controlled, deeply dissect the landscape causing high
susceptibility to landslides. This geologic and tectonic setting make it ideal
for investigating the interplay of Quaternary volcanic, seismic, and landslide
hazards of the region. Field access facilitated by industrial partners and new
road cuts provide the ideal location to leverage high-resolution outcrop and
satellite-based imagery alongside geochemical, petrographic, and
geochronological data that can be used to quantify recent and active geologic
processes including the sequence, style, and timing of volcanic eruptions, the
kinematic and displacement history of faults and past earthquakes, and study of
the underlying properties leading to landslide failure. The Guatemala Geohazards
IRES students will have an unprecedented opportunity to develop field and
laboratory skills in volcaniclastic stratigraphy, neotectonics, and landslide
hazards while building international experiences and collaboration with
Guatemalan students, mentors, and professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.