* 2153438
* CRII: OAC: A (near) Real-time Framework for Smart Integration of  Electric Vehicles to Microgrids
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Zoleikha Abdollahi Biron, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth of electric vehicle
(EV) adoption creates a timely opportunity for utilities and power systems to
boost revenue and build sustainable load growth. However, uncontrolled EV to
power grid integration, particularly in smaller-scale power systems such as
microgrids, brings significant problems, e.g., power flow fluctuation and
unacceptable load peaks reducing power network reliability and power quality. In
this project we develop a framework to use the flexible energy capacity of EVs
to provide services for microgrids. This method increases EV owners’ engagements
and will enhance social welfare for all shareholders of the vehicle to microgrid
(V2M) connection including EV owners, intelligent charging stations (ICSs), and
microgrids. Considering the vast amount of data required for managing a large
number of EVs in a microgrid, the project will employ advanced machine learning
techniques and analytical approaches to reduce the computational complexity of
the problem. The proposed framework will provide an understanding of the
characteristics and requirements for future cyberinfrastructure design,
particularly in integrated large-scale ecosystems. This work represents a broad,
novel contribution to literature, education, outreach, and diversity; as such,
the project aligns with NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance prosperity and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall aim of the
project is to develop a (near) real-time low computational cost framework for
V2M integration. The research incorporates concepts of load prediction and game
theory advancing V2M technology to use the flexible energy capacity of EVs in
microgrids according to the needs of both. Traditional clustering and
forecasting methods cannot be directly applied to microgrids due to their high
volatility load profile caused by coupling various distributed energy resources.
The technical contribution of the project is threefold: 1) to design an
innovative machine learning-enabled algorithm for short-term load forecasting in
microgrids that consists of robust data preprocessing, feature extraction, and a
selection algorithm, followed by a weighted advanced long short-term memory (WA-
LSTM) model. The selected features have high relevance and minimum redundancy
reducing the computational cost significantly for the proposed WA-LSTM to
predict the load profile; 2) to develop a cooperative game to capture
interactions among EVs and their corresponding ICSs that outlines (dis)charging
profiles for EVs considering vehicle parameters and constraints. A Nash
bargaining game with relaxed constraints and a new penalty distribution policy
is proposed to maximize the profits of all players in the coalition while
satisfying the microgrids' requirements as the global goal; 3) to evaluate the
proposed methods in experimental testbeds using hardware in the loop (HIL)
setups to provide both analytic and experimental evidence to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.