* 2153474
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Detecting and Mitigating Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Zhen Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,900.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous real-world attacks
exploit software vulnerabilities to compromise computer systems such as servers,
desktops, smart phones, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Recent studies
show that it is challenging to detect vulnerabilities accurately and patch
vulnerabilities rapidly. State-of-the-art techniques can mitigate unpatched
vulnerabilities effectively, but they usually sacrifice the availability of
systems. The goal of this project is to improve vulnerability detection and
mitigation. The project’s novelties are two-fold. First, the project team is
developing an approach to significantly increasing the accuracy of vulnerability
detection. Second, the project team is developing an approach to substantially
reducing the availability loss of vulnerability mitigation. The project's
broader significance and importance are that 1) the approaches developed by the
project can be used by other projects addressing vulnerabilities, 2) the outcome
of the project can help the software industry in designing mechanisms to detect
vulnerabilities and defend against vulnerability exploits; and 3) the project is
tightly integrated with undergraduate-level and graduate-level curriculum
development and student advising. A diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students are participating in the project and developing their interests and
expertise in software security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop
an accurate vulnerability-detection technique and an unobtrusive vulnerability-
mitigation technique. To improve the accuracy, the vulnerability-detection
technique uses vulnerability conditions, each of which captures the intrinsic
characteristics of a type of vulnerabilities, to detect vulnerabilities. To
reduce the availability loss, the vulnerability-mitigation technique uses basic
blocks and program paths as the granularity of vulnerability mitigation. The
project consists of three key tasks: 1) designing a scheme for encoding
vulnerability conditions, 2) developing a technique based on fuzzing to detect
vulnerabilities using vulnerability conditions, and 3) developing a technique
based on code-disabling to mitigates vulnerabilities at the granularity of basic
blocks and program paths. The major contributions of the project include the
design of the techniques, prototype implementations of the techniques, and an
evaluation of the implementations with real-world
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.