* 2153799
* Acquisition of a clumped isotope gas-source isotope-ratio mass spectrometer and carbonate device for inclusive research and education at the University of Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 491,846.00

The acquisition of a mass spectrometer and sample preparation equipment will be
used to advance research and education in diverse fields of Earth-system science
including geology, paleoclimate, and biological and ocean sciences. The new
instrumentation will greatly enhance analytical capabilities in new geochemistry
methods at the University of Washington (UW) to precisely measure the
temperature and chemistry of carbonate minerals when formed in soils, lakes,
oceans, fault zones, hydrothermal systems, and laboratory experiments. The
temperature estimates and cutting-edge chemical analyses will support research
on modern and ancient environments to study Earthâ€™s climate system, past
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, the origin of landforms like the
Colorado Plateau, and geologic drivers of biodiversity. Analyses of corals and
shelled organisms will support environmental and marine sciences research
relevant to ecology, physiology, and biochemistry. The instrumentation will also
enable analysis of minerals formed in fault zones and hydrothermal systems to
study the interactions of sub-surface fluids and faulting, ancient earthquakes,
and chemical reactions relevant to ore deposits, critical metals, and carbon
dioxide sequestration. The research and educational opportunities provided by
this instrument acquisition will advance trans-disciplinary research and
education at UW and in the Earth science community. The award will advance
equity in undergraduate laboratory training and research through direct support
of underrepresented minority students and broad dissemination of best practices
for inclusive engagement with undergraduates. The instrument acquisition will
substantially enhance infrastructure for essential Earth sciences research and
education and contribute to technological innovation, societally-relevant
scientific discovery, and building diverse STEM talent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition and installation of a
new carbonate sample preparation device and high-precision gas-source isotope-
ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) to measure clumped isotopologues of CO2 at UW, to
advance interdisciplinary research in tectonics, paleoclimate, geochemistry, and
other Earth-science disciplines. The acquisition of the IRMS and sample
preparation system will enable rapid, high-precision complete stable isotopic
analysis (masses 44 - 49 inclusive) of small (&lt;0.5 mg) carbonate samples for
a wide range of ongoing and new research including novel applications of dual-
clumped isotope analysis, and free up existing instrumentation to substantially
increase capacity for novel triple-oxygen-isotope analyses. The system will
replace 1) an off-line custom preparation system for large (8-10 mg) carbonate
samples, 2) an existing IRMS with modified collector for traditional clumped
(mass 47 excess) work acquired with NSF funding in 2012, both of which will be
optimized to support carbonate oxygen-17 excess analyses; and 3) replace ageing
instrumentation that no longer provides reliable conventional carbonate bulk
stable isotope data. In this way, the proposed instrument acquisition will be
leveraged to expand capabilities for carbonate oxygen-17 excess analysis,
traditional bulk stable isotope analyses, and enable new high-precision dual
clumped isotope (47 and 48 excess) analyses of small samples, substantially
benefitting hundreds of Earth-science researchers and students. The proposed
research is tightly integrated with education and outreach. The project will
increase undergraduate geoscience lab opportunities through 1) direct support
for student technical training and research in partnership with a cohort program
for underrepresented minority undergraduates, and 2) national dissemination of
research-based practices for enhancing belonging, accessibility, justice,
equity, diversity, and inclusion in undergraduate geoscience laboratory research
and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.