* 2153814
* RAPID: Characterization of Aerosolized Droplet and Droplet Nuclei in Cough
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Olusegun Ilegbusi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,859.00

There is considerable interest in the behavior of cough-generated droplets in
the environment due to evidence of host-to-host transmission of viruses through
aerosolized droplets. Previous investigations have mostly focused on how such
droplets interact with the external environment and not much has been explored
on their behavior inside the body. Yet, the droplet behavior inside the airway
largely determines their subsequent characteristics outside the body (such as
size and dispersion), as well as their potential for retention inside the body
to cause lung infection, pneumonia, aspiration, and mortality. It is also
unknown whether people are at greater risk for pulmonary infection and pulmonary
pneumonia if their cough is too weak to expel virus-laden droplets as may occur
under some pre-existing conditions. The objective of this multidisciplinary
research project is to combine computational modeling with experiments to fully
understand the behavior of aerosolized cough droplets inside the human airway
depending on the cough strength and assess the potential of virus-laden droplets
to be retained in the airway or transmitted to the lungs. The research outcome
will be clinically relevant to the development of technologies to minimize the
spread of COVID-19, hospitalization, and death. The focus on droplet behavior
inside the airway will be particularly relevant for elucidating the behavior of
new COVID-19 strains which have been found to generate higher viral loads in the
airway compared to the original strain, making the new strains much more
contagious to others. The research will enable determination of how long these
new variants reside in the airway, which will aid in the development of
technologies that mitigate their potential transmission outside the body. An
important component of the research is also the education of the next generation
of scientists and engineers, especially those from under-represented groups by
providing them an opportunity to work on a challenging multidisciplinary problem
of public health significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the advent of the
COVID-19 pandemic, most studies have understandably focused on the interaction
of virus-laden cough droplets with the ambient environment. Yet, the behavior of
droplets inside the airway largely determines their subsequent characteristics
outside the body (such as size and transmission distance), as well as their
potential for retention inside the body to cause lung infection, pneumonia,
aspiration, and mortality. The role of cough strength in the retention of
droplets laden with the new viral strains inside the airway with potential to
cause serial environmental transmission has also not been fully explored. The
objective of this multidisciplinary research project is to integrate
Computational Fluid Dynamics with experiments to fully characterize the behavior
of aerosolized droplets and nanoparticles relative to cough strength inside the
human upper airway. The experiments for model calibration and validation will
utilize a realistic three-dimensional-printed upper airway structure produced
with a novel volumetric printing process. Cough will be simulated in the
structure with fluorescein solution atomized to produce seed droplets. Droplet
sizes will be quantified using a blue-light filter and digital image processing
of endoscope images. The research will: (a) Quantify small droplet and
nanoparticle interaction with the airway, in subjects with and without standard
facemask; (b) Quantify droplet characteristics (size distribution, residence
time, trajectories) within the airway under normal and disordered cough
functions; (c) Quantify aspiration capacity and delayed transmission potential
of droplets relative to cough strength; and (d) Validate the computational
models using the experimental data. By establishing the fundamental features of
droplet and nanoparticle interaction with cough flow and the airway, this
project will deliver the strategies for characterization of complex nanoparticle
behavior under cough flow in particular and transient explosive flow condition
in general. The project outcome will be clinically relevant in the development
of technologies to minimize the spread of COVID-19, hospitalization, and death.
The focus on particle behavior inside the airway will be particularly relevant
to exploring the behavior of new COVID-19 strains which have been found to
generate higher viral loads in the nasal and oral cavities compared to the
original strain, making the new strains much more contagious to others. The
model developed will enable quantification of the residence times of these new
variants and explore intervention technologies to mitigate their potential for
transmission outside the body or aspiration pneumonia and lung infection. As the
longer-term impact of post-COVID patients becomes better understood, the droplet
behavior relative to cough strength will be an important risk marker as the
micro aspirations that retain in the lung tissue can result in lung infection,
pneumonia, or death. The sequence of symptoms and other comorbidities occurring
in post-COVID patients amplify the significance of the aspiration event being
investigated. This research will also assist the development of respiratory
intervention technologies to improve deficits of cough function in patients with
pre-existing conditions such as post-stroke individuals, sedentary elderly or
those who have undergone cancer related treatment. The education objective of
the research will focus on educating the next generation of scientists and
engineers, especially those from under-represented groups by providing them an
opportunity to work on a challenging multidisciplinary problem of public health
significance. The research findings will be integrated directly in two
undergraduate courses and two graduate courses taught by the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.