* 2153862
* CAS: Exploiting Spin in Photo-induced Chemistry: Fundamental Explorations of High-spin and Low-spin Transition Metals in Long-lived Charge Separated States and Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Gordon Yee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Amanda Morris and Gordon Yee of
the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University are exploring the role of molecular spin state on photochemistry. The
proposed work constitutes a systematic study of molecular reorganization and
spin at molecule-metal oxide interfaces and has the potential to impact research
areas across various application spaces including photocatalysis, photovoltaics,
and quantum information sciences. The interdisciplinary project brings together
knowledge in molecular inorganic, materials, and photophysical chemistry
providing a broad foundation for educational enrichment at the K-12 and
collegiate levels. Outreach, including efforts to promote diversity in science,
will be a component of the funded work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-lived, charge-
separated states are critical to the realization of both photovoltaic and
photocatalytic assemblies. The proposed research is motivated by the need to
understand the role of molecular reorganization and metallic spin state in
controlling charge-separated-state lifetimes and catalytic
selectivity/efficiency. The research builds on their recent work exploring
charge-transfer-induced spin-crossover compounds and the impact of the
accompanying molecular reorganizations on photoinduced electron transfer
processes. The results gathered from the proposed studies will enable the
development of structureâ€“function relationships with respect to spin and
reorganization energies in photo-induced reactivity that, thus far, have been
relatively unexplored. They aim to answer the following questions: What is the
role of high-spin/low-spin electronic state transitions on photo-induced charge
separated lifetimes? Can the design principles uncovered in the previous aim be
extended to more severe molecular reorganizations, i.e., intermolecular and
intramolecular ligand association/dissociation? Does molecular spin state
control photocatalytic mechanisms, i.e., rate and
path?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.