* 2153504
* CRII: HCC: Human-automation Interaction: Assistive and Adaptive Multimodal Interface to Support Older Adults in Complex Automated Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gaojian Huang, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,778.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated systems have been
applied in a wide range of environments, such as in transportation,
manufacturing, healthcare, or living. One particular demographic expected to
benefit from the development of automated systems is adults aged 65 years and
older. Older adults have become the fastest-growing age group globally. General
age-related declines in cognitive and physical abilities may limit older adults’
ability to perform daily tasks, such as driving. In this case, automated systems
(e.g., automated vehicles), may bring particular benefits for older adults to
maintain daily task performance and independence. Given that current automated
systems are often constrained by design limits and require human interventions,
a reliable human-machine interface (HMI) is necessary to assist humans during
the manual recovery process. Additionally, individual differences in cognitive
and physical capabilities may lead to different task performances. It is
necessary to examine how non-chronological age factors, such as cognitive and
physical abilities, may impact adults’ performance and wellbeing in complex
environments. This project aims to develop methods and tools to support older
adults with different abilities in automated systems and to better understand
how the aging process affects interaction with an interface. The outcomes of the
project will contribute to the knowledge base in aging, automation, and human-
machine interactions, as well as provide guidelines and recommendations for the
design of next-generation automated systems for a wide range of user groups. By
contributing to the scientific basis of human-automation interactions, the
project will benefit the society by increasing human safety and wellbeing in
automated systems. The PI will also initiate outreach programs in local senior
centers, such as workshops and activities to educate the importance of
successful aging, i.e., living an active and healthy lifestyle at the later
stages of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to conduct a series of
human-subject experiments using automated driving simulations to investigate
three areas. The first area is to explore the effects of multimodal displays,
both visual (e.g., augmented reality) and tactile interfaces, on how quickly
older adults intervene and takeover from an automated system. Second, the
project will investigate the impacts of non-chronological factors on older
adults’ task performance in data-rich complex environments. The final area
explores whether visual and tactile interfaces, as multimodal displays, can
mitigate individual differences in task performance. The project will collect
empirical data and develop computational models on human behavior and
performance with various capabilities and limitations. These could help
researchers working in aging, human factors, and inclusive design and frameworks
that address how non-chronological factors affect performance on complex tasks.
For addressing individual differences in task performance, the project will
investigate the effectiveness of adaptive multimodal displays on older adults’
takeover performance change. The research will also contribute designing models
specific to automation takeovers and function/task allocation between machines
and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.