* 2153422
* CRII: CNS: Toward a Scalable Geo-distributed Data Analytics System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Kwangsung Oh, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,211.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many applications that automate
people's daily activities rely on the cloud to serve users around the globe. For
example, latency-sensitive services, such as Netflix, Uber, and Airbnb, utilize
cloud resources in Amazon’s geo-distributed data centers instead of managing
their own data centers. These cloud application providers must analyze highly
diffuse, large-scale data, including users’ activities logs and system logs —
i.e., geo-distributed analytics (GDA). GDA tasks affect user experiences, system
health, and operating cost; they must be completed in a timely and cost-
efficient manner. However, achieving this is challenging due to the complexities
of heterogeneous cloud resources and unpredictable changes in the cloud
environments and applications. This project aims to design and implement a novel
GDA system that determines and manages the optimal cloud resource
configurations, with consideration of the wide-area network (WAN) and diverse
compute resources. In addition, the system will make task scheduling decisions
to process GDA queries in a timely and cost-efficient manner considering
available cloud resources, input data locations, application goals, and query
execution dynamics. Thus, GDA applications will be able to achieve cost-
performance goals with minimal effort, while addressing and overcoming the
challenges above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this
project will advance the understanding of (1) how GDA workloads can be
accurately predicted using historical data, and (2) how diverse and
heterogeneous cloud resources can be optimally allocated and efficiently
utilized in GDA. A design and prototype implementation will be publicly
available in the form of an open-source system. The outcomes of this research
will allow researchers and software developers across several scientific,
commercial, and social domains to easily run and evaluate diverse GDA
algorithms. The research outcomes of this project will also be integrated into
the university course curriculum for both undergraduate- and graduate-level
students. This project will also open diverse opportunities that broaden
participation and diversity in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.