* 2153136
* CRII: CPS: RUI: Cognizant Learning for Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Bhaskar Ramasubramanian, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 174,921.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Research Initiation Initiative
(CRII) proposal is to develop a cognizant learning framework for cyber-physical
systems (CPS) that incorporates risk-sensitive and irrational decision making.
The necessity for such a framework is exemplified by two observations. First,
CPS such as self-driving cars will share an environment with other CPS and human
users. Human drivers demonstrate a heightened sensitivity to changes in speed
and can easily adapt to changes in the environment and road conditions, which
makes it essential for a CPS to have an ability to recognize non-rational
behaviors. Second, large amounts of data generated during their operation and
limited access to models of their environments can make a CPS reliant on machine
learning algorithms for decision making to meet performance requirements such as
reachability and safety. Our research will be grounded on improving behaviors of
autonomous vehicles in realistic traffic situations. Outcomes from this effort
will contribute to the development of a research paradigm unifying control,
learning, and behavioral economics. Students at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution will benefit by being directly involved in all aspects of the
research process. Research tasks will involve a team of undergraduate students
in a vertically integrated manner where more experienced students will mentor
newer team members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort comprises two
thrusts. Thrust 1 will construct utilities to encode CPS performance objectives
consistent with practical models of risk-sensitive and irrational decision
making. Strategies will be learned by formulating and solving a reinforcement
learning problem to maximize this utility. Methods to enable learned strategies
to adequately consider delays between evaluation and execution of actions
arising from the physical components of the CPS will be developed. Thrust 2 will
design algorithms to learn decentralized cognizant strategies when multiple CPS
operate in the same environment. To improve reliability in uncertain
environments, or when feedback is sparse, techniques to identify contributions
of each CPS to a shared utility will be identified. Solution methodologies will
be evaluated empirically through extensive experiments and theoretically by
determining probabilistic performance guarantees. The PI will develop a research
agenda and new undergraduate curriculum in CPS and machine learning at Western
Washington University (WWU). Research and educational goals of the project will
be integrated through the CARLA simulator for autonomous vehicle research and
the F1/10 Autonomous Vehicle platform. The multidisciplinary scope of the
project will be emphasized in outreach efforts through Student Outreach Services
and STEM Clubs at WWU to encourage and broaden participation from traditionally
underrepresented student groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.