* 2153335
* Random Matrices, Random Schrödinger Operators, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Horng-Tzer Yau, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 330,000.00

The main objective of this project is to investigate the foundation of random
matrix theory and its applications to Random Schrodinger operators and
statistics. Classical probability theory has been a cornerstone to statistics;
for current applications to large data statistics and artificial neural
networks, the most basic objects are random matrices representing large data and
noise. In this project, the PI will develop theoretical tools in analyzing the
statistics of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of large random matrices, which are
the fundamental objects in data analysis. Besides data matrices, the PI will
also investigate the associated matrices of large random graphs and, in
applications to mathematical physics, random Schrodinger operators. In order to
enhance the exchange of ideas among different groups of researchers, seminars
and other scientific events will be organized jointly with the
Statistics&lt;br/&gt;and Computer Science departments at the PI's institution
and with other institutions in the area. These programs will bring together
researchers from probability theory, statistics, combinatorics, mathematical
physics, and computer science to work together on questions centered around the
analysis of large random matrices that are interesting to these scientific
communities. The project also provides research training opportunities for
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research funded by this
award is to understand the foundation of random matrices and associated
applications in data analysis and mathematical physics. One of the specific
projects aims to explore the connection between random matrices and random
Schrodinger operators. This project is a natural extension of the PI’s recent
work on delocalization and quantum diffusion of random band matrices. This work
shows that a mean-field model like Gaussian orthogonal ensemble or Gaussian
unitary ensemble can be used to model non-mean-field models—in this case, band
matrices. The PI anticipates that this project will lead to a solution (in a
certain weak sense) of the long standing open problem regarding the
delocalization of random Schrodinger operators. Another project aims to extend
the existing theory concerning Dyson’s Brownian motion to eigenvectors of free
convolution models. This project can be viewed as extending Dyson’s Brownian
motion to a non-uniform setting. The third project concerns investigation of the
eigenvalue and eigenvector statistics of the adjacency matrices of d-regular
graphs for any degree d bigger than or equal to three. A long-term goal of this
project is to show that the second largest eigenvalue distributes by the Tracy-
Widom law up to a shift. A final project aims to develop methods to prove
spectral gaps for the Glauber dynamics for spin glasses on
hypercubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.