* 2153189
* Advanced Characterization of Inelastic Performance of Tall Buildings to Wind for Performance-Based Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Xinzhong Chen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 338,074.00

This research project will develop efficient analysis frameworks for assessing
the inelastic response of tall buildings under wind loads, which can be used to
support performance-based wind design (PBWD). Current building design for wind
loads does not explicitly permit structures to behave beyond the linear elastic
limit, even under ultimate wind loads. This linear design approach may limit the
use of more innovative tall building systems with improved performance, safety,
and economy. There is very little information concerning the nonlinear inelastic
performance of tall buildings to wind in terms of the actual capacity and
reliability of buildings against extreme wind loads. This project will address
the critical research needs and close the knowledge gap for achieving PBWD of
tall buildings with consideration of inelastic behavior. The project outcomes
will be used to enrich instruction and training of graduate students. This award
will contribute to the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). Project data will be archived and
made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).
Computational tools developed under this project will be integrated with
software framework of the NSF-supported NHERI Computational Modeling and
Simulation Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has three
specific objectives. First, the project will characterize the inelastic
performance of tall buildings using high-fidelity, three-dimensional, nonlinear
finite element building models with different heights and building structural
systems under realistic three-dimensional dynamic wind loads. The response
analysis will shed new insights on the unique characteristics of inelastic
building response; biaxial and triaxial response interactions; influence of
P-Delta, strength deterioration, and stiffness degradation; and influence of
eccentricities in mass and rigidity. Second, the project will develop reduced-
order nonlinear building models and analysis frameworks for assessing
probabilistic inelastic response. Modal push-over analysis under uniaxial,
biaxial, and triaxial loads will be implemented to generate hysteretic
generalized force models and to develop reduced-order nonlinear building models
with computational efficiency. The accuracy of reduced-order building models
will be validated through comprehensive response history analysis and comparison
with the predictions from the high-fidelity nonlinear finite element models.
Statistical linearization approaches will be developed to further facilitate the
predictions of inelastic response statistics. Third, the project will establish
frameworks for assessing the reliability of buildings with inelastic
performance. Various uncertainties involved in the assessment of inelastic limit
state building responses will be modelled and assessed. The fragility functions
associated with multiple demands at different mean wind speeds and directions
will be evaluated, and will be further integrated with the joint probability
distribution of wind speed and direction for evaluation of building system
reliability. The directionality effect of wind climate and aerodynamics on
inelastic building performance will be evaluated for better building design to
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.