* 2153981
* Orbit Equivalences in Borel Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kostyantyn Slutskyy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 195,000.00

Ergodic theory is the branch of mathematics that studies average behavior of
dynamical systems, examples of which are movements of celestial bodies or gas
particles. Exhaustive classification of all such systems is impossible, and it
is fruitful to study notions of equivalence when dynamical systems share orbits
but traverse them in a different order or share paths but follow them with
different speeds. Such relations are called orbit equivalence relations. Due to
their statistical nature, ergodic theoretical conclusions always leave the
possibility of an exceptional behavior on some outlying orbits. Borel dynamics
is a mathematical discipline that strives to adapt and enhance ergodic
theoretical methods to study all orbits of a dynamical system, ruling out any
exceptions. The PI will investigate variants of orbit equivalence within the
scope of Borel dynamics. The project provides research training opportunities
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concentrates on the
study of orbit equivalence relations of Borel flows. Complete classification of
measure-preserving transformations is known to be an infeasible task, and
ergodic theory has been advanced with the introduction of notions of equivalence
that are weaker than the isomorphism. Notable examples include orbit
equivalence, (even) Kakutani equivalence, and alpha equivalence, all of which
can be viewed under the unified umbrella of restricted orbit equivalence
formalism. The PI intends to investigate corresponding notions of orbit
equivalence within the scope of Borel dynamics. Problems investigated in this
project are likely to have connections with Borel combinatorics, ergodic theory,
symbolic dynamics, and descriptive set theory of Polish group
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.