* 2153468
* CRII: III: Learning networks from strategic decisions: enabling network intervention and revealing social privacy risks without structural information
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Yan Leng, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 154,231.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of digital platforms and
cloud-based products changed business operations and consumer decision-making.
The bolstered connections improve the effectiveness of dynamic pricing,
marketing campaigns, and large-scale behavioral change on digital platforms. On
crowdsourced review platforms such as Yelp and Google Review, publicly ratings
and reviews reduce consumer information search friction; on E-commerce retailers
such as Amazon and Alibaba, information about products strengthens consumers'
trust in the products. Integrating machine learning methods and rich behavioral
data improve consumers' experience, accrues revenues, and guides manufacturers'
and retailers' pricing strategies. Even though connections among individuals are
powerful in a wide range of applications: it is not always available for various
reasons: (1) network data is costly to collect; (2) network data may be too
sensitive and confidential to share; (3) network data is dynamic and static
data's accuracy may decay over time. In the meantime, strengthened social
interaction and data integration pose privacy risks, leading to data security
issues at a systematic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays the
groundwork for learning social network structures based on large-scale
behavioral data. Two inversely-related issues motivate this research: 1) How to
design network interventions to leverage social externality when structural data
is unavailable? 2) Does publicly available behavioral data pose social privacy
risk in leaking social network information? This project studies the general and
fundamental problem of learning the network structures and approximating utility
functions based on observed decisions. This project first analyzes this network
learning problem's fundamental and conditional identifiability by imposing a
linear-quadratic network game structure in a network of strategic decision-
makers. It will extend this linear-quadratic game to a broader class of network
games. This project further develops a generative deep learning framework to
approximate human decision-making processes on social networks. Finally, the
researchers will demonstrate the practical value of this research by applying
the theory and approach to network intervention (e.g., information diffusion and
influence maximization) and privacy risk evaluations (e.g., shadow profiling and
social attack) using three large-scale digital behavioral data and two small-
scale experimental data. This interdisciplinary project builds upon and
contributes to game theory, machine learning, network science, and management
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.