* 2153393
* CRII: SaTC: Enabling Secure Machine Learning Queries over Encrypted Database in Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Xinyu Lei, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,855.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In cloud computing, public cloud
service providers can provide cloud storage as the primary service, while
providing additional machine learning (ML)-based services by using the clients'
data in storage. Although this business model is promising, it also brings in
security concerns since the public commercial cloud cannot be fully trusted. For
example, public commercial clouds may sell clients' sensitive data to third
parties. In this project, the investigator develops a scheme to enable secure
and privacy-preserving machine learning services over the encrypted database in
cloud storage. The project's broader significance and importance are two-fold.
First, the project extends the border of cloud computing services and brings in
new business growth possibilities that enable safer and privacy-preserving AI
analyses on data stored in public clouds. Second, the project engages female and
under-represented minority students in computing, thus fostering the 21st-
century data-capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigator develops a scheme to support secure ML queries over encrypted
databases in cloud storage by employing an index-aid approach. In this approach,
each data item (i.e., a training example) in a dataset is formally encrypted
using AES/DES to achieve strong ciphertext privacy. For each data item, a secure
index item that can support ML analyses is generated. Therefore, this scheme
achieves strong ciphertext privacy and ML capability simultaneously, as well as
index, model, and token privacy. In summary, this project makes two significant
technical contributions. First, the development of an index-aid approach that
addresses the conflict between data security and utility. Second, the
development of AI-driven data encryption/mask techniques that outperform
differential privacy and homomorphic encryption regarding privacy and runtime
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.