* 2153373
* CRII: SHF: Error Resilient Asynchronous Architecture for Ultra-Low Power Energy Harvesting IoT Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Ashiq Sakib, Florida Polytechnic University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the demand for self-powered
smart electronics and battery-less solutions increases, energy harvesting will
be the power source of the future. Energy-harvesting devices operate on energy
derived from ambient environmental sources or human activities. However, due to
the limited energy density and irregular energy profile of different energy
sources, such self-powered devices should be extremely energy-efficient and
functional even under fluctuating supply voltages. Nowadays, most devices based
on conventional synchronous (clocked) digital designs are extremely power-
hungry, with the clock accounting for a significantly large portion of the
consumed energy. Moreover, device miniaturization results in major design
challenges, which makes clocked designs more susceptible to supply-voltage
variations and unsuitable for devices operating on harvested energy.
Asynchronous (clockless) designs can resolve the power inefficiencies associated
with clocked designs, and have the potential to bring a whole class of
applications into the domain serviceable by energy harvesting. With this vision,
the primary objective of this project is to design error-resilient asynchronous
circuits, which can create a venue to implement robust, unsupervised,
maintenance-free, safe, sustainable, and low-power electronics for numerous
energy harvesting-powered applications in different sectors, such as medical,
space, defense, automobile, power industry, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop a robust, reliable, and error-tolerant Quasi Delay
Insensitive (QDI) asynchronous architecture for ultra-low power applications,
which can perform energy-efficient computation and provide protection against
radiation-induced transient errors in unsupervised scenarios. While numerous
error-detection and -mitigation techniques exist for synchronous designs, there
are very few for QDI asynchronous circuits. Also, the existing methods have
major limitations, such as failure to ensure complete resilience, failure to
halt error propagation in QDI pipelines, failure to circumvent duplication
resulting in latency, energy, and area overhead, etc. This project aims to
address these limitations by conducting research in two phases. The first phase
will focus on 1) systematically analyzing the error response of QDI asynchronous
circuits, and 2) developing a scalable and efficient formal framework to
identify vulnerable components in both the data path and control path. The
second phase will leverage the framework developed in the first phase to 1)
critically analyze the vulnerable components and critical paths, 2) investigate
possible architectural modifications for complete error-resilience, 3) ensure
proper actions to prevent fault propagation through the QDI pipeline, and 4)
perform cost/performance trade-off analysis of the newly developed
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.