* 2153885
* Development of Catalytic Coupling Methods via Unreactive C-C and C-N Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chae Yi, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 527,182.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Chae Yi of Marquette University is studying new methods to upgrade
petroleum and biomass-derived commodity chemicals into value-added materials
using environmentally sustainable catalytic processes. The approach relies on
the use of emerging concepts in transition-metal mediated catalysis that allow
for molecular frameworks to be broken and reformed at bonds that have
traditionally resisted manipulation. The studies will likely lead to fundamental
advances in the field of catalytic bond activation and the knowledge gained is
anticipated to lead to economic and environmental improvements in the
preparation of complex organic molecules needed for the manufacture of
pharmaceuticals and other valuable products. The broader impacts of the funded
project shall extend to supporting summer internships that will allow for
undergraduate students from local college STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) programs to receive research experiences in the Yi laboratory.
In addition, the award will enable Professor Yi to engage in outreach efforts at
local high schools and colleges that will serve to promote careers in science
and engineering for students with diverse backgrounds and many of whom belonging
to groups underrepresented in the current STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project will focus on the development of new
catalytic methods for organic synthesis based on the activation (rupture) of
carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen bonds. The scope and mechanistic aspects of
such processes as mediated by well-defined ruthenium catalysts with redox-active
catechol ligands will be investigated and their synthetic applications for
reforming biomass-derived organic commodities will be explored. During the
course of these studies, the Yi laboratory will endeavor to develop a series of
multi-component deaminative catalytic coupling methods that fuse carbonyl
compounds with enamines as an efficient strategy for the elaboration of a
variety of heterocyclic systems of relevance for the generation of
pharmaceutically active substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.