* 2153370
* CRII: III: RUI: Multiphysics Modeling of Slope Stability in Post-Wildfire Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Yifei Ma, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2024
* USD 174,924.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Post-wildfire landslides and
debris flows in recent years in the Western U.S. have become more frequent and
led to numerous fatalities and large economic costs. The increase in landslide
susceptibility in post-wildfire environment has been attributed to the increases
in soil moisture and reduction of covering vegetation and root anchoring effect.
The post-wildfire hillslope stabilization and rehabilitation methods are
strongly relying on the knowledge of the engineering behaviors of the wildfire-
burnt soil and the effect of post-wildfire environmental factors (e.g., heating-
cooling and wetting-drying cycles). However, the transitioning mechanisms from
increasing soil movement to catastrophic landslide, along with the engineering
characteristics of wildfire-burnt soil, remain unexplored. There is currently no
readily available approach or framework to evaluate the wildfire-burnt slope
stability or soil properties. This project seeks to serve the national interest
by developing a multiphysics and multiscale numerical framework to analyze the
engineering properties of wildfire-burnt soil under extreme conditions during
and after a wildfire, thus informing our strategies for slope stabilization and
remediation. Expected projectâ€™s outcomes, such as the physics-based models,
multiphysics coupling algorithms, and decision-supporting numerical data, will
promote the fundamental understanding of the multiphase granular flow and
renovate the technology in wildfire-burnt slope stabilization. This project will
also provide a multidisciplinary learning platform through project-based
challenging activities to leverage a greater awareness amongst the engineering
students about the effectiveness of numerical modeling in addressing engineering
challenges related to sustainable and energy viable
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to quantify
the fundamental physics that govern the mechanical and hydrologic soil behaviors
and therefore slope stability in post-wildfire environments. The approach to
achieve the initiative will combine analysis and numerical simulations. Towards
this end, the research team will (1) empirically identify the wildfire impacts
on soil erosion, including reduction of root anchoring effect and subsurface
seepage flow; (2) analytically evaluate the fundamental physics during and after
the wildfire, including the effect of severe temperature gradient and wetting-
drying cycles on the soil fabric; and (3) numerically model the macro-scale
slope stability under various combinations of micro-parameters and environmental
conditions. The stability of wildfire-burnt slopes will, for the first time, be
evaluated through physics-based correlations that are informed by the particle-
scale measurements from the numerical models. The project puts forward an
innovative cross-disciplinary multiphysics research that will advance our
fundamental understanding of multi-phase wildfire-burnt debris flow and promote
insights into the correlations between micro-scale physicochemical forces and
macro-scale mechanical wildfire-burnt soil behaviors. The combination of
empirical, analytical, and numerical analyses provides a powerful range of
interdisciplinary tools for understanding the effect of coupled physical-
thermal-mechanical-hydrologic process on the soil engineering
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.