* 2153746
* CAREER:  Determinantal, hyperbolic, and log-concave polynomials in theory and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Cynthia Vinzant, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 279,813.00

Determinants and polynomials are fundamental objects used regularly by
researchers across the mathematical sciences. The aim of this project is to
better understand some classes of polynomials that, like determinants, are
ubiquitous in mathematics. Hyperbolic polynomials and, even more generally, log-
concave polynomials are real polynomials that share many useful functional
properties of determinants. The study of hyperbolic polynomials originated in
the context of partial differential equations in the 1950's and has been used to
understand problems in convex optimization, operator theory, and combinatorics.
There are still many important open questions about such polynomials, and
because of their prevalence and concrete nature, structural results often have
far-ranging applications. The educational component of this project includes a
series of summer workshops for undergraduate and graduate students providing
them a background in an important and active area of mathematical research as
well as exposure to its applications in other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, close connections between log-concave
polynomials and matroids, which are combinatorial models of independence
structures, were developed. Coefficients of these polynomials give discrete
probability distributions that can be efficiently sampled. This research aims to
use real algebraic and discrete geometry to further develop our understanding of
these classes of polynomials, with a view towards applications in approximation
algorithms, combinatorics, convex optimization, and operator theory. This award
will also support workshops for undergraduate and graduate students to train
them in areas including real algebraic geometry, the geometry of polynomials,
tropical geometry, and their applications outside of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.