* 2153503
* Mid-Scale RI-2 Consortium: Compact X-ray Free-Electron Laser Project (CXFEL)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Samuel Teitelbaum, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 02/29/2028
* USD 31,627,021.00

Modern science questions across many disciplines increasingly focus on
understanding events, changes, and structures at the smallest atomic scales. The
establishment of a Compact X-ray Free Electron Laser (CXFEL) facility at Arizona
State University will enable these advanced studies and fulfill an urgent need
in the broad U.S. research community to directly observe, manipulate, and
control quantum dynamics in complex materials, molecules, and interfaces. These
capabilities will reveal novel biological processes, enable new energy-efficient
technologies, and decode quantum behavior that can drive new computing methods
and novel materials. A diverse population of undergraduate and graduate students
will be engaged in the scientific and project management aspects of this mid-
scale research infrastructure development effort. The combination of
infrastructure training and broad researcher access to transformative new
instruments will serve the NSF mission priority to advance all fields of science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CXFEL is a novel instrument to produce
sub-femtosecond coherent X-rays for analysis of a range of samples. CXFEL builds
on the latest advances in laser technology and electron beam physics to produce
a room-sized X-ray laser (roughly 10m long) with full coherence in time and
space. The CXFEL will uniquely offer full control of the X-ray phase using
electron-beam patterning that allows customized time-structure of the beam,
e.g., attosecond pulses, very narrow linewidths, and extremely precise timing
among multiple pulses with different colors. Multiple end-stations will be
configured to support X-ray spectroscopy, small- and wide-angle X-ray
scattering, coincident attosecond momentum imaging, and time-resolved X-ray
crystallography for studies in biology, quantum materials, atomic and molecular
science, and optical sciences. During construction, sophisticated machine
learning software will be integrated with the hardware to create highly flexible
and efficient ultrafast science instruments that respond to NSFâ€™s Big Ideas,
including Midscale Research Infrastructure, Rules of Life, Quantum Leap, and
Harnessing the Data Revolution. The software tools will help guide acquisition
and analysis of large data sets, speeding up experiments and expanding
capabilities. The primary outcome of the CXFEL project is construction of a
user-facility with instruments and end-stations, including validation of
algorithms and experimental capabilities. The resulting facility will be
accessible to a nationally and internationally distributed group of
investigators from a range of different scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.