* 2153721
* Testing the role of metastable olivine in subduction dynamics and deep earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2025
* USD 393,670.00

Plate tectonics on the Earthâ€™s surface is driven by convective motion of solid
rocks the mantle. Mantle thermal convection is due to density differences
arising from differences in chemical composition, mineral structure (phase), and
temperature. The primary driving force for convection arises from gravitational
sinking of cold, and therefore dense, tectonic plates within subduction zones.
It has previously been proposed that within the sinking tectonic plate (called
subducting slab), the cold temperature can delay the normal changes in mineral
structure that occur with increasing pressure. This causes the plate to be less
dense than expected based on temperature alone. It has also been proposed that
this less dense region - called a metastable olivine wedge - is necessary to
trigger earthquakes that occur at depths of &gt; 400 km. These earthquakes are
referred to as deep earthquakes. However, it is still unknown whether metastable
olivine exists in all slabs where deep earthquakes are observed. There are also
other possible mechanisms that may trigger deep earthquakes. Here, the
researchers use state-of-the-art numerical simulations to test how the presence
of metastable olivine affects subducting-slab dynamics. They integrate in the
modeling various experimental and observational parameters and test different
scenarios. They compare the model outputs with observations in existing
subducting slabs around the Globe. Results of this study directly inform
potential origins of the different slab dynamics and that of deep earthquakes.
The new improved computational codes are shared with a scientific community. The
project has strong implications for the understanding the dynamics of subduction
zones, at the origin of the largest earthquakes threatening human societies. The
project also provides support and training for several graduate and
undergraduate students at University of California -
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the biggest outstanding questions of mantle
dynamics is why some slabs appear to stagnate in or below the transition zone,
while others appear to sink directly into the lower mantle. The answer is
related to phase transitions and trench motion, but it is unclear how these
feedback with other material properties and larger-scale mantle flow to generate
the apparent variability in slab behavior. This project tests the role of a
metastable olivine wedge (MOW) in subduction dynamics and its potential to serve
as a source for deep earthquakes. The team first overcome several
simplifications of previous models through integration of HeFESTo for
equilibrium phase transitions - including density and latent-heat effects, and a
grain-size and water-dependent metastable olivine transformation (MOT) model-
into a fully dynamic subduction simulations with a visco-plastic rheology
including Peierls creep. The simulations run in the software Aspect. 2D models
test how slabs with different ages and rates of subduction (controlled by the
plate boundary shear zone; PBSZ) lead to different subduction dynamics.
Observations of slab morphology together with plate and trench motion are
compared to model output to constrain uncertainty in parameters including PBSZ
viscosity, the gradient of viscosity into the lower mantle, and the water
content of the slab. In addition, the researchers compare the distribution of
the MOW and its overlap with strongly deforming regions of the slab; the aim is
to predict the expected pattern of seismicity. This pattern is compared to
observations and analyzed accounting for the thermal structure of the slab
(e.g., is the pattern indicative of warm versus cold slabs). The team uses 3D
models to quantify the impact of trench width together with along-strike
variation in subducting plate age and PBSZ properties. While these are generic
models, the initial conditions are chosen to represent three different
subduction zones: Japan-Izu-Bonin, Tonga-Kermadec and South America. Using the
observations of MOW extent in Japan, Izu-Bonin, and the Marianas, the team
calibrates the MOT model, and use it to predict the MOW extent for the other two
regions. The model results are compared with observations using along-strike
variations in the slab morphology, plate motions, and seismicity as a further
constraint on model parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.