* 2153606
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Interpretable Fair Machine Learning: Frameworks, Robustness, and Scalable Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Grani Adiwena Hanasusanto, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Machine-learning algorithms are revolutionizing modern decision-making
processes, from deciding job offers, evaluating loans, and determining
university enrollments to proposing medical interventions. However, despite the
recent success of machine-learning algorithms in solving large-scale problems,
serious concerns have been raised that they are not entirely objective and can
inadvertently amplify human biases. The proposed research project addresses this
fundamental shortcoming by developing scalable data-driven methods and
algorithms that generate interpretable policies aiming for provable fairness
guarantees. The project will inform the policy-makers or decision-makers about
possible outcomes and tradeoffs between machine learning outcomes and social
equity/fairness. Furthermore, the research results will provide guidelines to
support policies as well as regulations to promote diversity and fairness in
many relevant domains of application.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research leverages recent advances in discrete and robust optimization, aiming
for solution methodologies that faithfully address the exact learning models
with fairness measures, provide strong out-of-sample fairness guarantees, are
robust against bias and noisy outliers in the dataset, and can be solved
efficiently for large-scale problem instances. More specifically, the proposed
research aims to develop effective new frameworks for fair learning via sub-data
selection that can leverage past efforts and enhance the fairness in the
learning outcomes. Robust solution schemes will be carefully designed to
significantly mitigate the severe overfitting effects of empirical-based methods
and improve out-of-sample performance. Efforts will also be devoted to
addressing algorithmic fairness in multi-stage decision-making and resource-
allocation problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.