* 2153698
* NSF-IITP: START6G -- Sub-THz Augmented Routing and Transmission for 6G
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Robert Heath, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 380,000.00

Terabit-per-second data rates will enable next-generation wireless cellular
applications, including extended reality, holography, haptic feedback, and
wireless cognition. These applications provide, in part, the means to create an
immersive experience for work, education, and healthcare which helps to bridge
the gap in experience between in-person interaction and video telephony.
Achieving the high data rates, though, requires going to higher radio frequency
bands than are currently used for cellular communications. In the last five
years, cellular communication has embraced the lower millimeter wave spectrum,
which refers to radio frequencies from about 25 GHz to 100 GHz. Indeed,
millimeter wave communication has become one of the defining features of fifth
generation cellular communication systems. Going to terabit-per-second data
rates will require higher bandwidths that are available above 100 GHz, in what
is known as the sub-THz band. This collaborative project establishes
fundamentals that will help realize sub-THz communication and drive the future
of wireless technology. It develops new hardware and algorithms that help to
create the required high data rate communication links to serve the applications
highlighted above. For example, it develops technology that helps sub-THz
communication signals better go around obstacles, by instrumenting the
environment with smart reflective surfaces and reconfigurable antenna arrays.
The results of the project will contribute to the development of new wireless
technologies that are beneficial for personal communication, safety applications
and industrial deployments. Industry impact and technology transfer will occur
through frequent communication with the partners of the sixth generation North
Carolina program. The project will lead to more undergraduate and graduate
students with expertise on new and important technologies for wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sub-THz Augmented Routing and Transmission
for 6G is a collaboration among experts in wireless communications at North
Carolina State University (NC State) and Yonsei University (YSU). It addresses
the design of reflective surfaces and reconfigurable arrays for multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) communication at sub-THz frequencies. It devises methods
for configuring the beams formed or reflected from those arrays in a way that
routes around obstacles. It creates algorithms that exploit new levels of
reconfigurability in the arrays to obtain higher throughput and more robust
communications. Finally, it results in the creation of joint real-time hardware
(H/W) and software (S/W) testbeds for sub-THz communications. The uniqueness of
this project lies in the multi-domain approach for improving sub-THz
communications. The intellectual merit will occur in several directions. (a)
Intelligent reflective surfaces constructed from state-of-the-art meta-materials
/ meta-devices. (b) Reconfigurable antenna arrays with adaptable structures that
are mechanically and electrically controlled. (c) Directional-beam-based initial
access and beam routing algorithms that leverage channel map information. (d)
Models of reconfigurable antennas arrays and performance limits of those arrays.
(e) Algorithms that leverage true time delays to reconfigure those arrays to
support high bandwidths. (f) A suite of evaluation scenarios that test the
developed hardware and algorithms. The immediate impact will be to identify the
most relevant approaches for enabling large arrays for communication and
reflective applications, as well as algorithms that leverage those arrays to
enhance communication at sub-THz frequencies. The long-term impact will be in
the development and realization of sub-THz communication as part of 6G wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.