* 2153819
* SBIR Phase II:  Passive Cooling Materials for Transparent Applications in Refrigerated Trucking and Solar
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Romy Fain, HEAT INVERSE, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to produce
and validate the companyâ€™s passive cooling thin films to meet specific market
requirements such as for refrigerated trailer, inverter, and solar photovoltaic
(PV) applications. The product platform may meet the needs of myriad
applications and use cases through the development and validation of both
transparent and highly reflective/opaque films. The proposed effort may advance
the goal of improving cooling technologies by enabling customers in the
refrigerated trucking, solar energy, home cooling, and other markets to reduce
their greenhouse gas emissions while reducing costs. Examining the annualized
refrigerated trucking industry alone, which is valued at $1 billion globally,
could reduce greenhouse gas emissions by more than 15 million metric tons of
carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent per year in the U.S.. In addition, application
to solar inverters and PV cells may increase the efficiency of renewable power
generation. These uses collectively serve to improve the sustainability of
multiple industries, with a long-term impact of offsetting the use of fossil
fuels and the negative environmental, societal, and health effects tied to them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is based on
exploitation of selective photonic emitters that allow certain wavelengths of
light to be emitted above the atmosphere, allowing passive cooling of more than
12.5 degrees C (100 W/m2), with zero energy input and no waste heat generation.
Given that the passive cooling is inherent in the microstructure of the film and
there is no need for electrical continuity, the product may provide seamless
cooling capabilities, even in the unlikely event of mechanical failure of the
film. Optimization of the thin films for application-specific use requires the
successful completion of three objectives, which are the focus of the Phase II
project: 1) investigation of fabrication techniques driving improved film
performance compatible with the needs of key market applications, 2) development
of application-specific installation methods while maintaining high performance
requirements, and 3) development of improved manufacturing processes for
production scale-up. Successful accomplishment of these objectives will prime
the technology for market entry in a variety of applications, whether new or
retrofitted. From a technical perspective, the research and development
activities may advance the knowledge of passive radiative cooling systems and
how they may be applied to support sustainable innovations in temperature
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.