* 2153184
* CRII: RI: Analysis and Applications of Multi-Level Games
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Mithun Chakraborty, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With artificial intelligence (AI)
becoming progressively more competent and ubiquitous, an AI entity is more
likely to find itself operating in a complex, dynamic environment along with
other intelligent entities all with different goals and disparate information or
beliefs about their environment and each other. Examples include bidders in an
online ad auction, algorithmic trading agents in a financial market,
(cyber)attackers and defenders in a network, a hierarchy of policymakers
formulating a decentralized epidemic response plan in a decentralized manner,
and so on. As such, game theory, the systematic study of such multi-agent
strategic interactions (or, games as they are called), is becoming increasingly
fundamental to AI research and practice. Empirical game-theoretic analysis
(EGTA) is a principled framework for (approximately) reasoning about games that
are beyond the scope of traditional, analytical game-theoretic methods either
because the games are too complex or because obtaining information about
possible plays of the game is too expensive. This project seeks to make
fundamental methodological improvements to the EGTA framework by constructing
finer- grained models (i.e., more accurate approximations) of the game under
consideration than those prevalent in the state of the
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the aim of the project is to adapt EGTA
to multi-level game model forms: strategic interactions that can be represented
in the form of a directed, rooted tree. Extensive-form games (EFGs) are a
classic example of this class of games that capture temporal patterns in agent
activity, information revelation, and possible stochastic events (acts of
Nature). Current EGTA practice abstracts all such temporal patterns away in a
simulator (e.g., an agent-based model) that is queried to obtain payoff data for
strategy combinations over players but induces a coarser game model that is
essentially normal-form and does not reflect such patterns. This project will
take the next step in EGTA design by explicitly incorporating features of the
underlying game tree into the empirical game model itself and tackling the
resulting conceptual and computational design challenges such as striking a
balance between model granularity (which leads to better approximation) and per-
iteration computational burden. The second phase of the project will seek to
transfer knowledge gained from development of EGTA for EFGs to similar
treatments of other tree-based game model forms. Advances in this project can
significantly improve our understanding of systems that comprise interacting AI
agents employing highly sophisticated strategies (such as deep reinforcement
learning algorithms), and in turn inform robust design of such
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.