* 2153482
* CRII: SaTC: A Framework to Defend Against Sockpuppet Connection Requests in Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Sajedul Talukder, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2024
* USD 157,888.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Links between people in Online
Social Networks (OSNs) have been used by attackers to access private and
sensitive user data, post false or abusive information on the timelines and news
feeds of victims, and scam and influence the perceptions of victims. The massive
growth of social media usage has incentivized perpetrators to connect users
through fake "sockpuppet" accounts, an attack that is often successful due to
the lack of adequate verification of declared information. The goal of this
project is to significantly expand the understanding of identity deception and
abuse in online social networks, and design and build intervention mechanisms to
mitigate these types of attacks. The project team will work with social media
users to create a digital framework that can assess users' risk of falling
victim to sockpuppet attacks, educate them about these attacks, and help them
carefully examine connection invites and avoid accepting invitations from
suspicious accounts. This goal is to develop a new generation of sockpuppet
prevention solutions that have the potential to help protect millions of
vulnerable OSN users from sexual predators, online fraudsters, scammers,
adversaries, or malicious hackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build
a digital framework rooted in cognitive psychology, UX research, and machine
learning methods to defend against sockpuppet connection requests in online
social networks. In a first research thrust, the researchers will develop survey
instruments and user studies to investigate pending connection decisions,
motivations, and behaviors in OSNs. The findings from this research thrust will
be utilized to develop the next thrust, where the researchers will implement a
"spam connection" folder through a pending connection decision classifier.
Finally, the researchers will ievelop a novel Online Social Network Pending
Connection Processing Interface .This will be designed as a layer on top of
existing social networks that can be used to administer and assess educational
and interface interventions around sockpuppets in the context of real social
networks, while allowing the research team to address ethical and legal
considerations of working with sockpuppet connections and people's private data.
Together, this work will both enhance the understanding of just-in-time
motivations and behaviors related to social network risks and help sociologists
gain deeper insights from underexplored social and spatial dimensions provided
by social networks to test relevant theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.