* 2153329
* CRII: III: Advance mathematical theorems for Extreme Value and Risk Measure in Robust Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Xing Wang, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 167,923.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk is ubiquitous in information
systems. It occurs in areas from hardware/software failure, cyber-attack, human
error to fraud. Risk is usually associated with extreme scenarios (also called
long tail events) that are of a low probability of happening, but, if once they
happen, are tied to huge losses. Therefore, risk management is very critical to
ensure robust information system and intelligence. This project will develop
risk measurement for high-dimensional (HD) data with long tails. The project
overcomes challenges caused by the lack of data on the tail, the dimensionality
in risk measurement and parameter estimation, and the underdeveloped
mathematical properties of HD risk measures. The investigator seeks to advance
mathematical risk measures and contribute to research and education that enable
resilient risk management in computing-driven decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal, this project will fill the
knowledge gaps by advancing mathematical theorems and scientific methods for
high-dimensional risk measures in data-intensive systems. The research
activities include: (i) developing new high-dimensional risk measures, risk
sharing, and risk aggregation methods for big data with heavy tails by
integrating Copula, extreme value theory, and statistical inferences; (ii)
understanding in-depth mathematical properties of risk measures and exploring
new methods of statistical inference with theoretical guarantees (e.g.,
asymptotic property, convergence) for high-dimensional risk measures; (iii)
expanding the dependence investigation between heavy-tailed losses, especially
under extreme conditions, and proposing the optimal decision-making strategy
given specific risk measures. If successful, this project will provide new
scientific insights and mathematical theorems/tools for intelligent systems'
risk quantification and risk management. It can improve the system safety,
stability, and resilience, and increase U.S. competitiveness in risk management
and optimal decision making. Broader impacts will be promoted by developing new
teaching modules, advancing computing-oriented math education, and improving
diversity and inclusion in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.