* 2153843
* Wildlife Neighbors: Facilitated Ecological Research with Minority Youth via Camera Surveys in Urban Parks
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nyeema Harris, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2023
* USD 253,216.00

Urban environments are remarkable natural laboratories to study ecology and
speciation. These learning ecosystems are ecologically diverse and potentially
more accessible for urban youth and their families. Unfortunately, disparities
in STEM access continue to persist. Transportation, social and financial
barriers, and a lack of awareness of STEM opportunities are a few of the
inequities that significantly limit participation in STEM programs among urban
youth, especially from underrepresented groups. Perceptions of who can
meaningfully engage in scientific research remain demographically skewed to
affluent, aged, and non-minoritized individuals. In an effort to address these
challenges, this pilot study will investigate the feasibility of using remote
cameras to survey local, urban wildlife to promote inclusive practices and youth
engagement in STEM. A co-created curriculum will be employed, bringing urban
ecologists and Detroit youth (6th-8th grade) together to participate in wildlife
field experiences to garner and analyze data collected from cameras deployed
through the city. It is the unique coupling of the camera surveys with authentic
place-based, culturally relevant ecological research that will facilitate the
innovative, experiential learning experiences. This pilot study will advance the
understanding of the extent to which various facilitation methods and
participation in out-of-school time programs like the Wildlife Neighbors program
impact youth. From a broader impacts' perspective, this work may yield positive
environmental literacy outcomes and prove applicable for other urban youth in
the country. The research findings would lay the foundation for future research
and add novel approaches to the NSF portfolio on urban, out-of-school time
environmental education programs for middle school youth using camera surveys to
promote inclusivity, engagement in scientific field research, and increase
youths' interest in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a strategic partnership
between the Applied Wildlife Ecology Lab in the School of the Environment at
Yale University and the Detroit Zoological Society, this pilot will examine the
effects of experiential learning through wildlife monitoring in twenty-four
Detroit parks on strengthening four aspects of youth's environmental literacy:
knowledge of ecology, competencies as researchers, empathy for wildlife, and
sense of place. Youth will self-select into one of four facilitation models,
each varying in intensity (summer experience, afterschool club) and mode (in-
person, remote). Using camera surveys deployed in Detroit parks, youth will be
immersed in ecological research, engaging them in the entire scientific process:
observation, inquiry, data collection, fieldwork, data analysis and
storytelling. Youth pre- and post-surveys, daily reflections on program
activities, and parent/guardian questionnaires will assess impacts and
experiences of the Wildlife Neighbors facilitation models and program more
broadly. The research questions will explore the extent to which participation
in Wildlife Neighbors: (a) differs across facilitation intensity and mode, and
(b) strengthens environmental literacy among middle school urban youth when
engaged in a co-created out-of-school time experiential program using remote
cameras to survey local wildlife. Over the two-year pilot duration,
approximately 100 youth and their families will participate in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot study is funded by the NSF Advancing Informal
STEM Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.