* 2153784
* Geophysical clues about oceanic plateau formation from magnetic anomalies and machine learning
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* William Sager, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 390,602.00

The fundamental science problem is understanding the origin of oceanic plateaus.
Oceanic plateaus are massive underwater volcanoes resulting from voluminous
volcanic eruptions. They represent about 5% of oceanic crust and can easily
cover areas as large as Alaska and reach thickness of tens of kilometers. The
formation of oceanic plateaus coincides with significant paleoclimate change and
mass extinction. Therefore, studying oceanic plateaus is an important scientific
pursuit which will advance our understanding of Earth’s dynamic systems and,
possibly, past climate changes. However, the formation and internal structures
of the oceanic plateaus are poorly understood because they are located
kilometers underwater and thousands of kilometers away from land. The project
will focus on advancing our understanding of the formation and structure of
oceanic plateaus using marine magnetic data, and machine learning. The main
hypothesis is that oceanic plateaus formed near spreading ridges and are
dominated by linear magnetic anomalies, and therefore, linear volcanism. To test
this hypothesis, the team will compare the spatial patterns of marine magnetic
anomalies from three selected oceanic plateaus with good magnetic data coverage
against those from two mid-ocean ridges, namely, the East Pacific Rise and the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Instead of relying on visual inspection of magnetic
anomalies, the team will implement three proven machine learning methods to help
quantitatively compare the spatial patterns of the magnetic anomalies from the
five regions. The project will help to accelerate new discoveries based on
magnetic data and will help to retain and attract young talent to the area of
magnetics, a proven method in critical mineral and planetary exploration. In
addition, the project activities will create educational and training
opportunities for students from underrepresented groups and help to develop
America’s artificial intelligence workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing
view of oceanic plateaus is that they are centralized shield volcanoes formed by
massive volcanism onto already existing oceanic crust. However, recent research
proposed that Tamu and Ori Massifs formed by linear volcanism, a process similar
to seafloor spreading volcanism. This project will provide new evidence to
understand whether either of these two theories is valid or whether oceanic
plateaus formed in a hybrid manner (i.e., both are true to an extent). In
addition to investigating whether magnetic anomalies are linear, the research
will give new clues about the geologic structure of oceanic plateaus, which is
poorly known. An important aspect of the study is the application of machine
learning to the analysis of marine magnetic anomalies over oceanic plateaus,
which has not been attempted even though machine learning has achieved great
success in many other areas including geoscience. Therefore, the proposed
research will also advance our understanding of how machine learning, a new yet
rapidly growing interest in the geoscience community, generates new knowledge
when combined with marine magnetic data and applied to oceanic plateaus. The
research will also help understand the advantages and limitations of the machine
learning methods when applied to marine magnetic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.