* 2153369
* CRII: Interpretable Influence Propagating and Blocking on Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Zhiqian Chen, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,004.00

As networks including virtual (e.g., social networks) and physically grounded
(e.g., transportation networks) increase in complexity, the need to
understanding the spread of network influence is crucial. Influence in networks
has been the subject of increasing attention among researchers due to its far-
reaching social and commercial implications. For instance, the objective of
information propagation or viral marketing is to identify the most prominent
trend setters capable of influencing vast numbers of others, while the primary
objective of epidemiology is to ascertain who is most likely to spread a
disease, which aids in the development of vaccine and quarantine regulations.
This project will develop novel tools to analyze how the spreading network's
structure and initial state maximize the influence flow, and then investigate
policy options for controlling the flows. The primary innovation of this project
will be its ability to learn the complex relationship between flows and the
geometric structure of graphs and extract understandable rules for decision-
makers. The main challenge is the huge number of combinations of variables
combined across structures and attributes to alter influence flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advocates a unique paradigm for learning
interpretable representations of influence flow over graphs, with a particular
emphasis on disentangling the combinatorial limitations imposed by both the
graph's geometric structure and seed selection. This research aims at developing
a new framework that boosts accuracy and interpretability while decoupling the
influence process. The difficulty of developing interpretable models is
compounded by the specific characteristics of influence modeling, which include
complex tangled topological links, insufficient data, and confluence effects.
The investigator will use context-aware constraints and complementing
observations to narrow the search and determine the effect source. The
investigator will perform an in-depth assessment of effective and efficient
control policies to improve influence propagation or blocking. This project will
address the following three fundamental research issues: learning expository
topological dependence of influence; Learning the influence cascade and the
sources; and learning to control the influence flows. The proposed model will
determine the optimal seeds that minimize future influence based on the
currently influenced region, which requires modeling the interaction of numerous
graph-dependent elements. According to thermodynamics' second law, the flow rate
is determined by the energy levels within the system, which motivates us to
examine graph entropy notions further to provide a more robust assessment of
them. The investigator will employ global sensitivity analysis and perturbation
matrix theory to choose the smallest yet most critical and robust
set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.