* 2153019
* Flexible Log-Likelihood Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 04/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Scientific models often make poor predictions of their outcomes due to underfit
or overfit. Just like the radio of an old car has only two adjustable dials for
frequency and volume, probability distributions, like the bell-shaped normal
distribution, that are used in scientific models typically only have one or two
adjustable dials. Underfit occurs when no combination of the dials ever produces
a good signal, while overfit occurs when the dials produce an extremely good
signal in particular circumstances that becomes poor in slightly different
circumstances, such as the location of the car or a new group of observations in
a scientistâ€™s data set. Scientists should be able to add as many adjustable
dials to their models as they need to avoid underfitting the data but also need
the capability to avoid overfitting when simultaneously adjusting more dials.
Doing so will promote the progress of science by allowing scientists to make
decent predictions of their outcomes that readily generalize when circumstances
change moderately. Since scientists in all fields face these ubiquitous
problems, providing software to help combat them will have a broad
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Those metaphorical dials are the parameters in the
likelihood function used by scientists when utilizing maximum likelihood or
Bayesian estimation techniques. Almost all likelihood functions are taken from
the exponential family of probability distributions and have only one or two
unknown parameters. In the past few years, a new continuous probability
distribution from outside the exponential family has been derived where
scientists can specify any fixed number of parameters, but this metalog(istic)
distribution is difficult to use as a likelihood function because its density
lacks an explicit expression. Moreover, while there is a convex set of
parameters that produce a valid probability distribution, some combinations of
parameters do not, and it is presumably impossible to characterize the
admissible set explicitly. Nevertheless, it is quite possible to evaluate a
metalog likelihood function numerically while imposing the required constraints
on the unknown parameters, which would allow it to be utilized by scientists in
many situations. The investigators will implement the metalog likelihood
function in the free and open-source software known as Stan, whose algorithms
have become the workhorse for Bayesian analysis in many scientific fields. The
Bayesian approach also would permit a principled way to choose a model with the
appropriate number of parameters in the likelihood in order to avoid overfitting
future data. The project will also further advance interdisciplinary
professional development of the next generation of researchers in statistical,
data science, and other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.