* 2153387
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Collaborative Research: Advanced Ion Channel Modeling and Computational Tools with Application to Voltage-Dependent Anion Channel and Mitochondrial Model Development
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ranjan Dash, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,997.00

This project studies the role of the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC) on
the outer mitochondrial membrane in regulating key mitochondrial functions. The
goal is to understand how VDAC electrostatics and kinetics alter species
transport across the outer mitochondrial membrane, and how that in turn impacts
key mitochondrial functions. The major outcomes of this project will be state-
of-the-art mathematical models, numerical algorithms, and software tools. The
computer simulations will provide a basis for identifying potential therapeutic
targets for cardiovascular and other diseases. The numerical algorithms will be
important contributions to the fields of biophysics, biochemistry, computational
biology, and biomedical engineering. The ion channel modeling and numerical
algorithms can be applied to other physical and engineering systems that involve
species transport, multiple physical domains, and complicated interfaces. The
resulting software tools can be used for many other biomedical and
bioengineering applications. This project will also provide multidisciplinary
education and research opportunities to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in Southeast Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Voltage-dependent anion
channel (VDAC) is the most abundant protein on the outer mitochondrial membrane
(OMM) and is the main conduit for simultaneous transport of ionic species (ions
and metabolites) into and out of a mitochondrion. Alteration of species
transport across OMM via VDAC can impact mitochondrial functions leading to
disease pathologies. However, current mitochondrial models do not account for
species transport across OMM via VDAC, and none of the current ion channel
models work for VDAC on OMM in a mixture of many ionic species of different ion
sizes. This project will address these important issues via an integrative
approach combining state-of-the-art mathematical modeling and computational
methodologies to study VDAC and mitochondrial functions. The project aims to
develop a nonlocal Poisson-Nernst-Planck-Fermi (NPNPF) ion channel model that
will work for VDAC in a mixture of many ionic species with distinct ion sizes.
One major aim is to develop effective NPNPF finite element solvers (algorithms
and software programs) and numerical schemes for computing ion channel kinetics
(Gibbs free energy, membrane potential, electrochemical potential, electric
currents, and transport fluxes). The other major aim is to apply the resulting
ion channel kinetics to the development of a novel integrated VDAC-mitochondrial
model to yield an improved model that reflects the effects of ion sizes, atomic
charges, VDAC molecular structures, and nonlocal dielectric properties. Both
NPNPF and VDAC-mitochondrial models will be validated by biochemical kinetic
data. The VDAC-mitochondrial model will be the first that can elucidate the
underlying molecular mechanisms that link microscopic VDAC electrostatics and
macroscopic VDAC kinetics to mitochondrial function. The results are expected to
transform understanding of how VDAC electrostatics and kinetics contribute to
the pathogenesis of mitochondriopathic diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.