* 2153783
* Excellence in Research: The Role of Bovine Sperm Acrosome in Fertilization
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Subir Nagdas, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 362,150.00

This project will elucidate the role of certain proteins in the activation of
the acrosome in cows. The acrosome is a small compartment in sperm cells that
releases enzymes to allow the sperm to penetrate the protective layer
surrounding the egg. The PI has characterized two novel proteins in the
acrosome, and will characterize the function and ability of these proteins to
bind to calcium and to bind to other acrosomal proteins to form a complex that
activate the acrosome just prior to fertilization. This project will provide
increased understanding of fundamental aspects of mammalian fertilization, as
well as contributing to improved strategies for maintaining and activating
stored spermatozoa and improving fertilizing capacity of stored sperm for needs
of agriculture, zoological preservation, and reproductive health. The projects
will also increase opportunities for undergraduates and high school students at
this HBCU to learn the ethics of science and receive hands-on experience/skills
with modern biochemical and cell biological techniques. Most of the PI's
previous lab students have since matriculated into various graduate and
professional programs. The results of this project will thereby increase the
pool of future Ph.D. scientists from underrepresented groups, as well as
facilitate high school students' admission into research-intensive schools for
baccalaureate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calcium-dependent acrosome
reaction is a key control point in mammalian fertilization, but numerous
unresolved signaling events and biochemical mechanisms that promote membrane
fusion of the acrosome to the sperm plasma membrane remain poorly understand.
The goal of this project is to identify the biochemical mechanisms that regulate
the role of acrosomal proteins in membrane fusion and the release of hydrolases
during the acrosome reaction of bovine sperm. The PI’s work has characterized a
32kDa acrosomal polypeptide (OMC32) essential for membrane fusion that is
present in the bovine sperm acrosome. The project here will examine the
hypothesis that OMC32 interacts with other acrosomal proteins to regulate
release of hydrolases and other acrosomal proteins essential to completing the
acrosome regulation, and whether OMC32 is an essential target of signal
transduction elements and regulatory proteins that mediate the acrosome
reaction. In a second aim, the PI and students will examine a novel 64kDa
calcium-binding protein in the outer acrosomal membrane. Here, the project will
test the hypothesis that this calcium-binding protein regulates fusion between
the acrosomal membrane and the sperm plasma membrane. Besides extensive training
of high school and undergraduate students in research as a career, this project
will contribute to greater understanding of sperm membrane fusion, acrosome
integrity and function, and mammalian fertilization. The results may also
contribute to improved strategies for maintaining acrosomal integrity in stored
spermatozoa, and improving the fertilizing capacity of mammalian spermatozoa,
with potential benefits of maintaining stock for the cattle industry, for
endangered mammal species, as well as for human reproductive
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.