* 2153942
* BERING STRAIT 2022-2026: Quantifying status and change in Pacific-to-Arctic physical/biogeochemical oceanic fluxes, a central part of the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Rebecca Woodgate, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,373,874.00

The ~50m deep, 85km wide Bering Strait is the only connection between the
Pacific and Arctic Oceans. The generally northward flow through the strait is a
key source of oceanic heat, freshwater, and nutrients for the Arctic,
influencing the upper ~200m of roughly half of the Arctic Ocean. This provides
both a stratified upper ocean layer, which protects sea-ice from deeper and
warmer Atlantic origin waters, and a major source of nutrients which fuel Arctic
ecosystems. Oceanic heat carried northward through the strait acts as a trigger
for western Arctic sea-ice melt and is the best predictor of sea-ice retreat
date in the Chukchi Sea, the highly productive, shallow sea immediately north of
the strait. The freshness of the flow may influence ocean circulation as far
away as the Atlantic Ocean. To understand and quantify how the climate and
ecosystems of the Arctic Ocean and the Alaskan Arctic seas are changing, and how
those changes relate to the rest of the globe, observations are needed to
quantify the changing properties of the flow through the Bering Strait. Year-
round oceanographic measurements in the strait (from moorings, i.e., instruments
moored to the sea-floor) started in 1990 and show the flow is increasing in
strength and temperature, and freshening dramatically in winter. These changes
are believed to have significant effects on the Arctic and beyond. Additionally,
satellite studies, which are indicating large increases at the base of the
Arctic food chain, suggest an increased nutrient flux from the Pacific Ocean
through the strait. However, to date, no year-round or interannual measurements
of nutrient flow through the Bering Strait exist to test this idea. Since
moorings are still the only viable way of measuring seasonal and interannual
change in the Bering Strait, this project supports: four years of moorings,
measuring physical properties such as flow, temperature, salinity, sea-ice;
biogeochemical properties including nutrient content and measures of biological
activity; and accompanying analysis and outreach efforts. The latter include
making data products and results available to science, public, and industry
communities as well as bringing Bering Strait and Arctic science to the general
public, university students, and schools, including Bering Strait communities
and public and Hispanic/Latino-dominated schools in Seattle
WA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From September 2022 to September 2026, three year-round
moorings will be deployed in the US waters of the Bering Strait region,
supported by annual ship-based servicing, and accompanying hydrographic surveys
in the Bering Strait and southern Chukchi Sea. Hourly mooring measurements will
be used to compute water properties, and fluxes of heat, freshwater, and nitrate
into the Arctic. These in situ measurements will be combined with satellite
data, numerical weather prediction model data, and verified Arctic model results
to investigate causes of change in the throughflow, and to understand and
quantify transformations in the Chukchi Sea, thus giving a better estimation of
the forcings of the Bering Strait throughflow directly on the Arctic Ocean. The
project aims to obtain the Bering Straitâ€™s first year-round measurements of
nitrate, the key limiting nutrient of the region, and, by extending the longest
in situ physical instrument record from the Arctic Ocean, give a multidecadal
measure of change in this key Arctic gateway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.