* 2153821
* A Scalable Configurable Acoustic Processor for Emerging Audio Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Flynn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,673.00

Very large acoustic transducer arrays will transform how we sense, generate, and
manipulate sound. However, existing acoustic processing systems are not able to
support large arrays. This project tackles the challenges of scale, time
accuracy, latency and synchronization in large acoustic arrays. The research of
this project will free acoustic arrays from the electronic performance
bottlenecks that impede large-scale operation. The new audio technologies
involving large-scale electro-acoustic systems promise transformative acoustic
applications and will have the potential to transform biology and medicine
through contactless manipulation and surgery. For example, high-resolution
acoustic holography promises contactless manipulation of biological specimens,
non-invasive surgery, and new modes for augmented reality. By providing detailed
soundscapes, large sensitive arrays allow new levels of environmental and
industrial monitoring. For example, high precision acoustic imaging can locate
wildlife, pinpoint machine faults, and identify noise from wind turbines. In
addition, active metamaterials will enable the construction and control of
soundscapes. These materials can manage the sound environment in weight-
sensitive aerospace applications and provide health benefits by targeting the
sound debris that litters urban environments. For example, large active
metamaterial surfaces can quieten aircraft cabins or even enable acoustic
invisibility. The project will introduce sound processing in the undergraduate
circuits curriculum and use sounds, instead of optics and electromagnetics, to
provide an intuitive understanding of challenging applied physics concepts such
as holography and metamaterials. This research will provide rewarding and
meaningful research opportunities for undergraduate and high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will tackle scale, time, and signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) challenges of emerging acoustic applications and transform audio
processing with new mixed-signal circuit techniques that deliver unprecedented
spatial resolution, temporal resolution, and dynamic range for emerging acoustic
applications. The scale, which corresponds to the number of transducers,
ultimately determines the resolution and the SNR. Furthermore, practical
applications such as acoustic metamaterials work best on a large scale. Another
challenge for large arrays is temporal accuracy through phase control and
precise time synchronization. The research will investigate new techniques to
address the critical scale, time resolution, and latency problems that impede
large-scale acoustic holography, acoustic imaging, and active acoustic
metamaterials. In addition, the research will address issues of synchronization
and distributed processing for large-scale arrayed systems. The new techniques
will enable large-scale high-fidelity systems with unprecedented time accuracy,
time control, and low latency. The project will use testbed systems to showcase
the potential of the new techniques. Finally, the research will explore the
potential tradeoffs of configurable mixed-signal processing of
bitstream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.