* 2153707
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Flood Resilience Program - Integrated research experiences to foster understanding on how to increase resilience in flood-prone communities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Whalin, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,956.00

Impacts from flooding continue to be the most frequent, disruptive, and costly
natural hazard worldwide. These impacts continue to mount, especially in rapidly
developing coastal areas most influenced by the adverse effects of climate
change. A new generation of graduates is needed that have the training and
skillsets to address this problem that has already been causing catastrophic
episodes of flooding and its associated hardship every year in the United States
alone. The International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) Flood
Resilience Program (FRP) between the U.S. and the Netherlands will fill this
critical need by implementing a place-based integrative research and educational
program in science and engineering to help produce a diverse generation of
researchers and practitioners equipped to solve complex problems related to
flood risk reduction in the U.S. and around the world. Each year of the program,
eight U.S. students (4 undergrad and 4 grad) will engage in an immersive, six-
week problem-and place-based research experience in the Netherlands, a world
leader in flood risk mitigation and management. Existing partnerships
established among multiple institutions, researchers, and students in both
countries will be leveraged to provide students with international research
experiences under the guidance of faculty and researchers from multiple
disciplines in both countries. Key U.S. partners include Texas A&amp;M
University at Galveston (TAMUG) and College Station (TAMU) campuses, Jackson
State University (JSU), and University of Puerto Rico Mayagüez (UPRM). Dutch
partners include Delft University of Technology (main host), Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam and Rijkswaterstaat. Students will conduct research projects covering
both surge-based and precipitation-driven flood problems in both urban and
coastal areas. The effectiveness of structural and non-structural strategies
will be investigated, leading to a better understanding of when to pursue
strategies for mitigating adverse impacts from flood events. U.S. researchers
and students will be able to leverage Dutch data, methods, and facilities
associated with flood management. The IRES FRP will prepare the next generation
of engineers and scientists that will have to tackle the societal problem of
widespread flooding in an innovative fashion. Furthermore, the program will
create quantitative data on specific educational techniques and methods to
improve student learning outcomes as part of place-based research
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problem-and place-based case studies involving
the Houston-Galveston and Rotterdam-The Hague Metropolitan areas, respectively,
will integrate researchers and faculty with expertise in engineering
(TAMU/JSU/UPRM/TUD), coastal structures (TUD/RWS), architecture (TUD), economics
(VU) and planning (TAMUG) to guide student projects addressing the following
overarching research questions: 1) what are the underlying characteristics of
physical flood resilience and the differences between the two countries; 2) why
are urban communities and the associated built environment so vulnerable to
flood impacts; and 3) which mitigation techniques, both structural and non-
structural are being implemented in the Netherlands and what can be applied in
the U.S.? Students will select research projects covering both surge-based and
precipitation-driven flood problems. The effectiveness of both structural and
non-structural strategies will be investigated, leading to a better
understanding of when to pursue avoidance or resistance strategies for
mitigating adverse impacts from flood events. U.S. researchers and students will
be able to leverage Dutch data, methods, facilities, and expertise, associated
with flood management. The primary goal of the program will be to provide
participating students with interdisciplinary problem- and place-based
international research experiences by creating “authentic transformative
learning environments”. Participating students will learn “how to conduct
research” in general and “how to approach a problem through different
disciplinary lenses.” The program will prepare the next generation of engineers
and scientists in academia and practice that will have to tackle the societal
problem of flooding in an innovative fashion. Furthermore, the program will
create quantitative data on specific educational techniques and methods to
improve student learning outcomes as part of place-based research settings.
These findings will lead to improved future international research exchange
programs and be incorporated into teaching strategies at all partner
institutions. Emphasis will be placed on actively recruiting students from
underrepresented groups to participate in the program at all collaborating
institutions. Broad representation across society is particularly important for
effective strategies to flood-related problems since the impacts of floods are
disproportionate to vulnerable populations and flood-related lived experiences
of underrepresented groups may provide the spark to pursue related higher STEM
education. PIs at TAMU, UPRM and JSU, a designated HBCU, have experience with
recruitment of underrepresented groups that will be brought to bear for this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.