* 2153249
* CRII: HCC: 3D Hand &amp; Full-Body Pose Estimation in Telehealth for Children with Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Kevin Desai, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,368.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to provide efficient full-body interaction in virtual reality systems
that do not use head-mounted displays. This project aims to create accurate and
real-time 3D hand and body pose estimation, in the highly significant
application area of children with autism. A novel synthetic hand data generation
framework will generate 3D hand poses with increased diversity in terms of hand
distance from camera, hand size, camera viewpoint, occlusion, background, and
skin color. The outcome will be a novel 3D synthetic hand dataset consisting of
realistic and kinematically accurate hand models with articulated poses that
will advance current and future research endeavors in 3D hand pose estimation
research. The project will advance the state-of-the-art in 3D body pose
estimation for humans present further away from the camera at room-scale
distances. The synthetic dataset, algorithms, and programming libraries will be
made publicly available for wide-spread adoption, thereby advancing pose
estimation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broad societal
impact because it will improve the usability and interaction in human centered
telehealth applications, initially helping with the applied behavior analysis
for children with autism. Existing systems that employ head-mounted displays or
wearable sensors for tracking the user's hand and body movements are not
suitable for children with autism, and have disadvantages in many other
application areas. Therefore, by enabling 3D hand and full-body pose estimation,
this project will advance a plethora of 3D immersive applications such as
education, virtual STEM laboratories, tele-rehabilitation, tele-operation,
military training, entertainment, and communication. The need for real-time,
remote and interactive human motion sensing exists now more than ever,
considering the increase in virtual activities because of the recent
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.