* 2153668
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Undergraduate Interdisciplinary Research in Spain on Smart Connected Systems (UIRiSCS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xin Jiang, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 149,994.00

Undergraduate interdisciplinary research in Spain on Smart Connected Systems
will support six US undergraduate students per year and provide them the
opportunity to conduct mentored research at the University of Zaragoza (UZ) in
Spain. In this three-year project, a total of eighteen students will be selected
from Manhattan College (MC) and The City University of New York, College of
Staten Island (CUNY/CSI). The overarching objective of this multicultural,
interdisciplinary project is to provide the next generation of American
engineers and scientists with a global perspective on collaboration, unique
hands-on educational opportunities in the field of smart connected systems
through international experiences thus enhancing future US global
competitiveness, providing professional training and advancing and promoting
science. To meet this objective, each year a six-student cohort will: 1)
participate in a pre-travel training workshop with coordinated efforts from MC
and CUNY/CSI; 2) spend 8 weeks in the summer working on the projects with
professors from UZ; 3) engage in follow-up collaborative projects in areas of
smart connected systems upon return to their home institutions. The core of the
broader impacts is to increase the number of students who are under-represented
in Science Technology Engineering and Math (STEM) and to participate in
international research which is part of the evolving global economy. The effort
will also leverage CSI’s Spanish-serving institution designation as well as
CUNY’s unique status as the nation’s largest public university with a large
under-represented minority student population to expose those students to the
exciting undergraduate research opportunities that the involved institutions
offer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the development of increasingly sophisticated
intelligence technologies, we are entering an era of a smart connected world
with Smart Connected Systems (SCS), which allows intelligent decision-making
using data sources from both physical objects and virtual components to
optimized efficiency, comfort, safety, and security. The unifying research theme
of SCS includes sub-topics in sensors, optical networks, hybrid wired-wireless
networks, machine learning, nature language processing, computer vision, image
processing, and cybersecurity. Sample technical innovations that students will
conduct in Spain include: 1) Analysis of Plastic Optical Fiber prospects as
backbone for Smart Home Area Networks; 2) Development of smart home customized
applications using natural language processing and speech recognition. The
proposed international collaboration will push the frontiers of knowledge and
methodological approaches to build innovative, robust, and scalable smart
connected systems and leverage on an over 10-year existing collaboration between
UZ and the US institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.