* 2153510
* CRII: CPS: Cooperative Neuro-Inspired Actor Critic Model for Anomaly Detection in Connected Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Heena Rathore, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/28/2023
* USD 174,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connected vehicles are an integral
part of the future of intelligent transportation systems. They use wireless and
sensing technologies to enable communication and cooperation between vehicles
and infrastructure. Nonetheless, sensor reliability and data integrity play a
crucial role in these vehicles. As vehicles and infrastructures grow
increasingly networked and automated, there is a pressing need to identify
sensor-related anomalies and mitigate potential safety hazards they might pose.
The overarching goal of this project is to protect the connected vehicular
network against anomalous sensor readings from any cause to ensure the safety of
vehicles and passengers. The research aims to (1) provide new capabilities to
broadly address safety concerns in connected vehicles to meet emerging future
needs of intelligent transportation systems, and (2) enable a diverse and
inclusive community of scientists and engineers to work in multidisciplinary
areas such as cognitive machine learning and
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the ever increasing complexity of
connected vehicles operating in a more complicated cyber-physical social
environment, conventional anomaly detection methods will likely not be able to
keep pace with the demands of these challenges and function safely in a
tomorrow's smart and connected communities. This project will explore (1) novel
algorithmic methods that will enable the vehicles to quickly classify different
types of sensor failures, learn new emerging anomalous patterns of sensor
activity, and assess their risks relative to vehicle safety, and (2) designs for
efficient scalable safe multi-agent models to build reputational trust among the
connected vehicles in order to facilitate V2V information sharing, learning, and
cooperative decision-making, and (3) new consensus-based protocols for connected
vehicles that provide for resilience and adaptivity in the presence of
disruptions, interruptions, and changes to vehicle participation. Initial test
and evaluations are conducted by computer simulations with publicly-available
data sets on connected vehicles and autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.