* 2153428
* CRII: CNS: Towards Spectrum and Energy Efficient Large-scale IoT Communications: A Cross-layer Optimization Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Haijian Sun, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although 5G has dramatically
improved network capacity and spectrum efficiency (SE), the explosive growth of
Internet of Things (IoT) demands for more spectrum and energy resources to
support high device density and massive traffics. It is estimated that at least
5.2 GHz bandwidth is required for just eHealth Care IoT if spectrum is accessed
exclusively, or 1.3 GHz even with dynamic sharing strategy. It is clear that
shortage of spectrum resources is a major bottleneck for the success of IoT
popularity. On the other hand, current IoT devices use standards such as
Bluetooth, LoRA, Sigfox, narrow-band IoT (NB-IoT), or Zigbee, which require
power-hungry active radio frequency components like oscillators and converters.
Battery-driven IoT devices can hardly sustain years of life-cycle goal even with
infrequent transmission and optimized low-power protocols. Thus, sustainable
energy consumption is another challenge. With tens of billions of IoTs desire
for connectivity by 2030, there is a pressing need to address both SE and energy
efficiency (EE) challenges to accommodate for such densified IoT networks. This
research seeks to improve SE and EE performance while providing guaranteed
quality of service (QoS) for IoTs at large-scale, thereby providing a feasible
and practical connectivity solution in massive IoT era. Outcomes from this
project can bring following impacts: 1) a hybrid and cooperative communication
architect for IoTs, which combines benefits from both active and passive mode;
2) integration of research and curriculum design, capstone projects to both
undergraduate and graduate students; 3) cutting-edge research experiences to a
primarily undergraduate institution (PUI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
approach is to enable IoT device with a wireless-powered hybrid communication
structure that can not only minimize energy footprint with energy harvesting
from ambient signals, but also integrate coordinated passive and active
communication to support versatile QoS needs with efficient spectrum utilization
through user cooperation. This project offers a holistic solution to deliver
following innovations. 1) A novel PHY transmission architect. It combines a bio-
inspired symbiotic radio to coordinate excessive interference. Optimization
problems for SE and EE metrics are introduced from PHY resource allocation
perspective. 2) The co-designed MAC layer protocol to ensure proper user and
resource coordination. Two protocols will be introduced, one for maximum
performance and the other for lower complexity. 3) System validation with
software and hardware implementations. Extensive experimental verification is
designed to systematically validate the performance of proposed schemes and
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.