* 2153875
* U.S.-Ireland R\&amp;D Partnership: Smart Radio Environments with Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces -- Communications Through Blockage in Millimeter-wave Systems (REFLECT-MMWAVE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Rong-Rong Chen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The emergence of new generation of services and applications in future networks
set out many challenging requirements such as high reliability of wireless
links, high data rates and support for a large number of users. These challenges
become more critical as we move to millimeter wave (mmWave) bands in the quest
for very high data rates. While mmWave communication is a major technology for
future generations of wireless systems, it suffers from severe signal blockage,
attenuation, and mmWave channels easily become time-varying with small
movements. These significantly limit the link reliability and communication
performance of such systems. To tackle these challenges, this project develops
an innovative Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface (RIS)-aided system for mm-Wave
communication, termed as Smart Radio Environments with Reconfigurable
Intelligent Surfaces -- Communications through Blockage in Millimeter wave
Systems (REFLECT-MMWAVE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops new
technologies and methodologies to build smart radio environments that utilize
RIS to manipulate the propagation of incident electromagnetic waves in a
programmable manner to actively alter the channel realization. This turns the
wireless channel into a controllable system block that can be optimized to
improve overall system performance. The novel and innovative aspects of this
proposal include: (i) Implementation of a modular RIS radio hardware that can
achieve the best phase control performance for unit cells of RIS at mm-Wave
frequencies. (ii) Development of advanced signal processing algorithms for
practical RIS-aided mmWave transceivers, (iii) Machine learning enhanced
beamforming and RIS phase shift design. (iv) Optimal design of distributed
multiple access control (MAC) for mmWave RIS-aided communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.