* 2153998
* Combinatorial Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rosa Orellana, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 181,513.00

Algebraic objects such as groups are used to measure symmetry in a similar way
as numbers are used to measure size. In combinatorial representation theory we
seek to make algebraic objects more accessible by relating abstract algebraic
objects to combinatorial objects such as graphs and matrices. The combinatorial
objects are often easier to understand and more importantly they lead to more
efficient computation. In this proposal we are interested in using combinatorial
objects to understand products of representations. One product investigated in
this proposal is the tensor product of representations of symmetry groups. The
goal is to devise an algorithm that uses combinatorial objects to understand the
decomposition of this product into simpler representations. The decomposition of
tensor products is an important problem that has applications to a plethora of
fields such as algebraic combinatorics, complexity theory, and statistics, and
has applications in medicine, computer vision, physics, chemistry, and fast
matrix multiplication. Essentially, it is the problem of recovering individual
signals from a mixture of signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
longstanding unsolved problems in combinatorial representation theory that seek
to decompose representations into irreducible representations. These include the
Kronecker problem, the Plethysm problem and the Restriction problem. These
problems are interrelated and making progress in the understanding of any will
lead to breakthroughs on the others. Zabrocki and the PI introduced a new basis
of symmetric functions that arose from connections to the partition algebra and
led to the introduction of new combinatorial objects in the study of the
Kronecker problem. This new basis of symmetric functions has provided a better
understanding of the connection between the three open problems and the
combinatorial objects introduced have made the problems more accessible. In this
proposal the PI and collaborators, including graduate students, will continue to
develop algorithms using diagram algebras and symmetric functions that we hope
will lead to advances in the understanding of the Kronecker
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.