* 2153972
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic Reaction Rates and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor K. N. Houk of the UCLA Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering will
develop new computational methods to understand chemical reactivity, selectivity
and mechanisms. This research involves the use of equations of physics,
primarily quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics. Intensive computer
calculations predict the structures of molecules and the processes by which they
transform to products during chemical reactions. The Houk group has pioneered in
this area and continues to demonstrate to chemists that computation is a crucial
adjunct to their experimental research. As one part of this project,
computational models for perovskites are expected to lead to new architectures
and additives for enhanced photovoltaic performance. Planned research will
involve extensive collaboration with experimental research groups. This research
provides for computational underpinning and contributes to the better
understanding of new and puzzling experimental results, and provides guidance to
experimentalists about new experiments. Broader impacts activities include
outreach to students at UCLA, high schools and the general public. Group members
participate in outreach to potential STEM students to attract them to the
excitement of a career in computational chemistry. The participants supported by
this grant continue to be active members of the Organization for Cultural
Diversity in Science (OCDS) at UCLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Houk group has
pioneered the study of ambimodal reactions that can form several products from
one transition state. This continuing project will develop concepts to
understand reactivities and mechanisms for organic reactions, and to improve
computational methods for quantitative calculations of reaction rates and
mechanisms. This project involves calculations of reaction paths and molecular
dynamics of organic reactions, including reactions in solution. Various methods
to analyze reactivity, such as the distortion/interaction model of reactivity
that was conceived and developed in the Houk lab, will be applied to organic
reactions and mechanisms, selectivities of organometallic reactions, and
molecular dynamics of reactions in solution. Analyses and design of new
perovskite photovoltaics will be performed. New approaches to understanding
chemical reactivity will be developed. Collaborations on mechanisms and
selectivities with experimental research groups are expected to provide
explanations and guide future research directions. This project will have a
significant component dedicated to the computational study of newly discovered,
organic and organometallic reactions. New methods will be developed and shared
with the general chemical community. Predictions of new chemistry will be
studied by collaborators. Broader impacts of this research include training of
future leaders of organic computation and theory, teaching the chemical
community how to solve problems with computation, as well as teaching
theoreticians how to communicate with experimentalists. The highly collaborative
environment of this research is a significant benefit to the researchers engaged
in this science. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctorals will be
trained in the use of theory and computation as a companion to experiment for
the solution of chemical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.