* 2153786
* Facility Support: Institute for Rock Magnetism
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Bruce Moskowitz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,045,499.00

This Division of Earth Science Instrumentation and Facilities Program award will
continue operational support for the Institute for Rock Magnetism (IRM) at the
University of Minnesota for the next five years. The IRM is a multi-user
facility for pure and applied research on the magnetic properties of rocks,
sediments, and minerals. IRMS provides instrumental infrastructure, technical
expertise, and educational outreach for the Earth Science community and related
disciplines for research in Earth, planetary and environmental sciences. The IRM
serves as a national facility for research into the physics and chemistry of
magnetization in natural materials resulting from geologic, biologic, and
anthropogenic processes in the Earth system and covering time scales from the
present and recent past to billions of years ago. Natural-material magnetic
research is an essential part of larger scientific efforts to understand the
origin and evolution of the geomagnetic field and the deep interior of Earth and
terrestrial planets; the history of tectonic plates; and the evolution of
Earthâ€™s surficial environments and climate. The five-year project will continue
to strengthen opportunities for community-based research and promote the
progress of science by: (1) maintaining the integrity, function, and accuracy of
the facility instrumentation and computer resources, which maintains the IRM
database; (2) providing access and support to over 150 visiting scientists from
the US and abroad projected to use IRM facilities during the award period; (3)
training and education of undergraduate, graduate students, and early career
scientists; and (4) providing research-related information to the Earth science
community and related disciplines through biennial conferences, website, online
database, and a quarterly newsletter. The well-established biennial rock
magnetism summer school provides a ten-day workshop for hands-on, lab-based,
training for graduate and early career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
magnetic behavior of particle assemblages of iron oxides, hydroxides, sulfides
and iron alloys is governed by a combination of physical and chemical processes
at the nanometric to micrometric levels which makes magnetic measurements
sensitive indicators of mineral composition, crystallography, microstructures,
and particle size, shape and orientation distributions. The magnetization that
emerges from these processes and properties is affected by time, temperature,
pressure, external magnetic fields, and (bio)geochemical surroundings.
Understanding how these processes operate is the foundation for determining
magnetic mineral compositions, concentrations and size distributions in natural
samples, and for understanding the origin and significance of natural remanent
records of ancient magnetic fields on Earth and other planetary bodies. A suite
of advanced instruments enables sensitive measurements of magnetization under
controlled conditions of temperature, magnetic fields, time, and orientation,
and allow detailed characterization of magnetic mineralogy in geological,
extraterrestrial, biological, and anthropogenic materials. Research facilitated
by the analytical and technical capabilities of the IRM improves our
understanding of how the complex natural recording systems work, and to maximize
the information that we can recover from magnetic analysis of natural materials.
Research activities are carried out by IRM scientists and students and visiting
researchers, and encompass a range of aspects, from basic understanding of rock
and mineral magnetism, to applied studies in which magnetic characteristics of
rocks and sediments are used as tools for investigating a wide variety of
geological and surficial Earth processes. The scale of investigations extends
from bacterial magnetic particles and environmental reconstructions to plate
tectonic reconstructions and magnetic mapping of other
planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.