* 2153215
* Theory and Design of Dinuclear Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Ess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 331,048.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Daniel Ess of Brigham Young University is focused upon advancing the theory and
design of di-nuclear catalytic reactions in chemistry. Developing new catalysts
is critical to discovering new, efficient chemical reactions. Historically,
homogeneous catalysts use just one metal atom at the core of the catalyst. In
contrast, dinuclear catalysts have two metal atoms at the core of the catalyst
and have significant promise for new designs and modes of operation. Dinuclear
catalysts also hold promise for speeding up historically slow/difficult chemical
reactions where current single metal catalysts do not perform well. Currently,
research scientists do not fully understand how dinuclear catalysts facilitate
rapid reactions, or which dinuclear catalysts should be the target of synthesis
for specific chemical transformations. In this project Dr. Daniel Ess will be
using computational methods and theoretical analysis to understand mechanisms
and selectivity of reactions catalyzed by such dinuclear metal systems. This
work, interfaced tightly with experimental collaboration, will lead to the
prediction and experimental discovery of new dinuclear catalysts and chemical
reactions. This work will also provide training for undergraduate and graduate
students as well as postdoctoral scholars at the interface between chemistry and
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Ess of Brigham Young University is
using quantum-chemical methods and theoretical analyses to model and understand
transition-metal heterodinuclear and homodinuclear catalysts for organic
transformations. The dinuclear catalysts being investigated have direct bonding
between two transition metals as the core of the catalyst. Reaction mechanisms
will be investigated for C-H bond functionalization, C-O bond reduction, and
dehydrogenation. Selectivity for hydrocarbon semi-hydrogenation, for cyclization
reactions, and for stereoselective addition reactions will be the foci of these
investigations. This work will be combining quantum-chemical methods and machine
learning techniques to design new heterodinuclear catalysts. Undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars will be trained in advanced
computational techniques. Students and postdocs will interact directly with
several experimental groups and learn how to apply computational chemistry
techniques in an experimental environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.