* 2153605
* IRES Track I: U.S.-Bangladesh collaboration to improve air quality: Application of low-cost sensor technologies and satellite remote sensing
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Md Aynul Bari, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,823.00

Climate change can affect the air in both ambient and indoor environments.
Exposure to criterial air pollutants such as fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and
climate-driven pollutants such as black carbon (BC) is of increasing public
health concern both nationally and globally. The use of low-cost air quality and
greenhouse gas sensors can transform the ability of cities to understand and
address air pollution challenges. This International Research Experience for
Students (IRES) project will provide 24 U.S. underrepresented minority students
(15 undergraduates and 9 graduates) the opportunity to participate in a ten-week
summer program over three years for studying emerging air quality issues in
Dhaka, Bangladesh, which is one of the most densely populated cities in the
world. Each year a cohort of 8 students will participate in a two-week pre-
departure virtual training and one-week (in-person) post-trip follow-up session
in the U.S. and visit Dhaka for seven weeks to carry our collaborative research
at the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) and at the
University of Dhaka. Bangladesh is known for its vulnerability to climate
change, consistently ranked as one of the most polluted countries and Dhaka as
one of the most polluted megacities in the world. The experiences and lessons
learned from a megacity’s impact on air quality can be valuable for the IRES
students to study large U.S. urban centers confronting similar air pollution
challenges. This IRES will develop a diverse globally engaged workforce of young
scientists to contribute broadly to enhance U.S. leadership in science and
engineering. The international experiences will offer IRES students unique
opportunities to enhance their professional growth, peer-mentoring skills,
networking and develop their competencies in intercultural communication, self-
awareness, professional adaptability, and leadership in a culturally diverse
group. This IRES project will promote diversity in undergraduate and graduate
education and also bring benefits to the society by increasing global awareness
and yielding information that can support regulatory agencies to improve air
quality and public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project aims to
improve air quality by using low-cost approaches through integration of novel
internet of things (IoT)-derived sensor technology and satellite remote sensing
coupled with modeling to improve understanding of air pollution problems and
their potential solutions. By leveraging the unique research facilities, data
and other U.S. (e.g., Stanford University) and foreign resources, the IRES
students will investigate emerging air quality issues in Bangladesh. Research
activities using low-cost sensors include (1) development of a calibration
framework for low-cost PM2.5 monitoring system, (2) developing a low-cost
approach for evaluating brick kiln emissions, (3) high spatial resolution air
pollution mapping in Dhaka city, (4) understanding residential indoor air
quality exposure in Dhaka, (5) monitoring exposure to air pollutants and
greenhouse gases in public transportation in Dhaka city, and (6) estimation and
characterization of waste burning impact on air quality in Dhaka. Students will
also use satellite remote sensing approach for mapping brick kiln pollution and
perform evaluation of satellite-based models in estimating the surface PM2.5
concentrations over Bangladesh. Students will have the opportunity to select
their individual research projects based on their personal interests. This
project offers a robust student mentoring through student-faculty and student-
student interactions and several events to enhance their professional
development. The outcomes of this project can also benefit the general people
and the society as a whole to increase knowledge and understanding of air
quality problems, and reduction of ambient and indoor air exposure to improve
public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.