* 2153449
* CNS Core: Small: Not All Cameras are Created Equal: Systems Support for Highly Adaptive Video Analytics Pipelines
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ravi Netravali, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 373,908.00

The ubiquity of video camera deployments, coupled with steady improvements in
computer vision algorithms, has given rise to a diverse range of video analytics
applications. Use cases include surveillance, traffic scheduling, disaster
response, and more. Yet despite their promise, video analytics deployments are
far from widespread. A key reason is that video analysis is often prohibitively
expensive: video is data-intensive, stressing the network, and analysis
typically involves Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to query video, requiring
substantial compute resources. This project aims to design and implement
practical video analytics systems that can adapt their execution to most
efficiently utilize end-to-end compute and network resources, i.e., across
cameras, servers, and the networks between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
insight underlying the proposed work is to adaptively place analytics tasks by
leveraging frame-transforming techniques that are diverse in terms of resource
requirements and accuracy, e.g., lightweight frame differencing versus expensive
object detection DNNs. Along these lines, the project involves three synergistic
directions. First, it rigorously classifies existing frame transforming
techniques, investigating the correlation between their computation costs,
potential data reduction, and impact on response accuracy. Second, it develops
end-to-end systems that can automatically select the appropriate frame
transforming technique to run on a camera with the goal of optimizing for
response latency and accuracy given the available resources. Third, it develops
techniques to extend adaptive video analytics to emerging camera settings, e.g.,
multi-camera, steerable, energy-harvesting; these systems rely on the extraction
of spatial and temporal relationships between camera feeds to guide resource
allocation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research targets a large
slice of the population (given the breadth of video analytics applications), and
improves both the accessibility and potential of video analytics deployments.
The developed systems enable affordable (but effective) video analytics for
organizations of different scale, allowing them to make the most of their
available resources. Furthermore, the work motivates novel applications that
were previously deemed impractical, e.g., real-time monitoring of rural areas
via energy-harvesting cameras. The project also involves outreach efforts to
attract students from populations currently under-represented in computer
science. Key to these efforts is magnifying the interdisciplinary nature of
video analytics pipelines which span systems, networks, machine learning, and
computer vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software and research artifacts
designed as part of this project are released on a public website:
http://web.cs.ucla.edu/~ravi/adaptive_video_analytics/. The site is regularly
maintained and includes replication instructions and packages. Project data are
kept on the site for at least 5 years after publication, with extensions based
on public interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.