* 2153757
* Ultrafast Dynamics Occurring in the Ground States of Transition Metal Ccmplexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Clifford Kubiak, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 545,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Clifford Kubiak of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California San Diego is
developing new assemblies of metal complexes that undergo fast electron transfer
(ET) reactions. Electron transfer (ET) is the basis of operation of every
electronic device. ET research can elucidate methods for efficient conversion of
light to electrons and, subsequently, usable and storable chemical energy. This
NSF-funded project investigates a new generation of mixed-valent complexes to
study the behavior of electronic delocalization in molecular systems. The
ramifications of these findings can extend to the development of integrated
circuits, quantum computing, and artificial photosynthesis. In tandem with this
project, Professor Kubiakâ€™s group is also dedicated to community outreach and
science education, engaging and involving K-12 and undergraduate students in
cutting edge fundamental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed-valent trinuclear
oxo-bridged clusters have proven to be valuable model systems for the
development and understanding of the factors that control the rates, switching
location, and polarization of ground state electron transfer on the ultrafast
(picosecond) timescale using infrared spectroscopy and electrochemistry to probe
these phenomena. The most recent support period informed several key aims for
future research, including: (i) covalent attachment of mixed-valent complexes to
electrode surfaces and measurement of the influence of electric fields on mixed-
valent complexes potential energy surfaces; (ii) extending the study of electric
field driven ET towards driving chemical reactions important to catalysis; (iii)
the study of mixed-valent complexes joined by chiral bridges to understand
interactions between chiral molecules and spin; and (iv) the preparation and
study of high-spin mixed-valent iron clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.