* 2153381
* CRII: CNS: IoT-aware Federated On-Device Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Lan Zhang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,967.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent breakthroughs in on-device
machine learning bring artificial intelligence (AI) closer to Internet-of-Things
(IoT) devices, shifting the IoT paradigm from “connected things” to “connected
intelligence.” Given the presence of confidential IoT data and the widespread
impact of data breaches, federated learning provides a privacy-preserving
solution that enables knowledge sharing by exchanging on-device model updates
rather than private IoT data. However, classical federated learning assumes
homogeneous participating devices with a wealth of labeled data, which stands at
odds with the properties of most IoT devices, such as resource constraints,
heterogeneity, and lack of annotation. To unleash the potential of federated on-
device intelligence in IoT systems, this project focuses on two critical yet
open problems: (i) federated knowledge sharing across resource-constrained and
heterogeneous IoT devices in a data-free manner; and (ii) federated domain
adaptation with limited ground truth labeled knowledge under ever-changing IoT
environments. The project develops novel and practical approaches to address
conflicting goals on accuracy, efficiency, and data dependence at both the
knowledge generation and transfer stages. The proposed research will be
thoroughly and rigorously evaluated in simulator-driven and real-world
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the current
understanding of federated learning in practical yet challenging IoT
environments, address challenges to broad participation of federated on-device
intelligence, and enable compelling new IoT applications with federated
intelligence. The research outcomes of this project will be integrated with
existing curriculums and K-12 programs and disseminated through conferences,
seminars, and publications to accelerate progress in AI and IoT research.
Furthermore, this project will actively involve undergraduate and
underrepresented students and improve the presence of underrepresented
minorities in computer science and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.