* 2153255
* Beam Deflection Studies of Cold Molecules and Complexes Entrapped in Helium Nanodroplets: Permanent, Metastable, and Laser-Induced Electric and Magnetic Dipole Moments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Vitaly Kresin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 510,051.00

In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Vitaly Kresin’s group at
the University of Southern California will study the distributions of electrical
charges and magnetic currents within extremely cold molecules carried by a beam
of nanoscale droplets of superfluid helium. These distributions reveal
information about molecular structure, motion, and bonding. The nanodroplets
will pass through an externally applied electric or magnetic field, and the
field-induced deflection of their trajectories will be measured. The study will
encompass the electric and magnetic structure of biological molecules, atomic
and molecular complexes, “molecular magnets,” and other systems that are
impractical to accurately measure, or even synthesize, by other means. The
project also will demonstrate steering of a molecular reaction by an external
electric field and detecting the switching of the electric polarity of a
molecule by a tunable laser. The project will lead to new knowledge that has
broad relevance to basic research and applications ranging from protein
formation to ultracold chemistry, spintronics to organic synthesis, and
atmospheric chemistry to quantum information science. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be mentored in a highly interdisciplinary research field and
engage in science fairs and school outreach programs. A collaboration between
the project and an undergraduate laboratory course in combinatorial chemistry
will be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nanodroplets, formed via
supersonic expansion of helium gas, will embed molecules, atoms, or clusters
from vapor in pick-up cells, and then traverse a strong inhomogeneous electric
or magnetic field. This field will orient the ultracold polar impurities and
exert an intense deflecting force, resulting in a measurable deviation of the
beam, thus enabling direct readout of the electric or magnetic dipole moment of
the molecule or complex. This technique will be applied to hydrogen peroxide
clusters, amino acid dimers and dipeptides, high-spin alkali dimers, and
molecular magnets. Furthermore, the project will demonstrate the assembly of
pre-oriented molecules, and deflection-based action spectroscopy of photochromic
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.