* 2153579
* IRES Track I: U.S.-Thailand: Lasting consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on landscape change in tropical crop cultivation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Gang Chen, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2025
* USD 298,292.00

Americans’ access to tropical crops has been severely affected by the COVID-19
pandemic. Studies confirmed the immediate impacts of this global crisis on the
agricultural system across the tropics; however, the long-term impact of
COVID-19 on tropical agriculture systems remains unknown. In particular, crop
cultivation is an integral part of the agriculture supply chain. While the
pandemic apparently disrupts cultivation tentatively, it is unclear whether
there may be a slow recovery or a permanent change in the cultivation landscape,
driven by diverse, COVID-19-relevant biophysical and socioeconomic factors,
e.g., crop acreage or types, and cultivation methods. Such uncertainty could
have a downward impact on U.S. economy, regional trade, and food security. This
project aims to address this knowledge gap by providing U.S. undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly students from underrepresented groups, a unique
opportunity to study the lasting consequences of COVID-19 on landscape change in
tropical crop cultivation. A total of 18 U.S. students will be recruited to work
on this project in Thailand, which is the largest supplier of tropical products
from South and Southeast Asia to the United States. Jointly trained by UNC
Charlotte faculty and Thai mentors from Chulalongkorn University and Thammasat
University, IRES students will develop an international understanding of
tropical food systems, Earth observation big data analytics, mixed methods
research, and land-use science during the cohort-based activities. The
international experiences will further broaden U.S. students’ horizons by
exposing them to rural and urban cultures via fieldwork in agricultural and
urbanizing communities and on-campus research activities in Bangkok. This
project also offers unique opportunities to connect IRES students with
professionals in other fields, such as inequality studies, ecological
sustainability, and biodiversity in the tropics. Together, these experiences
will prepare students to chart pathways into STEM and related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses three interrelated research
questions during three intensive summer sessions: (i) What are the differences
in pre- and post-pandemic land use for crop cultivation? (ii) How does the
pandemic affect the social and biophysical drivers in crop cultivation and to
what effect? (iii) Will the future agricultural landscape return to a pre-
pandemic state? If yes, how fast? If not, what will be different? Each year, a
cohort of six students (five undergraduate and one graduate student) will be
recruited with an emphasis on underrepresented groups. Cohort one will develop a
cutting-edge geospatial model to extract location and acreage of crops. Cohort
two will implement open-ended surveys and interviews with farmers and key
stakeholders to develop an in-depth understanding of the relationship between
the pandemic and tropical agricultural practices. Cohort three will combine
results from cohort one and cohort two to simulate trajectories of future land-
use change. Students will be trained to study land-use models, evaluate
qualitative data, and learn effective ways to communicate mixed methods STEM
research with decision makers and stakeholders in the region through student-led
workshops. Our project enables a cohort experience, where the participating
students will have individual projects, which together will be coordinated to
address the three research questions. This project is funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.