* 2153747
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Enabling Caches and GPUs for Energy Harvesting Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Dongyoon Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Energy harvesting systems collect energy from variant ambient sources such as
solar power, thermal energy, and radio-frequency radiation. Due to unreliable
energy sources, energy harvesting systems suffer from frequent power failures.
Hence, energy harvesting systems should be able to save the current program
states before a power failure, restore the consistent program states when the
power comes back, and seamlessly resume program execution as if nothing
happened. However, maintaining crash-consistent states across power cycles is
challenging. As a result, the current generation of energy harvesting systems
has been designed with simple hardware configurations such as a single central
processing unit (CPU) without a cache, delivering limited computing
capabilities. Going forward, in the new Internet of Things era, ever-increasing
demand for substantially more high-performance energy-harvesting systems capable
of supporting emerging artificial-intelligence and machine-learning applications
are expected. This project proposes new software and hardware co-design
solutions that allow energy-harvesting systems to leverage caches and graphic
processing units (GPUs) for high performance and energy efficiency. The project
is expected to serve as the foundation to unlock next-generation Internet of
Things services, based on battery-less energy-harvesting systems. The project
also aims to incorporate research findings in undergraduate teaching and offer
K-12 outreach programs for female students to promote more equitable outcomes
for women in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to enable caches and GPUs in energy-harvesting systems and to design
next-generation energy harvesting systems with high performance and energy
efficiency. To this end, the project proposes compiler- and hardware-based
solutions in three research thrusts. The project will explore a compiler-based
solution that allows existing energy-harvesting systems to use a traditional
data cache without hardware modification. The project will explore a new
research direction that avoids expensive logging at run time, yet instead
recovers potentially un-persisted stores at reboot time. To achieve better
performance, the project aims to design a new hardware-based cache for energy-
harvesting systems, which combines the benefits of a write-back cache and a
write-through cache without their respective downsides. The project will design
the first energy-harvesting GPU system that introduces a new checkpointing
solution for GPU registers and a lightweight persistence solution for GPU shared
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.