* 2153032
* Collaborative Research: Real time Chemical Imaging of Nanoparticle Templated Tubulin-Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Rohit Bhargava, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2025
* USD 102,510.00

Nanoparticles can be designed in a variety of sizes, shapes, and
functionalities. This project will research the interaction of nanoparticles
with specific cellular proteins that are important for life processes and to
develop effective therapies for diseases such as cancer. The PIs will focus on
microtubules, which are hollow protein cylinders that impart structural rigidity
to cells, enable motility, and serve as conduits for intracellular transport.
The ability of these materials to polymerize and depolymerize affects cellular
processes and has been the subject of extensive research interest over decades.
Understanding how to control the disruption of these protein structures can
reduce cellular structural rigidity and serve as a target for cancer therapy.
Nanoparticle-mediated inhibition of tubulin polymerization has been reported
briefly; however, a general mechanistic understanding is still lacking. Such
knowledge can not only further scientific understanding but pave the way to
designing novel therapies. In this project the PIs will study the influence of
nanoparticles on the polymerization of microtubules (and other filaments) both
from a biochemical and structural perspective. To identify and quantitatively
evaluate the chemical association of the nanoparticles with tubulin during
polymerization, the PIs will utilize infrared spectroscopy, machine learning
tools and other biochemical techniques. In terms of analytic ability, the
integrated toolkit of measurement devices, imaging, and data analysis will be a
valuable resource to investigate molecular-environmental interactions that may
be expanded to other biological systems. This knowledge could have widespread
implications for the comprehension of nanoparticle-based novel cancer
therapeutics. For educational and outreach activities, the collaborating PIs
will develop an exploratory program course intended for freshman (science/non-
science majors) to enhance their education through greater interaction with
faculty in small classes and share their research in nanotechnology. The team
will specifically contribute to the education of early career and
underrepresented students via university-wide programs. The algorithms and data
generated during this project will be used as a basis for educational activities
from the high school to professional levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
the core of this project's technical approach is the recognition that a complete
understanding of the influence of nanoparticles on microtubules polymerization
is possible by applying molecular spectroscopy and imaging. Through this project
the PIs will develop best methods to use for tubulin polymerization studies with
nanomaterials having various chemical and surface properties . The PIs will
harness the advantages of infrared spectroscopy by using recent advances in
imaging technology to develop a spatially and temporally resolved approach that
illuminates molecular details of microtubules dynamics and quantitatively
evaluates the role of nanoparticles in tubulin polymerization. The project
includes emerging infrared measurement technology coupled to an infrared
transparent, cost-effective microfluidic platform that accurately controls
biochemical environments spatiotemporally. Using this platform, the PIs will
investigate the biochemistry, kinetics, and structural manifest of microtubules
upon association with nanoparticles of varying composition, concentration, size,
and surface functionalities. The extent of polymerization will be analyzed using
a fluorescence assay. Gel electrophoresis studies will be used to assess the
extent of polymerization and the phosphate release pathway will be analyzed to
obtain possible mechanistic insight. Microfluidics-assisted infrared imaging of
the nanoparticles will be employed to study the modulated microtubules formation
to reveal manifestation of a completely different array of secondary structures
that may arise from the propensity of select monomer units to adhere together
during polymerization. Infrared images of the nanoparticles incubated with
polymerized and dried microtubules will reveal nanoparticle spectral signatures
of microtubules with aggregated proteins. The main technical contribution is a
high-throughput IR imaging method to study protein polymerization in the absence
and presence of nanoparticles in the microfluidic continuous flow mixing device
and validate the results to facilitate understanding of the nanoparticle-protein
interaction. The ]obtained data will further be investigated with statistical
and machine learning approaches. The PIs will work to ensure that the protocols
developed here are available to students of all levels, giving them an
opportunity to understand the fundamentals of tubulin dynamics with
nanotechnology and stimulating their creativity to develop new cancer
therapeutics. In addition, the students will participate in dedicated projects,
learning about future career opportunities in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.