* 2153585
* Harmonic Analysis and Homogenization of Elliptic Equations in Perforated Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Zhongwei Shen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 213,094.00

Partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating coefficients are used to
describe various processes in materials such as composite materials and porous
media. The theory of homogenization, whose goal is to describe macroscopic
properties of microscopically inhomogeneous or heterogeneous materials, shows
that such strongly inhomogeneous material, whose characteristics change sharply
with respect to space variables, may be approximately described via a
homogenized or effective homogeneous material. As a result, the theory of
homogenization of partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating
coefficients has many important applications in physics, mechanics, and
materials science. The long-term goal of this project is to establish optimal
quantitative results in the homogenization theory for a large class of partial
differential equations in various settings, arising in applications. The
proposed research focuses on several challenging problems in the modelling of
fluid flows and acoustic propagation in porous media and inclusions in composite
materials. The new approaches and techniques to be developed will provide
theoretical foundation and guidance for numerical simulations of diffusion
processes in highly heterogenous media. Funding for this project provides
support for training of Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main focus of
this project on quantitative homogenization of partial differential equations is
on large-scale regularity properties and convergence rates for second-order
elliptic equations and systems in perforated domains. More specifically, the
problems investigated as part of the project include (1) uniform regularity
estimates for Darcy’s law; (2) large-scale regularity estimates for Brinkman’s
law; (3) elliptic equations and systems with periodic and high-contrast
coefficients; and (4) boundary value problems in perforated domains. The
resolution of these problems will provide a deeper understanding of some
fundamental issues in periodic homogenization. This project lies at the
interface of harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. Existing and
new techniques from harmonic analysis are expected to play a significant role in
the work of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.