* 2153945
* Coloring Graphs with Forbidden Structures and Investigations Related to Ramsey Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Zixia Song, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 179,999.00

This research project aims to investigate a variety of fundamental problems in
the areas of structural graph theory and extremal combinatorics. Often such
problems are related to other areas including theoretical computer science,
geometry, information theory, harmonic analysis and number theory. Progress on
these problems will advance our understanding of related aspects of graph theory
and combinatorics. The PI and her collaborators have recently made progress on
most of them. It is expected that further work on these problems will lead to
new methods and applications. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained during this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
problems related to the well-known Hadwiger's Conjecture, the Erdös-Lovász
Tihany Conjecture and Ramsey related problems. The PI and her collaborators have
recently made the first asymptotic improvement since 1980s on the chromatic
number of graphs with no clique minor of order k using new techniques. In this
proposal, the PI and her collaborators plan to explore the following problems:
Linear Hadwiger’s Conjecture for graphs of small order; the minimal
counterexamples to Hadwiger’s Conjecture for graphs with independence number two
by working on the Füredi-Gyárfás-Simonyi Conjecture; Hadwiger’s Conjecture and
the Erdös-Lovász Tihany Conjecture for special family of graphs; establishing
tight bounds on the minimum number of edges of co-critical graphs; and finding
graphs such that its list Ramsey number is the same as its classical Ramsey
number. Progress on these problems will likely lead to the development of new
methods and approaches that were too far out of reach before and are expected to
allow further exciting developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.