* 2153901
* Collaborative Research: A Control Theoretic Framework for Guided Folding and Unfolding of Protein Molecules
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Spong, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 220,952.00

This grant will fund research that enables accurate prediction of pathways for
protein folding and unfolding, with application to computer-aided anti-viral
drug design, control of protein-based nano-machines, and treatment of diseases
related to protein misfolding such as Alzheimerâ€™s, thereby promoting the
progress of science, and advancing the national health and prosperity. Physics-
based approaches reliably capture the processes that govern conformational
changes of protein molecules, but typically do so at great computational
expense. A recently developed modeling paradigm, which describes protein
molecules in terms of large numbers of rigid nano-linkages that fold under the
influence of interatomic forces, can significantly reduce the computational
burden, but presents challenges with ensuring that the predicted folding and
unfolding pathways are realistic and not artificially driven by the numerical
algorithm. In this project, this challenge is overcome using an optimization-
based control theoretic framework to guide both folding and unfolding dynamics
while respecting biologically realistic rates of change of conformational
entropy. Knowledge gained from the development of this framework will enable
systematic investigation of protein conformational dynamics, including unfolding
pathways of coronavirus spike proteins, while also advancing previously
unexplored control tools that may help robots navigate cluttered environments. A
unique approach to sonification of protein pathway data will make this knowledge
broadly accessible and will be integrated in course projects for undergraduate
students in engineering, computer science, and art, as well as in research
activities aiming to mentor high school students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to bridge the two seemingly
unrelated fields of optimization-based nonlinear control and conformational
dynamics of proteins through rigorous development and investigation of
computationally efficient and numerically stable algorithms that accurately
predict protein folding and unfolding while avoiding pathways associated with
artificially rapid loss of conformational entropy. This project will fill the
critical gap in knowledge of encoding entropy-loss constraints using the
kinetostatic compliance method by developing a novel non-iterative, large-scale,
quadratic programming-based control scheme over hyper-ellipsoids for protein
folding dynamics with large state-space dimensions; constructing a large-scale,
variable-step-size, numerical integration algorithm that is expected to reduce
the number of integration steps, where each step requires the burdensome
computation of a very large interatomic force vector field; and developing a
control theoretic approach for systematically investigating the problem of
protein unfolding. Ground truth data for validation will be obtained from all-
atom molecular dynamics simulations and, in the case of the model protein
barnase, publicly available experimental data from optical tweezer-based
mechanical unfolding experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.