* 2153201
* Mid-scale RI-2: Advanced Millimeter Survey Instrumentation in Chile
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Mark Devlin, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2028
* USD 14,004,179.00

Large scale millimeter-wave surveys of the sky at high resolution, designed to
explore the origin and evolution of the universe, can address a wide range of
pressing science questions. The next generation of Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB) instruments will reveal much about the origin and evolution of the
Universe, about the fundamental physics driving its birth and growth, and about
its dynamic contents as they interact and change. Achieving these goals requires
a significant improvement both in instrumental capabilities and in data
pipelines. Building on significant investment by the Simons Foundation (SF) in
the Simons Observatory (SO), this award provides three Advanced SO (ASO)
deliverables, which will increase the scientific reach, increase access to the
wider community not expert in the instrumentation, and decrease the
environmental impact of the facility and improve relations with the host country
of Chile. There are extensive plans for public outreach and the training of
early career researchers during the survey activity once ASO is operational.
Meanwhile, implementation of the infrastructure involves more than a dozen
graduate students and around ten postdocs, as key players. There will be
opportunities for young physicists to work with SO scientists on summer
activities, and extensive training on the ASO infrastructure, mentored by SO
scientists in a collaboration with the Simons Foundation and the National
Society of Black Physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions from this
award are: (i) 30,000 new detectors and associated optics for the SO six-meter
diameter Large Aperture Telescope, doubling its mapping speed and enabling the
detection of transient objects; (ii) an end-to-end data pipeline to produce and
validate maps of all SO data, and generate daily light-curves of variable
sources concurrent with other surveys such as those from the Rubin Observatory,
and (iii) a photovoltaic power system that directly increases system sensitivity
while reducing operating costs and environmental impact. This infrastructure is
crucial to the survey goal, to produce millimeter-wave maps of the sky on a
regular cadence. Such maps are a critical part of the search for primordial
gravitational waves, but also help understanding of galaxy evolution and the
role of magnetic fields. Analysis will: (1) reveal physical conditions in the
early universe and constrain any new light particles; (2) measure the
distribution of mass, electron pressure, and electron momentum in the more
recent universe, and combine with large-scale structure surveys to determine the
neutrino mass and the effects of dark energy; (3) measure the distribution of
electron density and pressure around galaxy groups and clusters; (4) use the
thermal Sunyaev-Zelâ€™dovich effect to find more than 30,000 galaxy clusters and
more than 100,000 extragalactic millimeter sources; (5) measure the alignment of
dust by magnetic fields in our Galaxy; and (6) reveal new features of the
transient universe concurrent with optical
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.