* 2153441
* Adaptive Multi-Layer Simulations of NarK Transport Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Hai Lin, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 497,017.00

With funding from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Hai Lin and Emilie Guidez of the University of
Colorado-Denver will develop and apply novel computational algorithms to study
how ions are transported through the membrane protein NarK. The NarK protein
imports nitrate (a mineral form of the essential element nitrogen) into the cell
and exports nitrite (a metabolite that can be toxic in high concentrations) out
of the cell. However, the mechanism of the NarK protein remains poorly
understood. Accurate and efficient computer modeling and simulations are highly
desired to provide critical insights. Lin and Guidez will formulate new
multiscale algorithms that seamlessly combine quantum and classical modeling
techniques, and employing these algorithms, their research groups will set forth
to unearth the atomistic details on how NarK helps the ions travel across the
cell membranes. This collaborative research has the potential to fundamentally
advance understanding of nutrient uptake by membrane transporters and,
consequently, in the longer term, potentially assist in the development of novel
therapies for diseases related to these protein malfunctions. The University of
Colorado-Denver is both a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) and an Asian
American Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institution. Lin and Guidez
will actively recruit students from underrepresented groups to promote
diversity, both directly and through the EUReCA! and XSEDE EMPOWER programs. In
addition, they will expand the highly successful partnership with Cherry Creek
High School to include Cherry Creek Innovation Campus, where high-school
teachers will participate in hands-on research through a yearly summer research
program. These outreach activities will promote K-12 curriculum innovation and
explore students to the excitement of research in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The operation
mechanism of the NarK transporter has remained elusive for many years. For
example, mutagenesis experiments have revealed that the binding-site residues
with delocalized pi bonds are essential to the transport activities, but exactly
how they influence substrate recruitment and translocation remains unknown. Lin
and Guidez will develop novel adaptive-partitioning multi-layer methods that are
next-generation ONIOM-like methods with on-the-fly relocated interlayer
boundaries. The new algorithms are expected to enable highly accurate and
efficient dynamics simulations to unlock the molecular details of anion binding
and translocation in NarK. Both the new simulation tools and the mechanistic
insights resulting from this project can potentially transform the study of ion
migration for many channels and transporters. Through a series of summer
outreach programs, this project will provide excellent opportunities to get K-12
teachers and students by exposing them to modern computer modeling techniques,
and actively engaging them in biochemical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.