* 2153010
* The 2023 ICLDC: Building infrastructure for achieving justice in Language Documentation &amp; Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Andrea Berez-Kroeker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2024
* USD 48,966.00

The International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC)
has become a central meeting for research on language documentation and
conservation, which brings together leading researchers, students, and community
members around the important science of language documentation. The 2023 ICLDC
offers its highly-diverse audience opportunities for formal and informal science
education and training that includes new methodologies and best practices in
cutting-edge language documentation and that crosses traditional disciplinary
boundaries. Participants include undergraduate students, graduate students and
faculty from linguistics, anthropology, biology, computer science, and other
academic disciplines. ICLDC has also included a large number of citizen
scientists from historically underrepresented groups in the sciences, such as
Native Americans, Native Alaskans, Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders,
offering opportunities for broadening participation in the language sciences as
one of the broader impacts of this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to its other crucial scientific benefits, research in language documentation and
conservation has the potential to increase awareness of and interest in a
greater emphasis on justice in research in the language sciences. Justice goals
have always been central to community-based and community-led language work,
even if they have not always been primary among goals for academic linguistics.
By bringing together stakeholders from multiple areas in the language sciences,
the special theme of the 2023 ICLDC aims to normalize the idea that linguists
have social responsibilities that extend beyond the strictly linguistic. The
International Decade of Indigenous Languages presents an opportune time for the
field of language documentation and conservation to develop a disciplinary
framework that establishes justice as both the starting point and end goals of
this work. The field of linguistics has not yet held an international
conversation on achieving justice within language documentation and
conservation, what role language workers play in achieving justice in
intersecting realms, and how justice can critically inform, and reform, best
practices in language documentation and conservation work. The 2023 ICLDC is a
venue for this critical and timely conversation, providing a key opportunity for
practitioners to build relationships and develop the social infrastructure
necessary for working toward a justice-driven model of language
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.