* 2153486
* Aerosol-Atmosphere-Ocean Interactions: Responses, Mechanisms and Feedbacks in the North Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Robert Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2025
* USD 784,389.00

The North Atlantic, meaning the Atlantic Ocean north of the equator, warms and
cools over multiple decades, with basin-wide cooling in the early 1900s, warming
in the mid-century, cooling from about 1960 to the millenium, and slight warming
since then. The warming and cooling have a variety of climatic effects,
including changes in the number of hurricanes each summer, the abundance of
rainfall in the southeast US and North Africa, and winter temperatures in
Europe. A particularly severe example is the prolonged Sahel drought that
occurred during the cooling period after 1960.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The causes
of the North Atlantic sea surface temperature (SST) fluctuations are not clear
and there is considerable debate as to whether they are the result of natural
climate variability or are externally forced. On the natural variability side
SST could change due to the speeding up and slowing down of the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), in which cold water sinks in the high
northern latitudes, circulates around the world at depth, and returns after
upwelling to the surface south of the equator. On the external forcing side
there is considerable interest in the effects of anthropogenic aerosols, which
cool the sea surface by reflecting sunlight back to space. Aerosol emission from
North America became more intensive throughout the midcentury but diminished
starting in the 1960s, thus modulation of Atlantic SSTs by upstream aerosol
sources is a credible theory. The debate between proponents of internal
variability and external forcing has not yet been resolved, for reasons
including the short observational record (only two full cycles), the lack of
AMOC observations, and the lack of long-term measurement of aerosol
concentrations over the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award
addresses the question of internal variability versus external forcing using
climate model simulations and observational datasets. The work takes advantage
of large ensembles of simulations performed with the Community Earth System
Model (CESM), in which the difference between individual simulations is due
purely to natural climate system variability. In particular the project uses
simulation ensembles of 20th century climate in which one type of external
forcing is removed, for instance one ensemble excludes greenhouse gas increases
but retains aerosols, land cover change, volcanic eruptions, etc.. The all-but-
one simulation suite includes an ensemble which omits only the aerosols from
biomass burning while retaining industrial aerosols, and another which omits
only industrial aerosols. The project uses these simulations to look at possible
differences in the effects of the two aerosol types. In addition, the project
generates new simulations using a configuration in which AMOC influence is ruled
out by replacing the ocean with a motionless "slab". The project also goes
beyond the common assumption that the SST variability is either due to internal
variability or external forcing and explores the possibility that the AMOC is
itself affected by anthropogenic aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal value due to the wide-ranging effects of changes in North Atlantic
SSTs. In particular it informs efforts to predict climate variations in the
North Atlantic sector including some which use climate models to predict the
future evolution of the AMOC. The project conducts community outreach in various
ways including participation in Riverside community events, partnership with
local organizations including the Osher Lifelong Learning Institute, and
engagement with K-12 students through the Geoscience Education Outreach Program
(GEOP). In addition, the project provides support and training to two graduate
students and two undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.