* 2153864
* I-Corps: Development of a smart food distribution software system
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Julie Ivy, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the development of a
decision-support system for humanitarian food relief networks which harnesses
complex data to support large-scale distribution and resource allocation
decisions. The human decision-making process is supported by intelligent
autonomous agents that guide users through data modeling and visualization tasks
tailored to the specific needs of the organization considering their specific
objectives of 1) equitable allocation of resources; 2) cost effective
distribution of resources; and 3) efficient use of scarce resources. Scarce
resource allocation problems in humanitarian food relief networks consist of
human (volunteer resources) and material (e.g., food, money). The commercial
potential lies at the ability to make model-specific recommendations to
decision-makers based on the agent's capability to learn from the user
environment through data and human/computer interaction. The proposed system
bridges the knowledge gap between sophisticated modeling tools and operations
subject matter experts who may benefit from these tools but lack the domain-
specific knowledge to implement them in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a platform for humanitarian food
relief networks that possesses machine learning and optimization capabilities
interwoven with the human cognition capabilities. Specifically, the proposed
technology leverages research in cognitive computing and data modeling to build
an intelligent platform to empower organizations to integrate advanced data
modeling into their operations. The vision is that this platform will function
as a collection of intelligent agents supporting workers performing different
functions as a team. In this context, intelligence implies the following four
cognitive abilities: to remember and process large amounts of information, to
visualize and understand complex concepts in the information, to communicate
(e.g., provide instruction and guidance), and to learn from experience. The
platform is designed to contain a robust operations and data modeling ontology
to facilitate human/machine interaction of the intelligent agents with the team
of workers and to facilitate the execution of the four cognitive abilities. This
I-Corps team plans to investigate the market potential of this innovation,
validate customer needs and how the innovation may alleviate such needs, and
discern sustainable business models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.