* 2153053
* Topics in Smooth Ergodic Theory: Stochastic Properties, Thermodynamic Formalism, Coexistence
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Yakov Pesin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 224,283.00

One of the greatest discoveries of the second half of the last century, which
impacted many branches of science, was the phenomenon known as ``deterministic
chaos'' – the emergence of irregular chaotic motions in purely deterministic
systems. Models with this type of motions can be widely found in physics,
biology, chemistry, as well as in engineering and economics. Hyperbolicity
theory, which is an important part of general theory of dynamical systems,
provides a mathematical foundation for the deterministic chaos phenomenon by
supplying researchers with tools that allow them to describe global properties
of a nonlinear dynamical system using information about infinitesimal hyperbolic
behavior of its trajectories. The study of hyperbolic phenomena originated in
the seminal works of Artin, Morse, Hedlund and Hopf, but the systematic study of
hyperbolic dynamical systems was initiated by Smale, Anosov and Sinai, who
studied dynamical systems with strong hyperbolic behavior which possess high
level of unpredictability and exhibit strong chaotic behavior. In this project,
the PI considers the weakest (hence, most general) form of hyperbolicity, known
as non-uniform hyperbolicity. The latter originated in the work of the PI. The
study of non-uniformly hyperbolic systems is based upon the theory of Lyapunov
exponents, which provides some “practical” tools to detect and describe
hyperbolic properties of the systems. The modern non-uniform hyperbolicity
theory has numerous applications to ergodic theory, mathematical and statistical
physics, Riemannian geometry, and other areas of mathematics and beyond. The
project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon past results the PI will carry out
a broad research program which includes the following topics: (1) Thermodynamic
formalism for non-uniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems. Some ideas from
geometric measure theory are used to construct equilibrium measures in
hyperbolic dynamics. The new method is based on pushing forward by the dynamics
the Caratheodory measure associated with the Caratheodory dimension structure
generated by the potential; (2) Essential coexistence of hyperbolic and non-
hyperbolic behavior. This is to understand how two different types of dynamical
behavior - fully hyperbolic (positive entropy) and non-hyperbolic (zero entropy)
- can coexist in an essential way. The project is aimed at constructing
Hamiltonian systems and geodesic flows which exhibit the essential coexistence
phenomenon thus providing new insights in the classical Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser
theory; (3) The study of two important conjectures in dynamics: (i) Katok's
entropy conjecture, claiming that a volume preserving uniquely ergodic
diffeomorphism has zero Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy; (ii) Baire Category
conjecture, claiming that irregular sets for smooth dynamical systems and for
continuous cocycles over them have the 2nd Baire Category; (4) Maps with
exponential and polynomial decay of correlations on compact manifolds. The goal
is to substantially advance the understanding of smooth realization problem by
showing that any smooth manifold admits a volume preserving hyperbolic
diffeomorphism with polynomial or exponential decay of correlations and also
satisfies the Central Limit Theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.