* 2153897
* Questions in Algebraic and Geometric Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,935.00

Combinatorics arises naturally in many other fields of mathematics. Polytopes,
one of the central subjects of geometric combinatorics, have numerous
applications not only in branches in pure math such as algebra, algebraic
geometry and number theory, but also in other fields like statistics, economics,
and optimization. The simplest way to understand polytopes is that they are
high-dimensional generalizations of polygons, and they can be constructed by
taking the intersection of half spaces. Familiar three-dimensional polytopes
include tetrahedra, cubes, octahedra, and dodecahedra. There are many aspects of
polytopes one can study. Counting integer points is a fundamental enumerative
problem, which has real-life applications in counting the number of integer
solutions of a set of linear constraints in multiple variables. This is related
to one of the two major research directions in this project. The other major
direction is on construction of polytopes satisfying certain conditions. In
general, many of the problems addressed in this project have a combinatorial
nature, which makes them sufficiently accessible that they may be integrated
into course material and student research projects. In particular, research
described in two parts of the project involves simple combinatorial objects, and
the PI plans to build one topic into an undergraduate research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the 1960s, Ehrhart discovered that the number
of lattice points in dilations of polytopes is counted by a polynomial, called
Ehrhart polynomial. The first part of the project is focused on the study of
Ehrhart positivity, valuations of polytopes, and related questions. Topics
include (1) studying Ehrhart positivity problems on Tesler polytopes and
Birkhoff polytopes; (2) investigating the uniqueness of Berline-Vergne's
valuation; (3) studying Fischer-Pommersheim's alpha-construction for McMullen's
formula; (4) exploring the connection between Ehrhart positivity and properties
of h^*-polynomials. In the second part, the PI will focus on problems related to
constructions of polytopes. Instead of defining a polytope directly, one can
start with a fan (or a poset), and ask whether there exists a polytope whose
normal fan (or whose face lattice) is the given one. The case of posets is
called the realization problem, which builds a nice bridge between the study of
combinatorial objects (posets) and geometric objects (polytopes). Based on her
recent work on nested generalized permutohedra and their connection with
permuto-asscociahedra, the PI will study the realization problem on "hybrid-
posets".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.