* 2153820
* Correlating Symmetry-Projected States
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Gustavo Scuseria, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2025
* USD 508,161.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Gustavo Scuseria of Rice University is
developing methods for the description of strong correlations. Strong
correlations occur when the behavior of chemical systems is determined by the
interaction between electrons, instead of by the attraction of the electrons to
atomic nuclei. Such correlations are not present in every chemical system, but
they appear in a wide range of important applications. Examples include
molecular magnetism, which is important for applications such as data storage
and quantum computing, and enyzmatic reactions containing metal atoms, such as
those responsible for nitrogen fixation, the process by which nitrogen is
converted into ammonia. Unfortunately, conventional computational methods have
been developed under the assumption that strong correlation is not present. This
means that strong correlations are difficult to describe with traditional
approaches and are typically treated by computationally costly brute-force
approaches that depend on the user’s insight into the problem. Tools will be
developed by Scuseria and his group that are designed to overcome these
difficulties. Computational methods that can reliably treat strong correlation
will be valuable for the computational community as a whole, and will enable
myriad important applications. This project will also involve education and
outreach activities to help recruit and train new members of the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve the difficulties in describing strong
correlations, Scuseria and his group will begin with symmetry-projected
techniques, which permit the mean-field description of the system to
spontaneously break symmetry and extract the component of the broken-symmetry
state that has good quantum numbers. All of this is expected to be done with a
computational cost that is comparable to or slightly higher than that of
standard mean-field methods. However, while symmetry-projected mean-field
methods are often qualitatively accurate for strongly-correlated systems
already, they lack dynamic correlations and are by no means quantitative.
Scuseria will develop a “project then correlate” approach that formulates
standard correlated wave function techniques to work directly on the projected
mean-field state. The hope is that this combination of two well-established
methods will work much better than its components under strong correlation.
Students mentored within the scope of this project will gain state-of-the-art
expertise in molecular electronic structure theory and quantum mechanics more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.