* 2153978
* Inspiration, Frustration, and Fascination:  An Excursion into Low-Oxidation State Main Group Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Yuzhong Wang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2025
* USD 525,543.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Gregory H. Robinson of the University of Georgia, will study the
synthetic inorganic chemistry of compounds based on inexpensive, abundant, non-
metallic elements. The goal is to develop catalysts based upon readily available
main group elements as alternatives to traditional industrial catalysts that are
often based upon rare and expensive transition metals. The key target in this
research is a class of compounds called dithiolenes that contains two sulfur
atoms and can accept and/or donate electrons in chemical reactions. Since the
ability to provide or accept electrons is one of the key properties of most
transition metal catalysts, the use of dithiolenes to perform a number of
industrially important processes will be evaluated. Students engaged in this
work will acquire skills in manipulating unusual chemical compounds. In
addition, they will be trained in public speaking and writing skills. The PI
will continue his efforts to extend the chemistry research enterprise to women
and African Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize a
number of main group-based dithiolene radicals and explore their structure and
reactivity. An important goal is to ascertain if main group-based dithiolene
radicals can activate small, energy-rich molecules. Specifically, a set of Lewis
base-stabilized dithiolene zwitterions (LO) will be prepared. These will be used
to explore: (a) the activation of small molecules using LO, (b) the thermally or
optically induced single electron transfer involving LO, (c) the development of
LO-anchored Lewis acid/base pairs, (d) the "naked" dithiolene radical-NHSi-
polysulfide three-component systems for ring opening of cyclic ethers and
esters, (e) magnesium dithiolene radicals, and (f) group 13 and 14 element-based
tris(dithiolene) triradicals. The proposed work will attempt to answer several
fundamentally important questions, including: Are redox-active ligands capable
of activating small molecules in a metal-free environment? The project will
provide training and education for a diverse group of students and postdoctoral
associates. In addition, the PI is an active participant in a wide range of
efforts to increase the diversity of both students and faculty in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.