* 2153397
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Secure and Privacy-preserving Input on Augmented Reality Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jiacheng Shang, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 171,879.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Augmented reality is a type of
interaction and immersive experience that overlays the real-world scene with
virtual objects. To deliver such an experience, augmented reality devices rely
on various sensors to sense the user and surrounding environment accurately and
synchronously. However, the sensors suffer from various attacks, which further
negatively affect the augmented reality experience. The goal of this project is
to have a complete understanding of feasible attacks on all sensors in augmented
reality devices and propose new defense algorithms against found attacks. The
outcome of the research will improve the security and privacy of augmented
reality devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal, the
project focuses on (i) identifying feasible sensor injection attacks and
proposing defense algorithms with behavior knowledge and sensor fusion, (ii)
studying what sensitive information can be inferred using the existing sensor
data on augmented reality devices, and (iii) proposing an inference prevention
model in the operating system to filter out sensitive information in sensor data
before sending them to augmented reality applications. The outcome of this work
can provide insights for building secure and privacy-preserving augmented
reality applications and devices. This project will also engage graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students to develop their interests in computer security
and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.