* 2153676
* Collaborative Research: US-German Research on Human-Automation Interaction for the Future of Work
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Orit Shaer, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 63,741.00

Automated systems have been around for decades. However today, computer-based
automated apps and devices are woven into our professional and personal daily
lives to a greater extent than before. Our goal is to design human-automation
interactions for the future of work, which are intuitive, and promote safety,
transparency, dignity, and trust. To do this, we need both scientific and
technological advancements, as well as a workforce that understands the
challenges and opportunities of the future of work. Our IRES students will help
develop the science and technology, and through their interactions with our
German colleagues, they will be trained by thought leaders in the field of the
future of work, helping us create the US workforce that will tackle the problems
of the new future of work. Each summer six student participants will conduct
research for two months on this topic in Germany in research labs led by thought
leaders in the field. The grant will support inclusive excellence in STEM
disciplines by promoting the participation of Black, Indigenous and People of
Color, and in particular women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to design
human-automation interactions for the future of work, which are intuitive, and
promote safety, transparency, dignity, and trust. The intellectual merit of the
proposed work will be the advances in human-automation interaction in four
areas. First, our work will shed light on how we should allocate tasks between
human and automated agents under certain work contexts, including in automated
vehicles and when working from home. Second, we will improve our understanding
of how to create human-automation interaction for work-related tasks where
workers develop trust at the appropriate level. Third, we will identify ways in
which human-automation interaction can support worker attention in different
work contexts, including automated vehicles and work from home. Fourth, we will
expand our understanding of how novel technologies can support work, and
importantly also wellbeing. Our technology focus areas will include speech,
augmented reality and virtual reality, and tangible interfaces. While these
technologies are already available, we will explore how they could be widely
used in work settings to support a broad range of
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.