* 2153937
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven Power Systems Control with Stability Guarantees
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Baosen Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF project aims to design a new data-driven power system control framework
with stability guarantee. Power systems are experiencing a period of rapid
changes due to the proliferation of renewable generation and distributed energy
resources including solar, electric vehicles, and batteries. Many of these new
technologies are interfaced with the grid through power electronic interfaces
(i.e., inverters) that can be controlled at a much faster timescale compared to
conventional machines. However, how to leverage such flexibility is nontrivial
due to the nonlinearity, complexity, and uncertainty in the underlying power
network. This project will bring transformative changes by developing new
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for inverter-based frequency and voltage
control with formal stability guarantees. The intellectual merits of the project
include (i) a novel framework that bridges Lyapunov control theory and RL,
therefore providing stability guarantee for learning-based controllers; (ii)
neural network structure design that ensures stability constraint is met by
design. The broader impacts of the project include various of new courses
development and research opportunities for students interested in both energy
systems and machine learning/AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
consists of three thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on developing the algorithmic
framework that integrates RL with Lyapunov stability constraints, which serves
as a foundation to later thrusts. Specifically, we will leverage analytical
models to construct Lyapunov functions and engineer the structure of neural
network-based controllers to meet the stability constraints. Thrust 2 uses
machine learning to discover new Lyapunov functions for realistic power system
models and design stable control policies. Thrust 3 integrates the theory and
algorithms developed in Thrusts 1 and 2, and robustifies the controllers against
modeling error, and network topology re-configurations in both transmission and
distribution grids. The contributions of the project are two-folded. On the
theoretical side, the proposed research bridges classic control and learning,
where control theory provides the structural constraints that guarantee a
controller is stable, and RL with neural networks searches over the large
parametric spaces to find the best performing controllers that have this
structure. On the practical side, our approach clears a critical hurdle in
applying RL to power systems by guaranteeing the stability of the learned
policy. We envision our framework will serve as the basis for future learning-
based smart power system control architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.