* 2153507
* Existence of Specific Paths, Cycles, and Colorings in Graphs and Hypergraphs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Alexandr Kostochka, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 295,490.00

Extremal problems on graphs and hypergraphs naturally arise in different areas
of science, such as information theory, electrical engineering, statistical
physics, and molecular biology. This is a large fast developing area with deep
ideas and powerful tools. The area also is closely related to other parts of
mathematics, computer science and operation research. We consider two types of
basic extremal problems on graphs and hypergraphs: on the existence of paths and
cycles of a given kind and on special partitions of the set of vertices or edges
of a (hyper)graph (mainly involving its cycle structure). Since cycles and paths
are very natural substructures of graphs and hypergraphs, understanding problems
on their existence will help in resolving other extremal problems. The PI plans
to involve into work on the problems of the grant several graduate students and
very recent graduates of the University of Illinois. The research guidance for
them contributes to their professional development and
reputation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study
a series of extremal problems related to paths and cycles in graphs and
hypergraphs and to colorings, especially when the answers depend on the cycle
structure. In fact, in most coloring problems the cycle structure is important.
In a number of problems we will consider (hyper)graphs with restrictions on
degree structure. Examples are: (hyper)graphs with bounded maximum degree, or
with bounded maximum average degree, or with given degeneracy, or k-regular, or
with high minimum degree. Among important topics are Turan-type problems on
cycles and paths in graphs and ordered graphs, problems on different kinds of
cycles and paths in hypergraphs, extremal problems on different types of
coloring, Ramsey-type problems for cycles and paths, DP-colorings, list
coloring, improper colorings, graph reconstruction problems when the known
subgraphs have less than n-1 vertices, saturation problems for hypergraphs. Work
in these directions will exploit and hopefully develop recent advances in the
field including the results and ideas of the PI and his co-authors, in
particular, graduate students working with him.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.