* 2153564
* NSF Entrepreneurial Fellowships for Increased Diversity and Impact
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Karin Lion, ACTIVATE GLOBAL, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2027
* USD 11,432,155.00

This effort seeks to lay the programmatic underpinnings for a larger-scale
national entrepreneurial ecosystem to support and mentor scientists and
engineers in their efforts to launch new high-impact ventures based on deep
technology innovations. The project will directly empower a racially,
geographically, and gender diverse set of new translational science and
engineering leaders advancing cutting-edge technology innovations across sectors
critical to economic security and competitiveness, including agriculture,
buildings, chemicals, computing, defense, electricity, manufacturing, and
transportation. Success in this effort may validate a national model for
developing and maintaining a strong translational research talent pool while
advancing emerging industries, addressing critical societal and economic
challenges, enhancing U.S. competitiveness and economic and national security,
and enabling more participation from those who have been underrepresented in the
science and engineering innovation enterprise. This initiative will also enable
synergies with, and be strengthened by learnings from, flagship NSF
translational programs including the NSF Lab-to-Market Platform comprising
Partnerships for Innovation, Small Business Innovation Research/Small Business
Technology Transfer, and Innovation Corps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this effort stems from piloting and evaluating three new critical
approaches to increase access and further empower scientists and engineers
across the nation. The first approach is the creation of a new modality for
entrepreneurial support: a community of entrepreneurial fellows that allows any
qualified scientist or engineer across the country to benefit from the core
fellowship support and leverage the concentrated resources of traditional
innovation centers without having to relocate to such centers. The second
approach is the creation of a new in-person community that would expand the
existing model beyond the most established entrepreneurial ecosystems, a
critical test toward ensuring that regional hubs can be created across the
nation to support fellows in an in-residence format. The third approach is an
initiative focused on increasing diversity in Scienece, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) entrepreneurship by supporting pre-doctoral scientists
and engineers from traditionally underrepresented populations, exposing them to
entrepreneurship and potential careers in technical innovation. Taken together,
these three initiatives seek to multiply the impact of a larger scale national
entrepreneurial ecosystem, and provide key learnings that will allow continued
scaling and even greater national impacts. Those who successfully complete the
program will constitute the nationâ€™s entrepreneurial leaders well into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.