* 2153404
* CRII: RI: Deep neural network pruning for fast and reliable visual detection in self-driving vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Qing Tian, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,343.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to simplify large general-purpose deep neural networks for fast and trustworthy
visual detection in self-driving vehicles. The project develops compact models
that require less computation, energy consumption, and carbon dioxide emissions.
In addition, lower latency of these compact models can translate to higher
survival rates during emergencies. Through facilitating a wider deployment of
self-driving cars, the project will also help reduce driving-related labor costs
and provide greater and safe mobility to the elderly and the disabled. Finally,
the investigator will introduce relevant technology and findings from the
project to the classroom and involve students from diverse backgrounds in this
research. These activities will prepare students for tomorrow's automobile
industry in Ohio and nearby Michigan, the top two states for auto production in
the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses problems of efficient and
reliable self-driving visual detection through deep network pruning and
adversarial training. The central hypothesis is that there are many redundant,
task-irrelevant, and even interfering parameters/features in a large generalist
network. When deployed on self-driving vehicles, such unnecessary and overfitted
components will render automated visual detection slow and open more doors for
malign attacks. Such components should be pruned or improved. This project has
two specific aims: (1) creating a deep network pruning framework for self-
driving visual detection. The framework will be proactive (not after the fact of
training) and will utilize both location and class information, and (2)
improving the robustness of the pruned self-driving detectors. The investigator
will study the adversarial robustness of the pruned models and seek improvement
via adversarial training. The research can lead to departing from the dominant
trend of employing large generalist networks for various applications to
deriving lightweight specialist networks for efficient and reliable visual
detection in self-driving cars. The project will provide some technologies
towards fully (Level 5) autonomous driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.