* 2153669
* Markov Random Fields, Geostatistics and Matrix-Free Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Debashis Mondal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 73,789.00

In the past few decades, spatial statistics has become increasingly important in
agriculture, epidemiology, geology, image analysis and environmental science.
PI's prior research provided new perspectives in connecting two major branches
of spatial statistics, namely the Markov random fields and geostatistics and in
advancing fast statistical computations. At present, many important scientific
applications demand use of complex spatial models and their multivariate and
spatial-temporal versions. However, statistical computations of these complex
spatial models have remained a challenge. The project derives new mathematical
understanding on these complex spatial and spatial-temporal models, which then
opens up the possibility of advancing various scalable statistical computations
with minimal storage. The project will contribute to obtaining enhanced
scientific understanding in studies such as arsenic and magnesium contamination
and hydro-chemical analysis of groundwater and spatial and spatial temporal
variations in opioid overdose cases in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together mathematical and
computational knowledge from different scientific fields to develop principled
frameworks for spatial statistics and inference. The research aims to provide
new understanding on (i) constructions of higher neighborhood order Gaussian
Markov random fields, (ii) joint modeling of two or more spatial variables, and
(iii) complex spatial-temporal models. Novel matrix-free computations are
proposed to advance statistical inference. These computations include not just
best linear unbiased predictions and residual maximum likelihood estimation, but
also scalable Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods. Applications will include mapping
(1) heavy metal contamination in groundwater and (2) geographic variations in
drug overdose cases across the United States. The project also aims to integrate
research and educational activities through developing short courses and case
studies on spatial statistics and scalable computation, and through providing
valuable training and learning opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.