* 2153311
* CRII: Learning to simulate with small data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Hua Wei, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great success in a series of artificial
intelligence (AI) domains such as Go games. Since RL can provide optimized
policies to achieve certain goals, people are eager to use advanced RL
techniques to solve real-world decision-making problems. Despite its huge
success in AI domains, RL has not yet shown the same degree of success for real-
world applications because RL largely relies on simulation, and there is rarely
a good simulator for real-world systems. Unlike simulated environments such as
games where data could be unlimited, real-world physical systems like traffic
systems are quite the opposite: data is small (i.e., sparse and hard to obtain).
This raises important research questions about building realistic simulations
from small data that can mimic complex and stochastic real-world dynamics. The
solution from this project can help policymakers choose a better policy before
implementing it in the real world, greatly facilitate the adoption of
reinforcement learning techniques in the real world, and benefit many
applications in which one would like to use real data to learn or understand
real-world physical systems better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
build a realistic traffic simulator by investigating data mining algorithms and
provides solutions toward mimicking real-world simulations with small data with
applications to traffic simulations. This project will learn to simulate without
making unrealistic assumptions on the real-world models and further learn with
the real-world setting of small data. First, the project will try to learn data-
driven models from incomplete and indirect observations from the real world.
Second, this project will seek to innovate the data-driven model to meet with
human knowledge, as human knowledge could guide us to learn a model that is not
only relied on small and possibly biased data. Third, this project aims to
leverage the influences from multiple parties in the real world for the data-
driven model. New machine learning techniques will be developed in the data
mining process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.