* 2153171
* CRII: III: Explainable Multi-Source Data Integration with Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Xiaoxiao Du, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,952.00

Sensors are all around us collecting data. Each sensor may provide complementary
or reinforced information that supports tasks such as target detection,
classification, or scene understanding. In remote sensing applications, for
example, hyperspectral imaging sensors can provide spectral information about
materials by using a wide range of wavelengths, while LiDAR (light detection and
ranging) measures an object's elevation above the ground. If a road and a
building rooftop are built with the same material (e.g., asphalt), hyperspectral
information alone may not be sufficient to tell them apart, while integrating
height information from LiDAR data makes it easier to distinguish the two. This
project will develop innovative mathematical framework and associated algorithms
for integrating such sensor data from multiple sources. The main novelty of this
project will be in its capacity to learn the relationships and non-linear
interactions among multiple sources during data integration, while addressing
data and label uncertainties commonly observed in real-world sensor data. This
work will advance the fundamental knowledge in explainable data integration and
is applicable to a broad range of data-intensive applications with significant
social impact including remote sensing, autonomous driving, robotic vision and
perception, and precision agriculture. This work will also support cross-
disciplinary research and educational activities, including mentoring students
from diverse backgrounds, outreach activities through hands-on design projects
and the development of undergraduate and graduate-level courses on data
integration and machine learning at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to bridge existing gaps in
knowledge by developing a unified, weakly supervised learning-based framework
for heterogeneous multi-sensor data integration, accounting for both data and
label uncertainties. This project addresses the following three research
components. The first objective of this research is to develop a scalable and
efficient computational model leveraging the binary fuzzy measures under the
multiple instance learning framework, which will reduce the search space of the
non-linear aggregation operator such as the Choquet integral (CI) and be
significantly more robust at handling data integration for larger numbers of
sources. The second objective is to leverage bi-capacities and bi-polar CI to
account for conflicts and negation of evidence in data sources. Experiments will
be conducted to investigate how each data source and their combinations
contribute to different integration outcomes. This study will allow for greater
explainability and adaptability when integrating complex and heterogeneous
datasets. The third objective is to extend the current multiple instance CI
framework for sequential inputs, such as multi-view and multi-temporal data,
which will uncover the untapped potential of using CI for spatiotemporal data
integration. This research will make data integration manageable, interpretable,
and applicable with large volumes of multi-modal data to facilitate decision
making and knowledge discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.