* 2153426
* CRII: III: Towards Effective and Efficient City-scale Traffic Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Weizi Li, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,789.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automobiles have facilitated
socio-economic development and connected nearly all social sectors. However,
rapid urbanization and expansion of the traffic system have caused many issues
worldwide including congestion and accidents. As urbanization and vehicle
production are projected to further increase in coming decades, better planning
and management of traffic become imperative. Traffic is a dynamical system that
propagates from one area to another in a city. So, in order to optimize it for
various purposes, a holistic and systematic viewpoint of city-scale traffic
dynamics is inevitable and necessary. Nevertheless, studies of this topic are
currently lacking due to the limitation of traffic data and the multi-scale
interpretation of the traffic system. This proposal focuses on leveraging mobile
data to effectively and efficiently reconstruct city-scale traffic. The
reconstructed traffic can be used to not only plan and manage urban traffic but
also to predict traffic patterns by leveraging advanced traffic simulation. This
project is expected to innovate in transportation and traffic research, and thus
benefit people from various disciplines, including computer science, civil
engineering, urban planning, earth science, and supply chain management. The
accompanying educational and outreach activities include curriculum development
at the intersection of Computer Science and Intelligent Transporation Systems,
and research opportunities for students in underrepresented groups as well as
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
developing effective and efficient reconstruction methods of city-scale traffic
using mobile data. First of all, the travel time of individual road segments
will be estimated using the time information embedded in mobile data. With the
estimated travel time, other macroscopic traffic states such as speed, flow, and
density will be subsequently estimated. Second, a novel map-matching technique
for generating vehicle trajectories will be developed in case of low-sampling
rate mobile data. Third, simulation-based optimization will be adopted to
reconstruct microscopic traffic dynamics while ensuring consistent traffic flows
at the boundaries of data-sufficient and data-lacking areas. Lastly, a hybrid
simulation will be explored with the aim to achieve highly-efficient traffic
reconstruction through studying various ITS applications' requirements on
efficiency and reconstruction fidelity, and an effective conversion method
between macroscopic and microscopic traffic simulation. The proposed methods
will be evaluated using both publicly available and proprietary
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.