* 2153551
* IRES Track I: Student Research Experience in Germany to Resolve Complex Plant Traits
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,722.00

Washington State University (WSU) and Germany’s CEPLAS program (Cluster of
Excellence on Plant Sciences) intend to develop a cohort of carefully selected,
diverse IRES scholars as globally educated graduate and undergraduate students
for international leadership in Plant Biology research that emphasizes solutions
to the huge challenge of sustainable food production. The scholars’
international research experience will be flanked by a rich cultural and social
program organized by CEPLAS. The IRES project will also incorporate a
transatlantic virtual collaborative component, not only as a contingency plan if
international travel is restricted, but also as a venue to prepare the IRES
students ahead of their international experience and sustain their connections
with CEPLAS’ scientists and students after the experience. The success of the
proposed IRES project will be fostered by the already existing excellent
infrastructure offered by CEPLAS for international students. Through the direct
cooperation between European and US scientists in this program, the IRES
scholars will increase their competency about crop plants with more
environmentally resilient photosynthesis and metabolism, enhanced interactions
with beneficial microbes, and defenses against pathogens. The interdisciplinary
IRES research experiences in Germany will also train the scholars on the
initiation, establishment, and cultivation of scientific collaborations, which
will benefit them in their professional careers, make them more marketable for
research occupations both domestically and internationally, and sustain regional
and national economies with multinational corporations in the agricultural
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-IRES venture between WSU and the
German Institutions within the CEPLAS program has resulted from a strategic
research and education partnership between the two institutions. The CEPLAS
cluster includes the Universities of Cologne and Düsseldorf, and the Max Planck
Institute for Plant Breeding Research, which are world-class research centers.
The IRES scholars will work on research projects that revolve on a deeper
understanding of complex plant traits. The knowledge gained by this fundamental
research has high agronomic relevance that can help to improve the yield and
adaptation of crop plants to limited natural resources and pave the way for
bioengineering crop plants that are more productive and robust against
environmental challenges. Hence, the research education received by these
scholars will broadly expand society’s knowledge about plant biology towards
improving food security while protecting the environment. A diverse cohort of 16
graduate and 8 undergraduate students with an eight-student cohort each year,
from the WSU’s College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences and
the College of Arts and Sciences, will complete a 10-week-long research
experience in Germany, with English as the working language. At CEPLAS, an
internationally acclaimed research center, each IRES scholar will conduct
fundamental research, carefully selected by a pool of 16 German/US research
pairs. Under the tutelage of leading CEPLAS Plant Science researchers, the
scholars’ research will address the challenge of a comprehensive understanding
of complex biological processes and traits in plants and their regulation and
inheritance. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.