* 2153558
* IRES Track 1: Exploring Surface Water Contamination and Links to Disease Risk in Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Thomas Shahady, University of Lynchburg
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,259.00

Costa Rica, a Central American country world-renowned for its biodiversity and
unique ecology, is very active toward conservation but with growing concerns
about water health. The entire country is sectioned into Conservation Units
called “Biological Corridors” serving to protect and conserve sensitive areas.
But while these corridors protect wildlife and forest communities, they also
serve as water purifiers labeled “Ecological Services” for the towns and cities
in these corridors. Drinking water is extracted directly from wells or springs
while sanitation occurs in the very same groundwater discharged from septic
tanks. This creates water stress as concerns over changing precipitation
patterns emerge, agricultural use intensifies, conservation work continues and
disease risk is addressed. These concerns have world-wide implications as rural
communities in the United States battle similar problems balancing water use
with conservation and associated disease risk in our
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between personal (septic
systems), with municipal sanitation (waste water treatment plants) and pollution
of surface waters, groundwater and aquifers, is a poorly understood yet highly
relevant area of study in Costa Rica because there is growing concern over high
incidence of disease, such as peptic ulcers, gastritis, and stomach cancers
potentially attributable to poor drinking water conditions. Through coordinated
and integrated student research projects, linkages between surface waters,
groundwater and sanitation are explored. The student research will more clearly
link incidence of illness to water sources, concerning pollutants and will begin
to generate new, innovative methods for understanding and predicting the
condition of underwater drinking supplies. Not only will this research address a
critical knowledge gap for communities where surface water conditions present
health risk, it will provide outstanding opportunities for professional
development of both undergraduate and graduate students pursuing careers in the
environmental health and sciences field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly
coordinated student work will support the need to integrate student experience
among very diverse, underrepresented groups of students with international
collaborators solving needed community issues. This work further integrates
diverse scientific expertise, international competencies, and diversity among
future U.S. water quality professionals through a concerted effort to recruit
and train undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, and foster research collaboration in an international
setting. It expands applicable water quality partnership work in Costa Rica and
provides critical decision-making capacity for local water professionals. This
project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.