* 2153337
* Mid-scale RI-2: Airborne Phased Array Radar (APAR)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* WENCHAU LEE, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Maria Womack
* 05/31/2028
* USD 12,398,000.00

This award supports the final development, testing, and implementation of the
Airborne Phased Array Radar (APAR), which will provide a generational leap in
severe storm and climate research. Operated by the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR), APAR will make measurements of clouds and severe
storms all over the world, including over oceans, rough land, and forested
regions, which are mostly unreachable by conventional radar systems thereby
eliminating a data gap in atmospheric science research. As the next-generation
operational weather observing capability for the United States, APAR meets a
critical need for new weather observations. With new capabilities to see deep
into the three-dimensional structure of intense storms and cloud systems,
crucial new insights are gained into the distribution of water vapor,
precipitation, and associated radiative processes that govern Earth's energy
balance. APAR measurements will be used to test predictions about severe
weather, including tropical cyclones, tornadoes, damaging straight-line winds,
hail, and flash flooding, and allow researchers to record the complex and
changing lifecycle of severe systems. APAR will be a requestable community
facility in the GEO /AGS Lower Atmosphere Observing Facilities pool. The
implementation and subsequent operation of APAR will offer the research
community access to high-resolution radar data for engineering and scientific
analyses, and help mitigate threats and risks to transportation, forestry,
agriculture, economy, and health. Other innovations include mapping out
characteristics of insect/bird migrations over thousands of kilometers and the
development of innovative software solutions. Funding for APAR will enable
significant opportunities for training a diverse workforce by incorporating
educational and training opportunities that will draw from underrepresented and
minority student, educator, and researcher populations. Multi-faceted and
-lingual outreach and education events and products are planned to reach a broad
and diverse audience through the NCAR Explorer Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;APAR
will be the worldâ€™s first phased array C-band (5 cm wavelength), dual-Doppler,
dual-polarization radar with fast-scan agility to be carried on an aircraft. It
will consist of four removable active electronically scanned array antennas that
will be mounted on the fuselage of the NSF/NCAR C-130. The engineering
breakthroughs required to implement APAR push the boundaries of current phased-
array-radar technology, including antenna performance never previously achieved
and tools and techniques (including signal processing to derive a multitude of
storm characteristics) to harvest the copious volumes of data to be collected.
Compared to ground-based platforms which must alternate between data collection
and transit modes, APAR will be able to obtain continuous three dimensional,
very high spatiotemporal resolution observations of storm kinematics and
microphysical cloud properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.