* 2153466
* Enantioselective Fluorescent Analysis of Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Lin Pu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2025
* USD 483,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Lin Pu of University of Virginia
is studying fluorescent sensors that can distinguish the enantiomers of chiral
amino acids. A chiral amino acid can exist in L- and D-enantiomeric forms whose
molecular structures are mirror images of each other, but not superimposable.
L-Amino acids are the essential molecular building blocks of proteins in living
systems on earth. D-Amino acids are less common in nature but are still found to
play important roles in biological systems. Both L- and D-amino acids are very
useful in the synthesis of diverse organic compounds including those of
pharmaceutical importance. Because of the significance of L- and D-amino acids
in biology and synthesis, it is important to analyze their chiral configuration
and enantiomeric composition. Among the methods that have been developed to
analyze the enantiomers of amino acids, using enantioselective fluorescent
sensors has advantages such as readily available instrumentation, high
sensitivity, real-time measurement, multiple sensing modes, non-invasive
imaging, continuous online monitoring, parallel analysis, etc. Professor Pu will
develop new enantioselective fluorescent sensors for amino acids to facilitate
the deployment of these sensors for the rapid screening of catalysts being
investigated for the asymmetric synthesis of amino acids and related compounds.
The researchers engaged in this project will also conduct outreach activities to
provide science education for local K-12 students of diverse background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a 1,1â€™-binaphthyl-coumarin-based
fluorescent probe will be further developed for application in the rapid
analysis of chiral amino acids obtained from asymmetric reactions. The pseudo-
enantiomer of this probe will be prepared and the resulting pseudo-enantiomeric
sensor pair will be applied to simultaneously determine the concentration and
enantiomeric composition of an amino acid sample by one fluorescence
measurement. This strategy also allows the identification of the absolute
configuration of the amino acid. A systematic structural modification of this
probe will be conducted to improve its enantioselectivity and expand the
accessible substrate scope of the method. In order to minimize the interference
of other components in an amino acid sample on the fluorescence measurement, a
perfluoro alkyl group or an amphiphilic polymer chain will be incorporated into
the fluorescent probes. These fluorous phase-based or polymer-supported
fluorescent probes will be able to transport the sensor-substrate interaction
away from the original sample phase for more accurate fluorescence measurements.
The proposed fluorescent sensors will be used in the screening of chiral
catalysts for the asymmetric alkyne addition to imines and for asymmetric
Akabori-like reactions. These studies should facilitate the search of efficient
and environmentally friendly chiral catalysts for asymmetric syntheses. The
enantioselective fluorescent probes developed in this project also have
potential to be used much more broadly in asymmetric synthesis, including in
automated systems for high throughput catalyst
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.