* 2153790
* Contractility and apoptosis in germline architecture and oogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Vance Kite, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,118,248.00

All living things are made of cells, but most cells are so tiny and closely
packed that they cannot be resolved without powerful magnification. By contrast,
animal eggs are exceptionally large cells; bird eggs are single enormous cells.
All animals produce eggs with an elaborate cell (the germline) that has many
inter-connected compartments that become eggs. In some animals, such as the one
the investigators use, the germline cell operates as a conveyor belt;
compartments and their contents are displaced from one end of the germline to
the other as they grow. It is not known how the compartments maintain connection
with each other, and how these connections change as compartments enlarge and
mature. This project will uncover the mechanisms of this process. The Broader
Impacts of the project include the intrinsic merit of the work itself as all
animal eggs (including those of humans) utilize some form of this process.
Additionally, the work will provide training opportunities for undergraduates,
graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers along with high school
teachers. Additional outreach work will bring science into local
gradeschools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators use Caenorhabditis elegans
as a model animal. The project will make use of the extensive genetics available
in this system and employ state of the art live microscopic imaging approaches
to observe and measure germline compartment dynamics. For compartments at
different positions along the germline, and as compartments are born, die, or
enlarge, the investigators will compare the size of the compartment and its
associated “doorway” to the shared central core. They also compare the amount of
various cellular components on compartment walls and doorways, focusing on
players that convey biochemical information or that rearrange to generate force.
Not all compartments ultimately become oocytes; some undergo programmed cell
death. The investigators will study the role of this process in germline
architecture and oogenesis. Computer modeling will generate testable predictions
that they will test with simulations and biological experiments. Execution of
the research and the outreach activities will define mechanisms of cell
structure and egg production, strengthen scientific research potential, and
increase research diversity during the funding period and for generations to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.