* 2153866
* Dynamics of Stochastic Networks: Approximation, Analysis, and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ruth Williams, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 231,879.00

Stochastic models of complex networks with dynamic interactions arise in a wide
variety of applications in science and engineering. Specific instances include
biochemical reaction networks, high-tech manufacturing, computer systems,
telecommunications, transportation, and business service systems. This project
addresses mathematical questions stemming from the challenges of analyzing and
controlling such stochastic networks. The research involves the development of
general theory for some broad classes of stochastic networks and the study of
questions directly motivated by specific applications. Since the complexity of
stochastic networks usually precludes exact analysis of detailed “microscopic”
models, the focus here is on approximate models. Two levels of approximation are
considered: first-order approximations called fluid models, and second-order
approximations, which frequently are diffusion models. New techniques and
results will be developed with an eye toward application areas. The investigator
will help train a diverse mathematics research workforce through collaboration
with early career researchers and women researchers. The project also provides
training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will address mathematical questions associated with the analysis and control of
stochastic network dynamics. Topics to be addressed include rigorous
justification of approximations, analyzing and controlling the behavior of the
approximate models, and interpreting the results for the original microscopic
models. An important subtheme is understanding the interplay between levels of
approximation. Five topics are to be studied:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Diffusion
Approximations for (Bio)Chemical Reaction Networks and Nearly Density-Dependent
Markov Chains;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Analysis of Processor Sharing
Networks;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Congestion Control and Resource Entrainment in Data
Networks;&lt;br/&gt;(iv) Networks with Random Order of Service and Reneging;
and&lt;br/&gt;(v) Dynamic Control of Stochastic Processing
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;Some stochastic process aspects of these topics include
error quantification in the approximation of nearly density-dependent Markov
chains by reflected diffusion processes, analysis of measure-valued processes
used to track residual job sizes or patience times in stochastic networks with
resource sharing and reneging, singular diffusion control problems, foundational
questions for reflected processes, and numerical approximation of reflected
diffusion processes in non-smooth domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.