* 2153475
* Unleashing Mesoionic Carbene-derived Super-reductants to Overcome the Limitations of NHC- Oxidative Organocatalysis Without a Co-Catalyst
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Guy Bertrand of the University of California, San Diego
(UCSD) is studying new processes promoted by so-called "mesoionic carbenes."
These chemical species are readily available organic compounds that have the
potential to catalyze the same kinds of transformations currently conducted with
expensive, toxic, and rare transition metal-based catalysts. Furthermore, the
processes being explored have the capacity to convert simple compounds found in
biomass to complex molecules of importance to science, engineering, and
commerce. Accordingly, it is anticipated that the research being explored will
facilitate the manufacture of value-added materials from simple feed stocks in a
more sustainable and economical manner. The broader impacts of the funded
project extend to the benefits accrued to the future STEM workforce from an
international exchange program between UCSD and the French Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) that Professor Bertrand spearheads. The exchange
of undergraduate and graduate students between UCSD and CNRS-associated
universities enables these young scientists to develop an international
perspective on both chemical production and the challenges facing the chemical
industry as it transitions to deliver more environmentally responsible
manufacturing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the funded research is to
advance the field of catalysis on a fundamental level through the exploration of
conceptually new and underdeveloped methods of substrate activation. There are
few examples of NHC-catalyzed reactions via single electron transfer pathways
involving Breslow intermediates (BIs), and the synthetic applications of such
processes are limited by the moderate nucleophilicity and reduction potential of
BIs derived from classical NHCs. In marked contrast, mesoionic carbenes, which
were discovered in the Bertrand laboratory, are strongly nucleophilic and among
the most potent organic reducing agents reported to date. The goal of the
project is to exploit the unique attributes of mesoionic carbenes to expand NHC
oxidative organocatalysis to less electrophilic substrates such as formaldehyde,
and to less oxidizing agents such as aryl- and vinyl-halides. It is anticipated
that the transformations of interest will be achieveable in both inter- and
intramolecular modalities and that a wide range of useful products, including
carbocycles and heterocycles, will be accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.