* 2153968
* Collaborative Research: From Silicate Melts Properties to the Dynamics and Evolution of an Early Basal Magma Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Sang-Heon Shim, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,976.00

The goal of this project is to understand the potential role of a basal magma
ocean in influencing magnetic field processes in the early Earth. A basal magma
ocean arises when an initially molten mantle begins solidifying from the middle
outwards, and a downward crystallizing basal magma ocean has been proposed as a
mechanism to power an early magnetic field in our planet. The research team will
collect key, currently missing measurements on the physical properties of iron-
bearing silicate melts to better understand the dynamics and evolution of an
early basal magma ocean and further evaluate the scenario that a basal magma
ocean powered the early Earth's magnetic field. The main questions to be
addressed are: What is the initial depth of the basal magma ocean? How long
would a basal magma ocean exist? What affects the strength of a magnetic field
generated within a basal magma ocean? Would the evolution of iron-enriched melts
be consistent with seismic anomalies observed at the base of the mantle? This
work represents a new, multidisciplinary collaboration between experimental
mineral physics (dynamic and static compression techniques) and computational
geodynamics to advance our understanding of deep and early Earth processes. This
work will support the training of graduate students in a variety of experimental
methods: dynamic and static compression techniques and X-ray and in-house
characterization tools at unique world-class facilities, as well as modeling
approaches to develop and refine models of planetary interiors that use state-
of-the-art experimental constraints. This work will also support research
experiences to undergraduate and high school interns, using a cohort-building
model with multiple layers of support and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes three crucial, collaborative research pieces: 1) dynamic
compression experiments to measure iron spin state and liquid structure of dense
melts; 2) static compression experiments in a laser-heated diamond-anvil cell
measurements to constrain iron partitioning and melting temperature; 3)
geodynamic modelling which will use the experimental constraints to understand
the thermal and magnetic evolution of the coupled solid mantle-basal magma ocean
system. The research team will collect new measurements on the physical
properties of iron-bearing silicate melts which represent crucial experimental
constraints for modeling the dynamics and evolution of an early basal magma
ocean. These properties include iron-spin state (which has only recently become
feasible for high pressure melts) and density of silicate melt, iron
partitioning between silicate melt and lower-mantle minerals, and the effect of
iron on melting temperature. These new measurements will provide a deeper
understanding of the evolution of a basal magma ocean, from its initial
conditions to properties and compositions of late-stage solidification products,
which may still be present in the deep mantle. The team will further investigate
the possibility that the Earth's magnetic field may have been generated from
within the basal magma ocean. Evaluating the duration of time this might have
occurred will be accomplished by supplying new geodynamic models of basal magma
oceans with relevant, high-pressure, high-temperature physical properties
measurements of constituent materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.