* 2153386
* CRII: CIF: A Sparse Framework Based Automotive Radar Sensing for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Shunqiao Sun, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,964.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millimeter-wave automotive radar
has emerged as a key technology in autonomous driving in order to provide
environmental perception under all weather conditions. However, successful
deployment is facing several challenges. First, automotive radars are required
to have high angular resolution in both azimuth and elevation directions in
order to produce point clouds representing the shapes of objects and enable
target identification. Enlarging antenna array apertures by simply increasing
the number of antenna array elements involves both a huge cost and a large form
factor, and is not feasible in automotive radar applications. Furthermore, as
more vehicles are equipped with radar, the probability of mutual radar
interference increases. This project aims to explore a novel joint sparse-
frequency and sparse-array signal-processing framework that enables high-
resolution environment perception for autonomous vehicles with low-cost, small
form factor and low probability of mutual interference. The project will result
in algorithms that are applicable to various radar-sensing applications,
including the remote sensing of vital signs of patients in telemedicine, a
crucial need during the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed educational plan creates
opportunities to guide senior Capstone designs, enriches curriculum in radar-
signal-processing courses, and facilitates outreach for minority students
through an existing multicultural engineering program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is challenging to achieve high angular resolution by adopting sparse arrays
synthesized via multiple-input and multiple-output radar techniques because the
high side lobe associated with sparse arrays would result in angle ambiguity. In
addition, conventional radar chirps occupying a large bandwidth with a constant
pulse-repetition frequency greatly increase the chance of mutual interference.
The technical aims of the project are organized into two tasks. The first task
investigates a matrix completion-based array interpolation approach to fill the
holes of both one- and two-dimensional sparse arrays. The relationship between
the recoverability of low-rank radar data matrices and the irregular sparse-
array geometry will be investigated. In order to effectively complete irregular
sparse arrays, efficient iterative hard thresholding matrix-completion
algorithms will exploit the structures and properties of the underlying low-rank
Hankel and block Hankel matrices. The second task investigates a cognitive
approach to sparsely allocate the radar chirps in both frequency and temporal
domains in order to synthesize a high-resolution range profile while
significantly reducing the probability of mutual interference. This task will
design novel optimization methods to dynamically allocate the transmit chirps
under both interference and range-Doppler peak side lobe constraints by relaxing
integer variables for efficient computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.