* 2153275
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Does a Range Shifting Species Alter Ecosystem Function?
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Howard Whiteman, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 10/31/2023
* USD 44,696.00

Organisms that feed on plants play important roles in moving energy and
nutrients though ecosystems, which underlies many services that ecosystems
provide to societies such as fisheries, clean drinking water, and carbon
storage. However, the identity and abundance of organisms in ecosystems is
changing as warm-climate species move into previously cooler regions that are
disproportionately impacted by climate change. Understanding how these species
movements alter ecosystem processes is an important step in anticipating and
managing the impacts of climate change on ecosystems and their services. This
research investigates how the establishment and subsequent population boom of a
novel aquatic insect species into high elevation wetlands influences the timing
and magnitude of processes central to all ecosystems, namely the consumption of
plant material, the cycling of nutrients that support plant and animal growth,
the availability of prey for predators, and the connections between freshwater
habitats and the surrounding terrestrial environment. In addition to scientific
advancement, this research advances early childhood education via childrensâ€™
science camps, provides opportunities for public outreach during science tours
at a field station, and trains the next generation of scientists by engaging
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups in field-based
ecological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the
novel hypothesis that the dominance of a range-shifting species with life
history characteristics that differ from resident species will shift the
phenology and magnitude of ecosystem processes, altering food-web energy
transfer, and resulting in ecosystem state-shifts. Specifically, this research
investigates the ecosystem impact of a large increase in the abundance of a
recent range-shifting caddisfly (Nemotaulius hostilis) with novel life history
trait of larval development occurring in the fall and winter, rather than summer
like resident species. The research combines field measurements of organism
biomass with assays of nutrient cycling and detritus processing to 1) quantify
range-shifting and resident caddisfly population size and energy transfer to
salamander predator populations; 2) experimentally test density-dependent
competition for detritus resources between range-shifting and resident
caddisflies; 3) leverage established models and a 30-year dataset on caddisfly
and salamander abundance to estimate the past, contemporary, and future
ecosystem-process-outcomes associated with range-shifting and resident
caddisflies including detritus decomposition, nutrient release, and subsidies to
the terrestrial ecosystem. This combined approach investigating interlinked
ecosystem compartments generates a strong mechanistic understanding with general
application. Moreover, by integrating the keystone top-predator into the
research, we will develop new understanding of how top-down control influences
the ecosystem outcomes of range shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.