* 2153891
* Collaborative Research: Using Anisotropic Surface Coating of Nanoparticles to Tune Their Antimicrobial Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yan Yu, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 136,184.00

The rapid rise in antimicrobial/antibiotic resistance in pathogenic bacteria is
a global public health threat. Antimicrobial resistance occurs when bacteria and
fungi evolve to stop responding to antibiotics and to continue to grow. Each
year in the US alone, antimicrobial-resistant bacteria or fungi cause infection
in more than 2.8 million people and more than 35,000 deaths. Developing
alternatives to traditional antibiotics is critical for addressing this global
challenge. This collaborative project supports fundamental research to develop a
new type of antimicrobial nanoparticle to combat antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
These nanoparticles are unique in that they display a non-uniform coating of
hydrophobic and positively charged molecules. Such nanoparticles are expected to
act through novel antibiotic mechanisms that are less likely to cause acquired
drug resistance in bacteria. The research team will combine experiments with
computational modeling to elucidate how interactions of these nanoparticles with
bacteria depend on the non-uniform surface chemistry of nanoparticles and the
cell wall chemistry of bacteria. The mechanistic understanding from this study
will guide the rational design of antimicrobial nanoparticles against a wide
range of pathogenic bacteria. By integrating nanoscience research with
educational and outreach activities this collaborative project outlines
interdisciplinary approaches to promote critical thinking and increase diversity
in STEM. These approaches include the development of introductory undergraduate
courses that integrate science teaching with art, a collaborative outreach
project to K-12 students in rural areas, and training of the next generation of
researchers, especially underrepresented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing broad-spectrum antimicrobial nanoparticles is
challenging because a single nanoparticle design cannot be a one-size-fits-all
solution effective against all bacteria. Instead, nanoparticles whose
antimicrobial activity can be tuned to match the bacterial diversity are needed.
This collaborative project is focused on developing a new strategy to tune
nanoparticle-bacteria interactions by using the anisotropic organization of
ligands on nanoparticles. Specifically, experiments will be combined with
molecular dynamics simulations to investigate interactions of amphiphilic
nanoparticles with model bacterial membranes and a diverse selection of Gram-
negative bacterial strains, many of which are resistant to most available
antibiotics. The expected results will establish the structure-activity
relationship governing the antimicrobial mechanisms of the amphiphilic
nanoparticles. Such new understanding will enable the development and
optimization of antimicrobial nanoparticles that are potentially more potent
than existing ones and whose effects are tunable. The educational and outreach
goal of this project is to develop interdisciplinary approaches to promote
critical thinking and increase diversity in STEM. These approaches include
innovation of introductory undergraduate courses by integrating art with science
teaching, a collaborative outreach project to K-12 students in rural areas, and
training of next generation of researchers with a particular emphasis on the
involvement of underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.