* 2153228
* IRES Track 1: Low-Dimensional Materials for Transducers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hyoung Jin Cho, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,888.00

The disruptions in a global supply chain created by the pandemic have impacted
almost everyone's daily lives in the U. S. and beyond. One notable example is
the "semiconductor chip shortage". The chips process data and enable autonomous
operations of various consumer products, in many cases, without direct human
interventions. In order to enhance the manufacturing capability and capacity to
address the current challenges, it is imperative to educate the next generation
engineers with the global perspective and competitiveness in this technical
domain. Among those semiconductor chip devices, a collection of devices that
convert one energy form to another is called transducers. They play a crucial
role in translating physical events into electrical signals that computers can
process. This IRES Site program aims to provide international summer research
experiences by engaging six undergraduate/graduate students each year for three
years at the epicenter of transducer development in Korea. The team will work
with six foreign faculty mentors at four different universities to innovate
transducer technologies by utilizing newly developed nanoscale materials. This
program is designed to expose the cohort students to global research in
different cultural environments and equip them with a broader range of skills to
stimulate their professional development. Their competencies can be nurtured in
the area of leadership, communication, self-awareness in order for them to be
successful in their future careers in academia, corporate, or government
sectors. The outcome of this program will directly impact and advance the
workforce development in chip manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently
explored low-dimensional materials in significantly reduced physical dimensions
have exhibited unprecedented opportunities for emerging device applications.
They are particularly promising for transducer technologies which benefit from
their large set of extraordinary properties such as enlarged surface area,
optical/electrical tunability as well as superior mechanical deformability. This
IRES program aims to comprehensively study the fundamentals of structure-
property-process relations in a variety of low-dimensional materials toward
exploring their suitability for advanced transducer technologies. The research
team will systematically investigate the materials classified by their physical
dimension â€“ i.e., zero-dimensional quantum dots, one-dimensional nanowires, two-
dimensional graphene and transition metal dichalcogenide layers, as well as
their heterogeneously-integrated hybrid structures. Specifically, the team will
strive to unveil the underlying physical and chemical principles for the
controlled manipulation of electrical and optical properties in these materials
and investigate manufacturing methodologies to assemble them with targeted
geometries. The obtained knowledge will be utilized to develop various
transducer device components with unconventional functionalities such as
mechanically stretchable optical/electrical sensors and energy storage
electrodes. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.