* 2153118
* How to Write A CAREER: Deconstructing the Award Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Michelle Digman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2023
* USD 41,468.00

This award will support a virtual workshop March 24th-25th, 2022, to coach
early-career faculty on best practices and rhetorical patterns used in
successful writing of research proposals in biomedical engineering. The ability
to write research proposals is critical to early-career researchers’ success,
yet there is little formalized coaching in the technical writing skills
necessary to craft a successful research proposal. Those that do exist tend to
focus on content and editing, without discussing the rhetorical patterns that
are common to award-winning applications. Rhetorical patterns are ways of
organizing information. Successful proposal writing has its own rhetorical
patterns. The “How to Write a CAREER: Deconstructing the Award” workshop will
emphasize these rhetorical patterns and the importance of mentorship to gain
mastery of them. First, NSF CAREER awards related to biomedical or
bioengineering will be deconstructed by a communications science expert. Second,
the identified common rhetorical elements will provide the foundation for
workshop materials and participants will receive actionable and practical
information. This proposal-writing workshop will coach early career faculty to
be better proposal writers by identifying the language structure that is common
across successful proposals and teaching them how to apply that structure to
their own proposals. Participants, with priority given to those underrepresented
in engineering, will be well positioned to submit competitive CAREER proposals,
which has the potential for broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will advance knowledge related to NSF CAREER proposal writing in bio-
and biomedical engineering from the perspective of rhetorical patterns.
Rhetorical patterns in scientific writing are also influenced by sociocultural
variables. For instance, women are socialized to not brag, despite the
importance of using rhetorical devices to add promotional value to one’s
research articles to convince peers of its value. Novice and non-native English
technical writers can make better rhetorical choices when informed of rhetorical
patterns. Rhetorical patterns are ways of organizing and communicating
information and are critical to the clear presentation of scientific
information. When English adjectives deviate from the order “opinion-size-age-
shape-color-origin-material-purpose Noun,” a native English speaker will
recognize that the sentence is odd but would likely be unable to articulate this
list. Similarly, experienced proposal writers and reviewers understand correct
rhetorical patterns in technical writing without necessarily being able to
impart it to early career investigators. Just as incorrect word order reveals
non-native English speakers, proposal writers who deviate from expected
rhetorical patterns are identified as “non-native proposal writers.” The
rhetoric of science contends that the practice of science is persuasive—in
proposal writing, the author must convince reviewers that their research is
based on sound scientific method or engineering principles. The rhetorical
patterns in such writing involve patterns called “situation-problem-solution-
evaluation” that showcase the researcher’s observational and experimental
competence while demonstrating explanatory and predictive power. If these
rhetorical patterns are not mastered, the likelihood of funding may be affected
despite the competence of the researcher. Teaching proposal-writing by employing
the most successful use of rhetorical patterns may lessen the impact of
sociocultural differences in proposal review.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.