* 2153986
* Molecular Networks: Bonding and Long-Range Interactions in Anionic Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Andrei Sanov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 476,676.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrei Sanov and his team at the
University of Arizona will study the binding of electrons to molecules and the
cooperative interactions induced by the addition of excess electrons to extended
molecular networks. Such interactions are ubiquitous in environmental and
biological chemistry and play defining roles in shaping our world. By capturing
laser-generated images of the electrons, the project aims to attain a unified
molecular/supramolecular view of the essence of chemistry: the behavior of
electrons in stable molecules and in systems undergoing chemical change.
Professor Sanov will develop educational activities inspired by this research,
placing emphasis on science literacy and math-intensive education at the
introductory and advanced curriculum levels. These activities will include
hands-on research exposure and modeling projects that integrate research
elements into the general chemistry, mathematical physics, and physical
chemistry coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in the Sanov laboratory
at the University of Arizona will focus on chemical interactions in cluster
anions, with an emphasis on charge delocalization and the interplay between
covalent and noncovalent forces. Since describing a complex system must start
with understanding its building blocks, a two-pronged approach is to be used.
First, the intramolecular covalent bonding will be examined, including the
effects of interactions with the surroundings on the intramolecular bonding
structures. Second, the cooperative effects in molecular networks controlled by
long-range covalent and noncovalent forces will be targeted. The synergy between
the two prongs is important, for the first is aimed at the building blocks of
chemical matter, while the second considers how they fit together in larger
structures, transcending the molecular view. The project will utilize
photoelectron imaging spectroscopy in conjunction with theoretical modeling. The
photoelectron spectra and angular distributions will be used to characterize the
chemical bonding and inter-molecular forces in cluster anions. The work will
advance from stable bonds to radical and diradical interactions in non-
equilibrium transient species, and to weak covalent interactions and solvation
forces in clusters and larger molecular networks. The results will be
interpreted with the help of electronic-structure calculations. The broader
impacts include potential societal benefits from increased knowledge of the
structures and thermochemistry of reactive intermediates and an improved
understanding of the general mechanisms of chemical bonding, charge-sharing, and
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.