* 2153107
* Understanding and Addressing Misinformation about Science
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 895,784.00

Science provides an important way to understand the world that can inform policy
and personal decisions, improve human and ecological health and well-being, and
advance knowledge and technological innovation. Misinformation about science,
however, can lead to harmful outcomes. Concern about the spread of
misinformation and its role in undermining scientific expertise and facts in
civic dialogue has grown significantly, especially over the last 5-10 years.
Using the consensus study process of the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), NASEMâ€™s Board on Science Education (BOSE)
convenes an expert committee to examine and synthesize existing research, and
produce a final report that characterizes the nature of the problem of
misinformation, identify possible solutions, and offer guidance on how to
prioritize interventions. This guidance includes specific attention to how
misinformation and existing risk factors and inequities intersect, and the
potential impacts these intersections have on the well-being of individuals and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consensus study provides a synthesis of
the research literature across a range of disciplines to 1) define the nature
and scope of the problem of misinformation about science; 2) provide a framework
for holistic understanding of the influences and impacts of misinformation
including the range and severity of impacts across communities and the
conditions under which it proliferates; 3) examine current interventions to
combat misinformation; 4) recommend priority actions that have the greatest
potential to reduce harm from misinformation; and 5) prioritize the needs for
future research. The final report advances understanding of the phenomenon, and
provides balanced, authoritative, evidence-based guidance and a reliable basis
for policy decisions and targeted interventions for stakeholders to work toward
the common goal of limiting the spread and harm from misinformation in science.
These stakeholders include public health leaders and practitioners, journalists
and other science communicators, scientists and their professional
organizations, leaders of efforts to combat misinformation, media companies,
community engagement leaders, policy makers, and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.