* 2153239
* EAGER: Develop Robust Light-Scattering Computational Capability Based on the Method of Separation of Variables in Spheroidal Coordinates for Small-to-Large Spheroids
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Ping Yang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,628.00

Dust aerosols affect global climate by partially absorbing and reflecting
incoming sunlight and heat energy emitted by the atmosphere and the surface. The
optical properties of dust particles are critical to reducing uncertainties in
the current knowledge of the role of dust aerosols in the climate system, and
thus are important for predicting future climate. The dust particle optical
properties are also fundamental for inferring dust aerosol characteristics from
space-borne and ground-based remote sensing observations. Dust particles are
almost exclusively nonspherical. It has been extensively demonstrated that the
spheroidal particle shape model represents a quantum leap forward, compared to
the spherical model, for computing the optical properties of nonspherical
particles. At present, the optical properties of small-to-large particles can be
computed only for spheres. There is a pressing need to have an exact and robust
computational capability to compute the optical properties of spheroidal
particles. Leveraging advances in computational mathematics, advances in
electromagnetic scattering theories, and modern computer technologies and
computer coding techniques, this project aims to develop a novel program to
compute the optical properties of spheroidal particle in the small-to-large
particle size range. Because many bacteria, microweeds, oceanic particles, and
interstellar dust particles have approximately spheroidal shapes, the outcome of
this project will also find extensive applications in climate science
(particularly the radiative energy budget in the climate system), remote
sensing, industry, bio-optics, oceanic optics, astrophysics, planetary sciences,
and other fields beyond atmospheric sciences. Because this project focuses on a
major unsolved interdisciplinary problem and because of significant challenges,
particularly from the perspective of computational electromagnetics and
mathematics, this project is exploratory but potentially transformative, i.e.,
“high risk – high payoff”. In addition to its scientific merit, this project
contains an educational component to train an early-career researcher in the
interdisciplinary area mentioned above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to solve light scattering by a spheroid in spheroidal coordinates. Although
solving the electromagnetic wave equation via the method of separation of
variables in spheroid coordinates has been explored, the previously developed
models are applicable only to particles that are small with respect to the
incident wavelength and have little practical use. The major challenge
encountered by the previous effort is numerical instability of spheroidal
harmonic functions. This project will seek to achieve numerical stability of
spheroidal harmonic functions by using advanced algorithms, such as expressing
spheroidal functions in terms of the Wigner-d function. The key to computing
spheroidal functions is to find eigenvalues of corresponding spheroidal
equations. The radial and angular spheroidal equations are of the Sturm-
Liouville type. The eigenvalues will be calculated by the invariant-imbedding
method, which is expected to be numerically stable and accurate. Thus, the
spheroidal functions are expected to be accurate even with extreme parameters.
The overarching goal of this project is to develop a numerically stable
capability for accurately computing the optical properties of a spheroid beyond
the currently applicable particle size and aspect ratio ranges of other existing
computational capabilities, such as the discrete dipole approximation method
(DDA), the finite-difference time domain (FDTD) method, the extended boundary
condition method (EBCM), and the invariant imbedding T-matrix method
(IITM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.