* 2153063
* CRII: SCH: Developing a new hybrid interactive machine learning software tool for cancer researchers
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Sanghoon Lee, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 174,716.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in technology
enable cancer researchers to detect the disease more effectively. Digital slide
scanners produce very high-resolution images of tissue samples and specialized
artificial intelligence software tools help medical and scientific experts in
interpreting the tissue area. However, existing software tools detecting cancer
areas have a limited capability to conduct integrated prediction of the cancer
and the prediction has been performed based on either through hand-crafted
features or deep learning generated features. This project will develop an open-
source hybrid interactive machine learning software tool that will enable
pathologists to interactively detect cancer areas promptly and with high
accuracy in the whole slide images. This will be done by fusing hand-crafted
features identified by clinical researchers and deep learning generated features
so that cancer researchers can easily define the regions within which they can
extract features of interest. The proposed hybrid interactive machine learning
software tool will benefit regions such as Appalachia, which have a lack of
pathologists. The software tool developed will eventually reduce the cost of
cancer diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, the successful accomplishment of the
proposed research work can affect the enhancement of other research areas needed
for heterogeneous data analysis extending to meteorology and ecology in the
interpretation of intensity variation. The accomplished results of the proposed
research works will also promote the interest in cancer research in K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate locally and nationally, through synergistic research
and education activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop an open-source hybrid interactive machine learning software tool using
hybrid features generated from two distinct features providing better accuracy
by element-wise multiplication after dimensionality reduction. The two distinct
features will be matched by transforming the high dimensional space of deep
learning generated features into the low dimensional space of hand-crafted
features. The element-wise multiplication will maintain the histologic feature
information of both hand-crafted features and deep learning generated
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.