* 2153220
* CRII: CNS: Towards an Efficient Serverless Mobile Edge Computing Network
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Xingyu Zhou, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serverless computing has emerged
as an event-driven cloud computing paradigm that enjoys many advantages over
traditional cloud computing. This includes automated server management, pay-as-
you-use pricing, and massive parallelism, all of which make it an attractive
approach for mobile edge computing (MEC). However, both the resource-constrained
nature of edge nodes and the latency-sensitive nature of bursty workloads in MEC
result in fundamental challenges to fulfilling the promise of serverless
computing in MEC networks from the perspectives of both service providers and
application developers. To unleash the full potential of serverless mobile edge
computing, this project is organized around three interrelated tasks: (i) the
development of locality-aware load balancing schemes for serverless requests
that guarantee an optimal response time, (ii) the development of cost-effective,
latency-driven resource configuration schemes, and (iii) the development of
principles and techniques that allow application developers to utilize the great
potential of parallelism offered by serverless computing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to important societal and educational impacts.
MEC has enabled a range of Internet of Things (IoT) applications across many
areas, including security and surveillance, healthcare, industrial
manufacturing, agriculture, and others. An efficient serverless mobile edge
computing network will directly impact these applications, and ultimately,
society at large. Moreover, the developed algorithms in this project will be a
direct add-on for existing serverless computing platforms, and our proposed
parallelism-assisted online learning approach will be a benchmark for the
community when dealing with parallel computing-based machine learning edge
applications. From an education perspective, this project will develop a
curriculum that will be broadly shared, as well as train undergraduate and
graduate students, while broadening participation in computing and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.