* 2153775
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny of Cnidaria - Convergent Evolution of Eyes, Gene Expression, and Cell Types
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Maria Pia Miglietta, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 392,713.00

This project will improve knowledge of the evolutionary relationships of
medusozoa (“jellyfish”) and the origin and evolution of eyes. Jellyfish are
among the most distant relatives of humans that have eyes that still use genes
similar to those used in human eyes. Within medusozoans, eyes originated
separately at least nine times from a common genetic toolkit. This research will
first expand knowledge of medusozoan relationships to untangle the complex
evolutionary history of eyes. Next, this research will determine how similar are
the genes expressed in each of the separately originated eyes. The team
assembled for this project represents a new collaboration of scientists from
multiple institutions with distinct but complementary expertise. The research
will promote participation of women and underrepresented groups in all aspects
of the project, will improve STEM education through training in integrative
biology, and will incorporate the research in STEM undergraduate courses and a
biodiversity workshop at a field station. The team will increase public
engagement through educational articles and outreach activities, including
integration of charismatic jellyfish into existing K12 outreach programs. Public
outreach on the genetics of diverse eyes will also provide important information
to improve understanding of important biological concepts and
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergent evolution is a fascinating hallmark of
biology that provides comparative biologists with replicated events in the
otherwise singular history of life. Convergent traits that are also
experimentally tractable, referred to as ‘meta-models’, provide opportunities
for biologists to address questions about how repeatable evolution is at
different levels of organization. This project will bring together a diverse
group of collaborators to develop medusozoan cnidarians as a phylogenetic meta-
model to address convergent evolution of eyes at different levels of
organization, including genes, cells, and morphology. This award will support
research to: a) test homology of eyes by generating a data-rich phylogeny that
includes new transcriptomes of Medusozoa to reconstruct presence/absence of eyes
across the group; b) compare gene expression profiles of convergently evolved
eyes and other tissues (as controls) from cnidarians to identify conserved and
convergent patterns of gene expression, and c) incorporate ‘tree-thinking’ into
single-cell transcriptomics to analyze cell-type phylogenies and quantify
histories of cell-types in convergently evolved eyes. Results form these studies
will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and presented at
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.