* 2153430
* CRII: SCH: Multi-modal Soft Tissue Characterization for Non-invasive Breast Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Kihan Park, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breast cancer is the most common
type of cancer among women worldwide, and its early detection is one of the most
important enabling factors for better post-treatment prognosis which
significantly affects the quality of life for survivors. This project will
develop a fundamental understanding of soft tissue behaviors using an
optimization framework with ultrasound and electrical impedance tomography to
provide an accessible and reliable tool for potential usages in breast cancer
screening. The specification of a distinct feature of collagen in the human
breast will provide a clue for a new breast cancer biomarker. The successful
completion of the project will lead to improved technologies associated with an
advanced breast cancer screening technique employing multi-modal
characterization such as wearable sensors, artificial intelligence in medical
imaging, and point-of-care diagnostic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will implement an optimization framework that can learn from the physical
responses of soft tissue in order to visualize the cross-sectional human breast
non-invasively using an integrated imaging technique combining ultrasound and
electrical impedance tomography. The first specific aim is to establish the
optimization algorithms and multi-modal parameters that present a line of
demarcation for actively responding soft tissues against the electro-mechanical
stimuli with minimal artifacts. The resultant images will illustrate how the
soft tissues respond against ultrasound stimulation under different patterns of
electric fields with temperature distribution information across the soft
tissues. The second specific aim is to conduct a repeated measure study
involving healthy subjects so as to identify critical factors that affect the
multi-modal characterization results over time. This observational study will
lead to not only an improved understanding of the algorithm parameters required
to account for temporal variability for patient-specific adaptation of the
algorithm while bridging the gap between ex vivo and in vivo electromechanical
characteristics of human breast tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.