* 2153846
* Analysis and Geometry of Random Fields Related to Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yimin Xiao, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 113,259.00

This project is concerned with the development of an analytic and geometric
theory of random fields that arise from stochastic partial differential
equations (SPDEs) and random matrices. Special emphasis is placed on vector-
valued and matrix-valued random fields that play a central role in various areas
of pure and applied mathematics, mathematical physics, astronomy, bio-imaging,
mathematical oceanography, and statistics. The Principal Inestigator (PI) will
develop probabilistic, analytic, and geometric tools for studying vector-valued
and matrix-valued random fields that will lead to a deeper understanding of
random fields that arise from systems of SPDEs and random matrices. These tools
will have sufficient novelty to open new research areas, solve a number of open
problems in the theory of SPDEs, random matrices, and related random fields.
Moreover, the proposed activities will also help to train graduate students and
to develop their careers in the mathematical and statistical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is significant and challenging to characterize the fine
analytic and geometric structures of vector-valued and matrix-valued random
fields. In the past investigations, the PI has established a series of results
on Gaussian and, more generally, infinitely divisible random fields, and the
solutions of SPDEs. Together with his collaborators, the PI has developed
fractal geometry and potential theory for Gaussian random fields, additive Lévy
processes, solutions to SPDEs, and used them to resolve several outstanding open
problems in non-Markovian Gaussian and stable random fields, Lévy processes, and
the theory of SPDEs. The PI plans to continue his investigation of precise
quantitative connections between vector-valued and matrix-valued random fields,
SPDEs, potential theory, and the geometry of random fractals. The proposed
research will ultimately yield novel insights into the understanding of vector-
valued and matrix-valued random fields, SPDEs, and random matrices. The expected
results will not only contribute to the theories of random fields, SPDEs, and
random matrices but also promote their applicability in mathematics,
mathematical physics, and in other scientific areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.