* 2153488
* IRES Track I: Advanced Engineering and Scientific Computing Research in Sweden
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joseph Iannelli, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,938.00

Engineering and Scientific Computing (ESC) is a fascinating discipline, as it
advances research and development in myriad fields of knowledge, from
Aerodynamics to Space Science, contributes to the United States’ technological
leadership, and supports private sector competitiveness. ESC fosters such
innovations by implementing on high-performance computers novel computational
methods that numerically solve mathematical models of physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As ESC advances research worldwide, this project
will educate globally minded students for international research leadership in
Engineering and Scientific Computing. Indeed, ESC professionals with both
scientific computing and global engagement skills are in high demand by
multinational corporations, government research laboratories, and academia. This
demand prompts a need to increase the number of students in computing research,
beginning with undergraduate students, as they progress in the educational
pipeline towards employment or graduate school. This IRES program will involve
twenty-one diverse U.S. students over three years. Diversity will be achieved by
recruiting students from different genders and heritages including, but not
limited to, American, African, Asian, Hispanic, and Native American heritages.
Each year, there will be a cohort of seven U.S. students who will complete a
fifteen-week long research experience in Sweden. In each same year, this cohort
will be expanded with seven Swedish students, separately supported by Sweden.
Students in the expanded cohort will interact with one another to establish a
future international professional network for all participants. Sweden is a
desirable overseas destination for this program, also in view of the
partnerships among U.S. and Swedish corporations that use ESC. These
corporations include Sweden’s Saab as well as Boeing, which are collaborating
with each other in the fulfillment of a major nine-year U.S. Air Force contract
and will also support this program through computing projects and internships.
The Swedish host for this program is Linköping University (LiU). This is an
ideal international partner as it develops and applies mathematically robust
algorithms, serves as the main partner of its region’s Visualization Center, and
manages Sweden’s National Supercomputer Center. This center houses the largest
high-performance computer in Sweden, which features 1.5 petabytes of data
storage, 480 GPU’s, and a processing speed of 300 petaflops. The IRES scholars
will thus have access to leadership-class facilities and conduct their research
in the welcoming international Computational Mathematics research environment
within LiU’s Division of Applied Mathematics. By developing globally engaged
students who have practiced scientific computing research overseas, this IRES
program will also widen students’ professional opportunities as well as global
horizons. By living in a different country and culture, the participants will
also sharpen their interaction, resilience, and resourcefulness skills in
navigating distinct cultures, expectations, and processes. These transferrable
skills are valued by employers and multinational corporations highly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. students will contribute to advance engineering
and scientific computing by completing research projects on the development of
efficient, stable, and high-order accurate algorithms for investigating
realistic physical processes. These algorithms will discretely approximate and
numerically solve systems of linear and non-linear time-dependent partial
differential equations, emphasizing rapid convergence and scalability on high-
performance computer architectures. The scholars will explore the development of
innovative discrete differentiation operators on arbitrary point sets via
machine learning, neural networks, and orthogonal functions, including Chebyshev
polynomials, to increase spatial accuracy. The resulting stiff ordinary
differential equations will be integrated through low-diffusion, e.g.
symplectic, implicit time stepping processes. The resulting non-linear algebraic
equations will then be solved via Newton iteration, leading to the solution of
sequences of linear systems. These will be solved through combinations of direct
and iterative Krylov-type flexibly preconditioned numerical linear algebra
solvers. An initial field for the iterative solution of these linear systems on
dense grids will be generated via interpolation of a direct Gaussian-elimination
solution within a coarse grid. The scholars will practice the skills to apply
mathematical frameworks and also appreciate the approximations involved in
computational models, understand the range of validity of computational results,
and analyze these results critically. These are crucially needed skills.
Efficient and scalable computational algorithms are important worldwide to
advance fields of knowledge that critically rely on scientific computing and
thereby advance technological development as well as designs cost effectively.
This is because these designs increasingly rely on computational simulations,
which usher in the era of e-design to lower development costs, increase first-
time quality of prototypes, and decrease time to bring complex systems, such as
aircraft, to markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.