* 2153263
* IRES Track I: Towards a Green and Self-Powered Internet of Things (IoT) using Vibration Energy Harvesting
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Hamzeh Bardaweel, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Over the three years of this project period, 18 undergraduate students will be
recruited from two adjacent Louisianan institutions, Louisiana Tech University
and Grambling State University, which is an HBCU, to participate in
international activities at University of Sheffield, UK. During their 6 weeks
stay at University of Sheffield, recruited students will be engaged in research
activities that are focused on raising studentsâ€™ awareness of potential
applications and environmental impacts of eco-friendly green energy harvesting
systems. Students will be engaged in individual projects that are carefully
selected and designed to suit their scientific background and course work.
Recruited students will participate in cultural activities organized by the
International Office and Student Services Information Desk (SSID) and The Global
Campus Program at University of Sheffield. A major outcome of this project is
producing a well-trained U.S. workforce that is capable of adapting to green
energy global markets and IoT technologies. Moreover, this project will focus on
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups using a proactive and
targeted recruitment pipeline through close collaboration with Grambling State
and Louisiana Tech National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) student
association. Dissemination of outcomes from this IRES project will be conducted
in a few ways. Nationally, outcomes will be presented at the ASME-IMECE
Undergraduate Research and Design Exposition. Locally, outcomes from the
scientific and cultural activities will be broadcasted via two annual on-campus
recruitment and dissemination workshops, i.e. one at Louisiana Tech and one at
Grambling State University. These annual events will act as an interactive
platform for i) returning IRES students to broadcast their research outcomes and
cultural experiences and ii) recruiting new students to participate in the IRES
project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This IRES project builds on the ongoing
collaboration between the PIs at Louisiana Tech University and University of
Sheffield in the field of design and implementation of energy harvesting systems
for IoT sensors. A critical part of the growing Internet of Things (IoT) market
is the large number of wireless sensor nodes needed for collecting information
on the surrounding environment. Presently, these sensors are mostly powered by
traditional batteries, requiring continuous replacement, laborious maintenance,
and hazardous disposal. This is an especially daunting environmental issue
because of the millions of batteries that will be required to power these
sensors that are expected to help comprise the IoT. In this IRES project,
students will be involved in hands-on research activities addressing the
challenge of harvesting energy from non-traditional green energy source, namely,
ambient vibrations for powering small-size IoT sensors. The outcomes from this
project will have significant societal impacts. Results from this project will
contribute to the field of green energy generation, from ambient vibrations, by
answering fundamental questions related to the feasibility of utilizing these
systems as reliable eco-friendly power sources for IoT sensors. The collection
of individual projects and research activities will contribute towards the
intellectual merit of the overall project that is focused on developing
vibration energy harvesting systems that are environment-friendly, efficient,
reliable, and suitable for IoT real-world implementation. Students will
participate in weekly cultural activities at Sheffield; helping them develop
global mindset and transversal and interpersonal skills necessary to become the
future workforce that is competitive and capable of adapting to new green energy
markets and IoT technologies. This project is jointly funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.