* 2153657
* Anionic and Pericyclic Reaction Cascades for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jon Njardarson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 537,182.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Njardarson of The University of Arizona is studying new classes of
chemical reactions that will lead to more efficient methods for the manufacture
of compounds of importance to society, such as pharmaceutical agents,
agrochemicals, and advanced materials. The insights gained from the studies,
which will encompass powerful multiple bond-forming 'cascade' reactions capable
of rapidly generating all manner of molecules of interest, are anticipated to
inform on the future practice of synthetic design. The broader impacts of the
funded project also include the education and training of the student coworkers
taking part in the research and extend to enabling Prof. Njardarson's continued
development of innovative and freely accessible educational content for the
general public. In this regard, the award will support an expansion to the
content available on the PI's popular app and website 'Chemistry By Design
(CByD)', with concurrent transformation of current and future content to a
machine-readable format that should be compatible with emerging artificial
intelligence/informatics technologies in the chemical synthesis field. The well-
established "Top 200" family of posters form the Njardarson group on the
structures and properties of pharmaceutical drugs will continue to be produced
and made available annually in traditional and new custom content
formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve continued and
significantly expanded investigations of the new class of counterion-dependent
anionic asymmetric amino-Cope rearrangements recently introduced by the
Njardarson group. This versatile reaction platform affords access to a range of
complex enantioenriched chiral products (both cyclic and acyclic molecules) from
readily available starting materials; however, much remains to be learned about
its scope before the power of the approach can be fully realized. New work will
include establishing methods for the selective trapping and exploitation of
chiral enamide intermediates and studying the many possible in situ cyclization
scenarios. These efforts will also include novel ways to streamline synthesis of
the requisite amino-Cope precursors (conjugated chiral imines) while also
exploiting the discovery of new useful cascades that may outcompete the amino-
Cope reaction. The second part of the funded project is focused on the
development of new transformations for the assembly of high value densely
substituted aromatic structures such as pyridines, isoquinolines, and other
arenes, from simple acyclic building blocks via pericyclic-centered reaction
cascades. It is anticipated that a number of significant new and useful methods
for the elaboration of sought after acyclic and cyclic products from simple
starting materials, will emerge from the research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.