* 2153767
* Transitions: Metagenomics of aquatic biofilms: evaluating linkages between autotrophic and heterotrophic microbial diversity and function
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Allison Rober, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2025
* USD 687,229.00

This Transitions to Excellence in Molecular and Cellular Biosciences research
grant will support implementation of cutting-edge molecular techniques into the
research and teaching program of a mid-career scientist allowing her to adopt
empowering technologies that are not accessible in her current research
environment. Rapid advances in molecular techniques have facilitated widespread
taxonomic characterization of microbial communities. Current research is quickly
moving beyond just characterizing diversity (who is there?), towards a focus on
linking individual species with their functional properties (what do they do?).
However, the study of some microbial communities remain relatively unexplored
with respect to diversity or function. This is particularly true for benthic
biofilms (i.e., assemblage of algae, bacteria, and fungi) in freshwater
ecosystems. The overarching goal of this research is to use molecular techniques
to bridge the gap between microbial community composition and functioning within
natural environments. Findings from this research will make significant
contributions to an understanding of, and ability to, link microbial diversity
with ecosystem function. By providing data from natural microbial communities to
publically available repositories, this project will facilitate improved
taxonomic resolution and genomic library construction. These data may also be
useful beyond their ecological application given that identification of novel
microbial associations in natural environments could facilitate the design of
synthetic microbial communities as a tool for industrial cultivation and
biotechnology. In addition to charting new conceptual ground in molecular
ecology, this project will provide research experiences for graduate and
undergraduate students from under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
ecosystem processes (e.g., carbon cycling) are mediated by microorganisms and
understanding how microbial functions scale up to the ecosystem level is an
important goal in ecology. Boreal peatlands provide a model ecosystem to examine
relationships between microbial structure and function owing to their role in
global carbon storage. In this project, researchers will use molecular
techniques to examine both the eukaryotic and prokaryotic diversity of the
biofilm microbiome and identify functional traits along a hydrologic gradient
and relate changes in microbiome structure and function to peatland carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions. Biofilm composition and metabolism are strongly
influenced by differences in hydrologically mediated environmental conditions
with consequences for net CO2 emissions. Conditions that promote a higher
proportion of autotrophic (algae) biofilm results in greater CO2 uptake from the
atmosphere, whereas a biofilm dominated by heterotrophic microorganisms
(bacteria and fungi) promotes greater CO2 emissions. The composition of
autotrophic and heterotrophic components of the biofilm are intricately linked
and perturbations to one portion of the biofilm community can cascade through
the rest. Therefore, it is anticipated that changes in gene expression that
control metabolic functions within the autotrophic component of the biofilm will
be reflected in the make-up and functioning of the heterotrophic component of
the biofilm and vice versa. This project is expected to reveal the influence of
environmental conditions on gene expression within the autotrophic and
heterotrophic components of the biofilm. Further, this research is likely to
facilitate the discovery of correlated patterns of abundance between certain
eukaryotic and prokaryotic microbes, and link trait-mediated metabolic functions
at the community level. Using metagenomic approaches to evaluate how abiotic and
biotic interactions shape microbial communities and microbial-mediated
biogeochemical processes addresses a critical knowledge gap in the field of
aquatic microbiology and will provide a better understanding of how aquatic
microbes participate in biogeochemical cycling within peatlands. Methodological
procedures will be integrated into college curriculum, providing opportunities
for a diversity of students to gain exposure to ecological molecular techniques
and applications that will prepare them for the increasing use of applied
microbiology in industry, environmental monitoring, and management
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.