* 2153177
* CRII: FET: 3D Printed Application-Specific Neuromorphic Circuits: Design, Fabrication, and Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Gozde Tutuncuoglu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 174,889.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern silicon-based CMOS systems
face limitations in terms of processing speeds and energy consumption that can
no longer be addressed via Moore’s-law-driven scaling-down efforts. The main
inherent challenge in conventional von Neumann computer architecture is the
latency caused by the data transfer between computer processing and memory
units, also known as von Neumann bottleneck. Neuromorphic computing, emulating
the energy-efficient and highly-parallel operations of the human brain, stands
as a promising platform to address this challenge. Neuromorphic circuitry built
on memristor devices enables efficient information storage in the form of
resistance states, emulation of biological synaptic functionalities, and in-
memory computing (i.e. via matrix-vector multiplication). Large-scale adoption
of neuromorphic computing technology is currently hindered by multifaceted
challenges in the materials, device and algorithm levels that are exacerbated by
long-prototyping cycles of conventional microfabrication techniques. This NSF
proposal aims to develop a data-driven, high-throughput and customizable
manufacturing platform for neuromorphic circuits, based on nanoscale 3D
printing, that will enable design freedom in both the materials and device
architecture levels. The project’s broader impacts include a new generation of
application-specific computational hardware that is indispensable for fueling
the future implementations of AI and critical to increase U.S. competitiveness
in the IC industry. The project will also support a multitude of
interdisciplinary research and teaching activities at undergraduate and K12
levels with a specific focus on the involvement of underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to implement a nanoscale 3D
printing technique to develop application-specific neuromorphic circuits. This
goal will be enabled through a state-of-the-art 3D printer that achieves sub-
micron resolutions via the two-photon polymerization technique, and supports a
range of functional and adjustable printing resins. A novel Bayesian
optimization approach will be executed to uncover the optimum set of material
and process parameters that will yield neuromorphic devices with desired
characteristics. An integrated electrical characterization framework will be
utilized to explore the synaptic functionalities and device performance metrics
of 3D printed memristor crossbar arrays. Finalized application-specific
neuromorphic circuitry will undertake the hardware-level benchmarking on image
classification of standard hand-digit datasets and real-life tumor-cell image
data. Use of a nanoscale 3D printing platform for complex neuromorphic circuitry
fabrication will enable new opportunities for customization and scalable
manufacturing of application-specific computational hardware
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.