* 2153240
* Tunable Catalysts Based on Low Valent Metal-Phosphine Framework Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Seth Cohen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Seth Cohen of the University of California, San Diego is studying the
development of a new class of solid, tunable catalytic materials. Using a
combination of phosphorus-derived ligands linked to palladium, rhodium, and
iridium metal centers, Professor Cohen and his research team will create new
molecular frameworks with potential for catalysis. Modifications to these
materials are being explored to determine how to tune them to promote cross-
coupling and hydroformylation reactions (carbon monoxide capture and
incorporation into useful building blocks) that are important for the
manufacture of fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and other important products. In
addition to these studies, Professor Cohen is supporting undergraduate students
from across the University of California system to travel to Washington DC where
they can participate in internships at the interface of public policy and
science through the Science Policy Internship Program (SPIP), and is
simultaneously creating an undergraduate scientific policy
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative catalytic materials are essential to
keep up with demand for new chemical reactions that produce fine chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, and other important products. This research program is
developing a new class of solid-state catalysts for performing high-value
chemical transformations. Specifically, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs, a type
of porous solid) derived from phosphorus-based ligand frameworks and low
oxidation state reactive metals are being investigated. The use of low oxidation
state metals as a component of MOFs is uncommon and underdeveloped, but
potentially valuable for C-C bond forming reactions. Both the organic and metal
component of the MOF catalysts will be examined in a modular manner, to
investigate structure-function relationships, optimize catalytic activity, and
explore opportunities for selectivity. These studies are designed to determine
how low oxidation state, framework materials can serve as modular, next-
generation, solid state catalysts. Synergistically, these activities will
promote the training of a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students,
while also supporting science policy internship program participation for
undergraduates and broadening scientific policy discussion through course
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.