* 2153689
* RAPID: Fare Free Public Transportation - A Full Scale Natural Experiment in Alexandria, Virginia
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 169,834.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will assess the effects
of free public transit and improved network connectivity on ridership, miles
driven by private vehicles, emissions of greenhouse gases and conventional
pollutants, congestion and traffic, and will study its distributional effects on
different income groups and ethnicities. The project is based on a full-scale
natural experiment conducted in Alexandria, Virginia, where the local transit
agency DASH (Driving Alexandria Safely Home) has decided to implement a fare-
free public transportation program over its service territory, motivated
primarily by fairness and equity considerations. Such a natural experiment will
be based on a data collection the study area and from one or more control
locations—while the program is in place, and retrospectively for a suitable
period before its implementation—for a proper assessment of its accomplishments
and effects. The survey plan will involve both users of the DASH system as well
as members of the general public at the treatment location to understand actual
or potential travel, general travel patterns, and whether the fare free has
displaced private car travel and emissions, or other transportation modes. The
data collection plan will be complemented with parallel surveys of transit users
and members of the general public at the control locations to elicit similar
information and their intended use of transit if the bus became free. This
research and its results may influence policy recommendations and infrastructure
investment decisions that will impact the future of our transportation system
and the quality of life of citizens in America. The impacts from this project
are especially relevant at this time, when transit use is slowly recovering from
the pandemic and has not yet reached pre-pandemic ridership and travel mode
shares, and when large-scale funding to infrastructure is being considered by
this Administration and the Congress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a methodological
perspective, the study involves challenging statistical procedures in terms of
sampling, analyzing, and modeling the data from both probabilistic and non-
probabilistic samples. Challenges include the construction of sampling weights,
the selection of control location, matching treated and control subjects to
ensure valid statistical inference, and many others. A multi-disciplinary team
composed by faculties and students in engineering, economics, survey methodology
and mathematics will work collaboratively on survey design, data linkage,
econometric model estimation, and travel behavior and policy analysis. The
project is expected to be serving as a proof of concept for similar programs
elsewhere and will be a reference for the many transit agencies implementing
innovative policy schemes to increase ridership and
accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.