* 2153524
* CRII: CNS: Toward a Sustainable and Intelligent Air-Ground IoT Framework for Remote Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Chen Pan, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 172,563.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy harvesting devices can
significantly benefit Internet of Things (IoT) applications for remote areas,
such as forests, farmlands, and oceans, where electrical power infrastructures
are generally unavailable. However, due to the remoteness and limited power
budget, it’s difficult for those energy harvesting-powered IoT devices to
deliver critical information to the backbone of the IoT network. Emerging
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), such as quadcopters, offer a reliable,
controllable, and flexible way of conducting information ferry in the context of
energy harvesting, regardless of the landscapes they may fly over. Nevertheless,
the air-ground integration between energy harvesting-powered IoT devices and
UAVs faces fundamental challenges. In the air, each UAV's coverage is
constrained by limited energy. On the ground, routing among energy harvesting
IoT devices is susceptible to power failures caused by intermittent energy
shortages. This research seeks to develop a sustainable and intelligent air-
ground IoT framework to enable efficient collaboration between UAVs and energy
harvesting devices for effective data sensing, processing, and delivery for
remote monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lay a foundation for
the deployment of energy harvesting IoT devices in remote areas with low cost,
enhanced reliability, and energy efficiency. The outcomes of this research will
include novel algorithms, protocols, optimizations, and hardware platforms that
will significantly benefit cutting-edge IoT applications, such as smart
agriculture, wild animal tracking, forestry management, coastal monitoring, and
more. The research results will be closely integrated into the education and
training of students. This project will promote the participation of
underrepresented groups and K-12 students in STEM. All designs will be made
publicly available for broad adoption and future research
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.