* 2153740
* CAREER: Tuning liquid jet and splash dynamics by deformable and heterogeneous boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Andrew Dickerson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 432,200.00

The stability of liquids flowing through gas is relevant to drug delivery,
fabrication processes, and thermal management. The stability depends on the
properties of the flowing fluid and on the mechanical and surface properties of
the solid bodies in the system. To better understand the stability of liquid
flow in these systems, this project will study how the properties of solid
bodies affect both free liquid jets and water entry splashes. Specifically, this
research will introduce (i) soft materials that deform in response to fluid
motion, and (ii) spatially nonuniform solid wetting properties where the air,
liquid, and solid phases meet. The feature of greatest interest in jets is the
length at which the coherent liquid column disintegrates into drops. Here, this
length will be controlled by employing deformable nozzles and nonuniform surface
chemistry (i.e. wetting properties) at the orifice. In studying water entry, a
solid impactor splashes into a liquid pool, and the resulting dispersed liquid
and air-entraining cavity behavior are of interest. Such splash features will be
modified using both solid projectiles with chemically nonuniform surfaces and
via compliant solid films atop the liquid surface. These scientific endeavors
integrate educational activities that engage local high school students and
educators in the scientific process through lectures, classroom flow control
experiments, mentored science fair projects, and research engagement workshops
for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characterization of the coupled physics
of dynamic three-phase contact lines with soft solids is in its infancy. This
research effort seeks to explore fluid flows where the multiphase interface has
been modified via material compliance and surface treatments. Experiments and
theory will be used to understand the physics of jet stability with the
inclusion of the aforementioned passive flow modifiers. A new understanding of
initial disturbances and their suppression within free stream liquid jets will
inform the adaptation of linear jet stability theory for deformable nozzles. The
modification of free liquid surfaces with compliant media and the alteration of
solid projectiles with heterogeneous boundaries will produce new theoretical
treatments at moderate Weber numbers for vehicles entering water. Thus,
conditions for cavity creation and collapse will be redefined, and the limits of
lift force production from non-axisymmetric cavities will be explored.
Experimental techniques include high-speed videography to capture flow features,
digital tracking to elucidate kinematics, microscopy to image surfaces, and
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to chemically characterize the solid surfaces
used in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.