* 2153040
* Full Proposal: Environmental Data Science Innovation and Inclusion Lab (ESIIL): Accelerating Discovery by Fostering an Open and Diverse Earth Data Revolution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jennifer Balch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2027
* USD 5,097,794.00

The Environmental Data Science Innovation &amp; Inclusion Lab (ESIIL) is a next-
generation NSF synthesis center led by the University of Colorado Boulder in
collaboration with NSF’s CyVerse at the University of Arizona and the University
of Oslo. ESIIL enables a global community of environmental data scientists to
leverage the wealth of environmental data and emerging analytics to develop
science-based solutions to solve pressing challenges in biology and other
environmental sciences. ESIIL holds inclusion as a core principle and method for
diversifying environmental data science at a time when society needs all
perspectives, and science needs to serve all. ESIIL’s research community
generates discoveries and novel approaches through: 1) cutting-edge team
science, 2) innovative tools and collaborative cyberinfrastructure, 3) data
science education and training, and 4) building inclusive participation and
diverse groups. These activities advance the frontier of environmental data
science, a rapidly evolving discipline bridging the computational, biological,
environmental, and social sciences. ESIIL’s open Collaborative and Scalable
Environment (CASE) cyberinfrastructure lowers barriers to scientific
collaboration through tailored user experience, seamless connection to critical
data sources, and premier cloud computing. ESIIL’s education program facilitates
broad access to environmental data science skills and helps develop the next-
generation data-capable workforce. Partnerships with Tribal Colleges and
Minority-Serving Institutions increases data skills and knowledge sharing among
underrepresented groups. The ESIIL Network, a diverse community of over 2,000
researchers and students, is a 21st-century team committed to generating data-
inspired discoveries that enhance societal and ecosystem resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ESIIL’s vision is that cultivating a diverse and inclusive
community of practice is needed to produce innovative breakthroughs in
environmental data science. Innovation Summits explore Grand Challenges such as
continental-scale ecology, artificial intelligence for the Earth, environmental
justice and big data, and adapting to our changing world. Incubator Working
Groups, postdocs, and large-team collaborations generate new discoveries, and
cross-sector partnerships catalyze use-inspired research through Innovation
Summits and Earth Hackathons. ESIIL collaborations include industry, government,
and non-profit partners, facilitating the co-production of science that has
environmental policy, management, and technological applications. The National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
network, and the Critical Zone Collaborative Network (CZ Net) are strategic data
partners. ESIIL facilitates best practices in team science and conducts basic
research on the correlates of scientific productivity and creativity within
diverse scientific teams. ESIIL accelerates scientific inquiry by supporting
community-developed and high-value software and data cubes bridge, for example,
ground, airborne, and satellite data from diverse observatories and platforms.
These tools, curated datasets, and reproducible and reusable workflows are
deployed on ESIIL’s open cyberinfrastructure. The ESIIL Stars internship program
supports students and faculty members from institutions that promote
underrepresented groups in STEM, providing data skills training, research
experience, and career mentorship. Initial partners include Oglala Lakota
College, United Tribes Technical College, and Metropolitan State University of
Denver. The ESIIL Leaders program supports emerging scientists from
underrepresented communities by fostering leadership skills in environmental
data science and team science. Culturally-relevant curricula inform training
modules along with an open textbook that introduces novel analytics for
environmental data. By hosting open education resources on an existing learning
portal, with a following of over 200,000 users per month, ESIIL education scales
to a global audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.