* 2153922
* CAS: Prodigious 2- and 3-Dimensional Organic Electron Acceptors via Strategic Cyclizations with Perfluoro Substituents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Olga Boltalina, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2025
* USD 527,957.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Olga Boltalina of Colorado State
University is studying efficient methods for controlled addition of
(poly)fluorinated carbacycles to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) to
expand their conjugated systems, which may result in the critical enhancement of
charge transport, thermal stability, resistance to photooxidation, and hence,
longer device lifetimes; favorable morphology and electronic properties for
photoinduced charge generation in donor-acceptor blends. The project is
anticipated to impact material design beyond electronics: liquid crystals,
agrochemicals, photonics, chiroptical materials, spintronics, medical imaging
with fluorinated compounds (F-MRI, PET) and pharmaceuticals. Other broader
societal benefits include the project's contribution to potentially
transformational technological advances in high-performing organic acceptors
with superior air-, moisture-, light-, and thermal stability that will be
integrated into low-cost, efficient, sustainable, and durable devices, including
organic field effect transistors, organic light-emitting devices and solar cells
that can be building- or vehicle-integrated, thereby visibly increasing the use
and lowering costs of renewable energy sources in everyday life. Dr. Boltalina
aims to combine cutting-edge research with educational and professional
development program for postgraduate students and summer research minority- and
other underrepresented-group chemistry majors by involving them in national and
international collaborative work and providing them with the skill sets that
they need for successful careers from academia to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deploy an arsenal of fluorine
chemistry methods to design, synthesize and test the charge mobility of new
n-type organofluorine semiconductors. Commercially available PAHs and
perfluoroalkyl (benzyl) iodides will be used in one-pot reactions to promote the
addition of perfluorinated carbacycles and subsequent reductive defluorination
leading to aromatic or non-aromatic six-, five- or even seven-membered
fluorinated rings on PAHs. Systematic experimental and computational studies of
these new transformations are expected to improve fundamental understanding of
chemical reaction pathways, to help optimize reaction selectivity and overall
efficiency. Charge transport data will be used to determine the specific roles
of fluorocarbacycles in the facilitation of charge mobility of highly ordered
organofluorine semiconductors. The effects of increased electron affinity and
greater solid-state ordering on functional enhancements of these materials as
n-type semiconductors, p-dopants, and self-assembled monolayers will be
explored. New types of (poly)fluorinated PAH building blocks that had been
inaccessible by other methods may well become readily available to the broader
synthetic community for the utilization of fluorine chemistry in covalent
organic frameworks, biosensing, fluorescent dyes, and electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.