* 2153394
* CRII: CNS: Design and System Technology Co-optimization Towards Addressing the Memory Bottleneck Problem of Deep Learning Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Mehdi Sadi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,923.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence and deep
learning (AI/DL) are influencing a range of areas, including autonomous
vehicles, healthcare, cybersecurity, language processing, robotics, gene
editing, climate science, and numerous others. Data size is increasing
significantly, yielding ever larger data sets and model sizes to achieve desired
levels of AI/DL accuracy. Over the last several years, growth in AI compute
capability has far exceeded growth in per-accelerator memory capacity, both on-
chip and off-chip. Memory has become the key bottleneck in AI/DL hardware,
demanding new approaches to resolve this bottleneck. This project includes two
key thrusts: (1) Key performance parameters of on-chip and off-chip memory
systems will be co-optimized with AI/DL hardware, considering interactions
between the Design and Technology (DTCO), and the overall System and Technology
(STCO). (2) Emerging Magnetic Random Access Memory (MRAM), chiplets, and
packaging interconnect technologies will be utilized to optimally design the
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will influence novel paradigms for
designing high-performance and energy-efficient AI/DL hardware, impacting the
development of new AI/DL algorithms – bringing society one step closer to
achieving human-level intelligence in machines. With diminishing returns from
Moore’s law, STCO and DTCO have recently become emerging paradigms for tuning
the technology for the best performance gains in hardware. The outcomes of this
work will be instrumental in enriching scientific knowledge in this field and
influence future researchers working on other emerging technical domains.
Aligned with the goal of establishing United States’ leadership in the AI/DL
domain, the efforts of this project are dedicated to achieving excellence in
education, workforce development, and outreach through graduate and
undergraduate research, mentoring underrepresented and minority students, and
promoting AI hardware education at the K-12 level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.