* 2153327
* CRII: FRR: Latch-mediation as a Pathway for Control in Small, Fast Jumping Microrobots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ryan St Pierre, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,332.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impressive leaps of jumping
microrobots, and the insects that inspire them, are a result of small springs.
The springs store large amounts of energy for even bigger jumps. A microrobot
the same size as an insect that can jump to heights over ten times its own body
length has the potential to explore unknown and changing environments, such as
subterranean caves, disaster rubble, or even the surface of other planets.This
project will create jumping microrobots that will reach new levels of control
and autonomy. This work will create a mathematical and experimental framework
that uncovers how energy is released by a latch. This framework will connect
features of robot design with control to push the boundaries of autonomy in
jumping microrobots. The huge leaps in small robots make this project an
excellent candidate for outreach activities in robotics research. Undergraduate
researchers will be recruited through a project portal at the University at
Buffalo that provides equitable access to research opportunities to a diverse
student population across the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
plan in this project works toward the principled design of jumping microrobots
with controllable jump heights, a part of the latch-mediated spring actuation
(LaMSA) framework. In this framework, springs are loaded but blocked by a latch,
and the jump occurs when the latch is removed. Control in jumping robots has
largely been through spring loaded, but this project focuses on understanding
the dynamics of unlatching as a new axis of control in jumping microrobots. This
is particularly important for the incredibly fast time scales of spring
actuation. First, a thorough understanding of the dynamics of unlatching will be
elucidated through mathematical and physical models. A new understanding of the
dynamics of unlatching will become a pathway for control in jumping microrobots,
to either produce the same, stereotyped jumping behavior with different initial
conditions, or variable behavior with the same initial conditions. These
research efforts will be a pathway toward a general understanding of dynamics
and control of unlatching, and lead to a principled framework for the design and
control of jumping microrobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly
managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.