* 2153750
* Critical Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Benjamin Dodson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 232,812.00

The main objective of this project is to improve the understanding of dispersive
partial differential equations. Dispersive partial differential equations
include the wave, Schrodinger, and Korteweg de-Vries equation. These equations
are ubiquitous in physics, modeling phenomena ranging from the behavior of
subatomic particles to interstellar gravity waves. Of particular interest are
questions of long time behavior of solutions. In other words, given certain
initial data, does a solution to the equation exist? If a solution does exist,
does it exist for all time? What is the behavior of the solution as time
approaches either infinity or the maximum time for which the solution exists?
Can we catalogue the various long time behaviors and obtain a complete
description of the possible phenomena? The project provides research training
opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
Principal Investigator and his collaborators study the long time behavior of
dispersive partial differential equations with initial data in a critical norm.
Many diverse dispersive partial differential equations have a scaling symmetry,
and a solution to the equation gives an entire family of solutions. Often, the
scaling symmetry completely describes the local behavior of the equation
completely: the equation is well-posed for initial data in the critical space,
but it is ill-posed for data in a less regular (subcritical) space. We wish to
understand the long time behavior for such equations at the critical regularity,
where it is known that local well-posedness occurs. Additionally, in many such
equations, the set where ill-posedness occurs in a subcritical space is often a
set of measure zero. Thus, we hope to describe the nature of the set of initial
data for which ill-posedness occurs. The specific problems that are addressed in
this project are the Schrodinger maps problem, the focusing, mass-critical
nonlinear Schrodinger equation, the energy subcritical nonlinear wave and
Schrodinger equations, and the one dimensional cubic nonlinear Schrodinger
equation. For the defocusing, energy subcritical problems, we expect scattering
to occur for initial data in the critical Sobolev space. Solitons are known to
occur for the Schrodinger map problem and the mass-critical nonlinear
Schrodinger equation. In both cases, scattering is known to occur for initial
data below the soliton (for Schrodinger maps this is only in the equivariant
case). We wish to understand the solution for initial data slightly above the
soliton for these problems. Finally, for the one dimensional nonlinear
Schrodinger equation, the aim is to understand the long time behavior for
initial data that does not decay at infinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.