* 2153425
* Artificial nose using electrophysiology coupled to nanowires: Towards single molecule sensitivity with single atom resolution on chemical species
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Francesco Tombola, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop an engineered electronic nose that can
“smell” chemicals and determine what kind of chemicals they are. Each nose will
smell only one kind of chemical. The chemicals could be anything that natural
noses can detect, e.g., dynamite, drugs, viruses, toxic chemicals, etc.
Receptors from biological noses will be attached to tiny electrical sensors.
This technique lays the groundwork for developing high precision chemical
detection in general, which can be utilized in a variety of applications
requiring high precision process control (i.e., advanced manufacturing.) Since
the sensor is electronic, it could be integrated into a massively parallel
electronic nose system with signal recognition based on hundreds of different
sensors onto one chip. An educational outreach program to share the technology
with K-12 will be implemented. This outreach program is designed to reach K-12
educationally disadvantaged students from local neighborhoods with predominantly
ethnic-minority student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end goal of this
project is an engineered electronic nose with specificity towards analytes that
differ by as little as one carbon atom and with the sensitivity of a living
system able to electrically register a single molecule of analyte. The analyte
could be anything that natural noses can detect, e.g., TNT, cocaine, aromatics,
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) etc. The strategy proposed is to genetically
engineer a fused olfactory odorant receptor (OR, a membrane bound protein with
exquisite selectivity) to an ion channel protein, which opens in response to
binding of the ligand to the OR. The lipid bilayer supporting the fused sensing
protein would be intimately attached to a nanowire or nanotube network (either
via a covalent tether or a non-covalent physisorption process), which would
electrically detect the opening of the ion channel, and hence the binding of a
single ligand to a single OR protein domain. In summary, the project’s goal will
be achieved by the combination of these three technological advances (fused OR +
ion channel protein, nanowire sensing of single ion channel activity, and lipid
bilayer to nanotube tethering chemistry) with the results of millions of years
of evolution of OR proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.