* 2153384
* SBIR Phase II:  Microfluidic Technology for Full-Page Digital Braille and Tactile Graphics Display
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Alexander Russomanno, NEWHAPTICS CORP.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 985,343.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce the burden of accessing
information for the 1.5 million blind people in the United States by making a
full page of refreshable braille text and tactile graphics available in a device
resembling a tablet computer. This assistive technology will provide increased
access to braille in digital form and enable blind students to read, with their
fingers, digitized spatial content including mathematical equations, graphs, and
figures, creating parity with their sighted counterparts interested in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields. In particular, the
product with supporting software will remove barriers to collaboration in
classroom learning environments and document preparation in the workplace. The
proposed product will improve braille literacy, increase opportunities to enter
careers in STEM, and ultimately lead to the employment success and independence
of blind Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project continues efforts to adopt
microfluidic technology in order to create a highly manufacturable full-page
braille and tactile graphics display that uses pneumatic signals to actuate pins
at braille spacing. The anticipated technical innovations shift certain drive
functions from electromechanical hardware to the more cost effective and easily
manufactured multilayered microfluidic substrate. Since the ultimate objective
for this phase of research is to create an integrated system for delivering
interactive braille and tactile graphics, the team will focus on designing the
interactive experience by which blind users access, on demand, the textual and
non-textual information that they desire. The anticipated outcome of this
project is a seamless array of actuated pins in a tablet­ sized device capable
of presenting a half­ page of braille characters and tactile graphic
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.