* 2153410
* Purine catabolites as inducers of bacterial gene expression
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Anne Grove, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2025
* USD 756,396.00

When a bacterial pathogen infects a host, the host mounts a defense, which is
intended to kill the invader. The bacteria, however, counter such defenses,
often harnessing the very host-derived defense compounds to trigger changes in
their own metabolism, changes that are designed to promote their survival in the
inhospitable host environment. This project aims to delineate mechanisms by
which bacterial plant pathogens detect and exploit host-derived signals to
promote survival and virulence. A more complete understanding of the infection
process will lead to novel insights into the lifecycle of economically important
plant pathogens and ultimately inspire efforts to control disease progression.
This program also offers an opportunity for advancing discovery while creating
an inclusive training environment for students. Graduate students will be
integral to developing this research project, and they will be encouraged to
pursue career-building opportunities. For undergraduate students, many of whom
will be recruited from institutionally established programs for minority
students, a substantive research experience not only integrates with their
required coursework, but it also enhances their value when entering the job
market or seeking admission to professional schools. Overall, these training
opportunities contribute to the development of a competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the host response to pathogens is the
production of reactive oxygen species. The purine catabolites urate and xanthine
accumulate during infection because one of the host enzymes responsible for
production of reactive oxygen species is xanthine oxidoreductase, which
otherwise participates in purine metabolism by converting hypoxanthine to
xanthine and xanthine to urate. Previous work has shown that PecS family
transcription factors bind these purine catabolites. The primary objective of
this project is to address the hypothesis that other urate/xanthine-responsive
transcription factors exist. Using Burkholderia thailandensis, which encodes the
PecS-family protein MftR, a combination of immunoprecipitation and mass
spectrometry will be implemented to identify additional purine-responsive
transcription factors. Identified proteins will be analyzed in vitro in terms of
DNA and ligand binding, and in vivo experiments will include analyses of gene
expression and phenotypes characteristic of strains deleted for genes encoding
the identified transcription factor as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation to
identify direct targets. The ability of MftR to rewire these regulatory circuits
will be examined. By focusing on several proteins that respond to the same
signals, the objective is to achieve a more integrated picture of the gene
regulatory networks affected by purine catabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.