* 2153754
* Transforming STEM Professionals into Culturally Responsive STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Rebecca Forrest, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2027
* USD 950,070.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing high quality,
effective secondary STEM teachers who will serve in high-need school districts.
Across the country, high-need schools struggle to recruit and retain secondary
STEM teachers. This challenge often has a negative effect on teaching and
learning. The project will work with the teachHOUSTON program at the University
of Houston to create a pipeline of secondary STEM teachers trained in high-need
STEM fields by recruiting STEM professionals who possess at least a
baccalaureate degree in a STEM discipline and desire to become STEM teachers.
The accelerated 9-month certification pathway incorporates classroom management,
inquiry, and culturally responsive pedagogy, as well as over 500 hours of field-
based experiences in high-need school districts. Several entities will
contribute as key players in the project's recruitment strategy to previous STEM
graduates. Collaborators include the College of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, the College of Technology, the Cullen College of Engineering, and
the University of Houston Alumni and Career Services. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Houston includes partnerships with
seven Houston area independent school districts (Aldine Independent School
District-ISD, Alief ISD, Alvin ISD, Cy-Fair ISD, Houston ISD, Pasadena ISD, and
Spring Branch ISD). Project goals include: 1) Recruit STEM professionals into
teachHOUSTONâ€™s accelerated pathway for teacher certification; 2) Implement a
9-month accelerated teacher certification pathway that is inquiry-based and
culturally responsive; 3) Provide $11,000 in support to 58 STEM professionals as
they complete teacher certification; 4) Introduce a Classroom Management Course
that is inquiry-based and culturally responsive; and 5) Build a STEM Learning
Community (SLC) to create a collaborative atmosphere that offers support through
an enhanced cohort model for the accelerated pathway for teacher certification.
The project will offer an accelerated pathway into teaching for STEM
professionals, ranging from recent college graduates to retired STEM industry
professionals. The project will support five cohorts of individuals to produce a
total of 58 secondary STEM teachers. With over 500 hours of field-based
experiences in high-need school districts, upon completion of the certification
program, Noyce recipients will serve as teacher leaders in their
schools/districts in incorporating pedagogy that is both inquiry-based and
culturally responsive along with a classroom management system that aligns with
these pedagogical approaches. Furthermore, this proposal will collect data to
advance knowledge of recruiting, preparing, and retaining STEM professionals as
secondary STEM teachers to teach in high-need school districts. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.