* 2153081
* CAS: New BODIPYs That Are Capable to Form Coordination-bonded Panchromatic Arrays For Light-harvesting
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Viktor Nemykin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 391,303.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Victor Nemykin of the University
of Tennessee is studying several new classes of molecules, that have the
potential to replace currently used carbon nanomaterials as electron acceptors
in the light-harvesting modules of organic photovoltaics (OPV) devices.
Naturally occurring porphyrins and their derivatives are well-known "pigments of
life," which are responsible for light-harvesting, oxygen transfer, the
catalytic transformation of biological substrates, and many other functions.
Porphyrin derivatives perform best in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell (DSSC) modules.
Although fullerene, its derivatives, and the other nano-carbon materials are
typically thought of as electron-acceptors for donor-acceptor assemblies, they
suffer several limitations. First, they are not bright chromophores, especially
for the low-energy range of the solar spectrum. Second, over the years, it has
become clear that they significantly limit the mechanical flexibility,
stability, and overall performance of OPV cells. Finally, fullerene and its
derivatives are still very expensive when the overall cost of the OPV device is
considered. In order to address the major deficiencies of fullerenes and their
derivatives, Professor Nemykin’s team is planning to prepare a broad range of
bright porphyrin-related chromophores with a first reduction potential that is
energetically close to that of fullerenes (electron-donors) paired with a set of
non-fullerene, BODIPY-like electron acceptors. They hope that these new
molecules will outperform currently used nano-carbon materials as electron
acceptors in OPV devices to eventually allow for the development of new,
economically viable light-harvesting modules for solar cells. This project will
help to train next generation research scientists through the cross-disciplinary
nature of the research, with exposure to inorganic, organometallic and
theoretical chemistry, as well significant application of spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In an effort to reduce the manufacturing cost of OPV
solar cells, researchers have been developing new OPV technologies that adopt
room temperature solution-based fabrication techniques. The resulting solar
cells also have many potential advantages in terms of mechanical properties
(flexible solar cells) and broad platform deployment (paint-on solar cells). In
pursuit of the preparation of the artificial light-harvesting materials that
would be as effective as the natural photosystem, a variety of synthetic dyes
such as porphyrins, phthalocyanines, and BODIPYs been studied in the last
decade, with the best, porphyrin-based, DSSC system providing ~13.5% efficiency
in the solar light-to-electricity conversion. In this project, the principal
investigator’s team will prepare, characterize, and investigate a set of new
panchromatic supramolecular assemblies formed using coordinating bonds between
electron-donating porphyrinoids and new electron-accepting chromophores. In
particular, specific emphasis will be on the design, preparation, and
characterization of the new electron-deficient chromophores that can outperform
and substitute nano-carbon materials as electron-acceptors. These new
chromophores will belong to the electron-deficient BODIPY family including aza-
BODIPYs, and MB-DIPYs. Photo-induced electron-transfer processes between
porphyrinoids (electron-donors) and new electron-acceptors (BODIPYs, aza-
BODIPYs, and MB-DIPYs) in supramolecular assemblies will be studied by an array
of the experimental and theoretical methods to characterize these systems
thoroughly and identify optimal non-fullerene donor-acceptor systems for
eventual deployment in OPV devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.