* 2153108
* IRES Track I: STEM Advancement through International Learning (SAIL)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Merlis Alvarez-Berrios, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2025
* USD 298,992.00

The STEM Advancement through International Learning (SAIL) Program at
Interamerican University of Puerto Rico, Bayamon and Ponce, will expose Hispanic
undergraduate students to nanoscience research under the supervision of Material
Physics Department faculty from the Complutense University of Madrid (Spanish
acronym UCM), Spain. SAIL will recruit six (6) undergraduate minority students
per year from Inter American University of Puerto Rico (IAUPR) to participate in
a 9-week research experience focusing on the design and characterization of
advanced nanomaterials for electronic and photonic applications. Currently,
nanoscience and nanotechnology are utilized in many public sectors, such as
transportation, medicine, and energy. However, nanotechnology depends on the
existence and characterization of new nanomaterials. The control of
nanomaterials' composition, size, shape, and morphology are essential, and their
complex functions require further advancement in preparation and modification.
For this reason, the design and study of advanced nanomaterials are of great
importance to society and the future. SAIL Scholars will conduct mentored, high-
quality research activities and develop the necessary skills to manage high-
performance equipment. Two independent campuses of the Inter American University
of Puerto Rico, Bayamon campus (IAUPR-BC) and Ponce campus (IAUPR-PC) will
establish a collaborative network to support the students in this research
experience. SAIL Scholars will work on multidisciplinary (Physics, Chemistry,
and Material Science) projects but with a unifying theme that enables a cohort
experience under the mentoring of expert researchers. The results of the
projects will generate new knowledge that will contribute to the advancement of
science. The skills developed by multidisciplinary collaborative research will
help students in their future careers and research opportunities. The
international and cross-disciplinary component of this learning experience goes
beyond what is ordinarily available to low-income undergraduate students in
Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IAUPR is a private undergraduate
institution with 99% Hispanic, primarily first-generation/low-income students.
The proposed activities will impact underrepresented minorities in STEM,
enabling cross-disciplinary research and promoting cultural competence in a
cohort model. A gender balance will be sought during the selection process, as
Hispanic women are even more underrepresented in the STEM community. Students
will present their research projects at regional, national and international
conferences to improve their networking and presentation skills. The
collaboration among campuses and the international alliance will strengthen
research, education opportunities, and mobility for minority students. The SAIL
project will impact the IAUPR system and the Island by combining program
activities and dissemination efforts. The anticipated results of the project are
an increase in the retention and graduation rates, development of research and
international skills for undergraduate students (self-efficacy in STEM) and
enhanced the number of students who decide to pursue graduate studies
(persistence in STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the International Research Experience for Students program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.