* 2153202
* Designing Time-varying Fields to Encode the Autonomous Navigation of Micro-robots
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Kyle Bishop, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 379,600.00

Mobile robots use sensory information about their environment to direct their
actions autonomously toward specific goals such as cargo delivery, waste removal
or materials repair. Achieving similar goals in microscopic environments, such
as inside the human vascular system, requires robots with dimensions that are
comparable to those of living cells. However, so-called “micro-robots” are not
autonomous. Instead, they require on external sensor and controllers to direct
their motion and other actions. The goal of this project is to create autonomous
micro-robots that can navigate local variations in their environment with
external supervision. The micro-robots are based on small particles that can be
energized by placing them in time-varying magnetic fields. Once the dynamics of
the particles in the magnetic field are understood, the project will design
fields that direct particle motion along gradients in surface topography
(topotaxis) and fluid velocity (rheotaxis). In addition to providing research
training for graduate and undergraduate students, the project will include
educational outreach to young women in high school interested in pursuing STEM
fields. In partnership with the 'Girls in STEM' summer program at the Courant
Institute, summer research projects on micro-robotics will train students on the
integration of data, models, and design to advance engineering
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing micro-robots based on field-driven
particles rely on knowledge of the current position and the target destination
to control particle motion through fluid environments. These external control
strategies often are challenged by limited information (i.e., particle positions
are unknown) and global actuation (i.e., particles move in a common field). This
project will use time-varying magnetic fields in three-dimensions to encode the
autonomous navigation of multiple particles in response to gradients in the
particle environment—particularly, those in topography (topotaxis) and velocity
(rheotaxis). Importantly, the field does not instruct particles on where to move
but rather on how to respond to local variations in the environment. As a
result, the same field can drive multiple particles to move simultaneously in
different directions. Building on model predictions, the project aims (1) to
demonstrate experimentally the autonomous navigation of magnetic micro-particles
across complex topographic landscapes, (2) to design improved driving protocols
informed by automated experiments and dynamical models, and (3) to develop
rheotactic particles capable of navigating velocity gradients within
microfluidic channels. These aims will be achieved through a combination of
experiments on magnetic micro-spheres and ellipsoids driven by time-periodic
fields and dynamical models based on low Reynolds number hydrodynamics informed
and augmented by particle tracking data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.