* 2153560
* IRES Track I: Computational Co-Design of Physical Systems with Embodied Intelligence by Integrating Data, Simulation, and User Interface
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bo Zhu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,964.00

Designing embodied intelligence for physical systems is an emerging challenge in
today's engineering and computing practices. This IRES project aims to tackle
the challenge on both sides of software infrastructure creation to bridge
scientific communities and research training curriculum development to educate
STEM students. By collaborating with two user interface research groups at the
University of Tokyo and Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(JAIST), we bring together an interdisciplinary team with their complementary
expertise in physics simulation, digital fabrication, data science, and human-
computer interaction to devise novel computational tools to support the
interactive design of intelligence-embodied physical systems. Fifteen U.S.
students, both graduates and undergraduates, will visit Japan in the summer and
jointly lead the research project by working with their collaborators at the
University of Tokyo and JAIST. The three-month study and research experience
will immerse the students in a unique research environment to develop their
scientific understanding and programming practices to address the frontier
research problems crossing artificial intelligence (AI), scientific computing,
user interface, and computational design. The follow-up mentoring activities
will guide the students' self-motivated exploration and future professional
development in this interdisciplinary field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research project is to build an open-source software
framework to lower the barriers for students, researchers, and engineers to
conduct interactive design and visual programming of data-driven intelligent
algorithms for various customizable physical systems, including examples of
soft-bodied robots, drones, and materials. On the side of infrastructure
development, we aim to democratize the creation of adaptable AI algorithms in
specific physical and engineering contexts by providing an easy-to-access
software framework to help designers conduct their data-integrated design tasks
across engineering and computing communities. The software's architecture
consists of three essential components --- frontend design interface, backend
physics simulator, and data-driven physical-intelligent coordination --- which
naturally transition to fifteen clustered sub-projects for the IRES students. On
the side of research training development, we plan to redefine the standard way
of problem-solving in physical intelligence by transitioning the workflow from
the traditional data collection and model activity to a fully integrated design
loop by interactively co-designing the data model, physical principles, and
intelligent algorithms. We plan to train an inclusive group of students, with a
particular focus on minorities and underrepresented students, by developing
their new skillsets through developing this open-source infrastructure crossing
physical and data sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the International Research Experience for Students program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.