* 2153071
* NSF-BSF: Studying the relationship between DNA replication and tandem repeat instability
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Sergei Mirkin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,142,847.00

Simple repetitive DNA sequences account for 3% of human genome. The length of
individual DNA repeats can increase between generations, and this repeat
expansion leads to over 50 hereditary human diseases, such as fragile X
syndrome, Friedreich’s ataxia and Huntington’s disease. While each of these
diseases is rare, altogether they affect one in several thousand newborns,
making them a significant medical and societal burden. Thus, understanding the
fundamental mechanisms of DNA repeat expansions is of prime importance. It is
believed that repeats can occasionally lengthen during DNA replication, but the
detailed mechanisms are poorly understood. This collaborative project between
two research groups in the US and Israel combines cutting edge genetic and
microscopy studies in a model experimental system to understand how repeat
length changes during their replication. The project also creates cross-
disciplinary training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expansion of simple DNA repeats is a hallmark of
numerous hereditary diseases in humans. This collaborative project between the
Mirkin (Tufts University) and Aharoni (Ben-Gurion University of the Negev)
laboratories aims to understand how replisome integrity ensures proper
replication of simple DNA repeats and counteracts their instability. Using S.
cerevisiae as a model organism, the project combines genetic assays that measure
instability of various DNA repeats (e.g., expansions, contractions, and
fragility), with single-cell live-microscopy analysis of replisome progression
through these sequences. This dual approach will make it possible to resolve how
a repeat’s length, its propensity to form dynamic DNA structures, and its
orientation relative to the direction of replication affect progression of the
fork. A particular emphasis of the project is on the role of coupling between
leading and lagging strand syntheses and dNTP pool complexity in repeat
instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.