* 2153723
* AF:Small: Distributed Protocols for Information Dissemination in Ad-Hoc Radio Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Marek Chrobak, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2025
* USD 397,714.00

Radio networks can be deployed to support efficient communication when
installing a wired network infrastructure is not feasible or economical, for
example in inaccessible environments or when the network involves mobile or
previously unknown entities. The distinguishing feature of a radio network is
that its nodes cannot selectively communicate with other nodes — instead, each
node transmits information via a shared radio channel and this transmission
reaches all nodes located within its range. This creates unique challenges, for
example the need to deal with signal collisions that occur when two nearby nodes
transmit simultaneously. Such challenges are particularly acute in ad-hoc
networks, which may be formed spontaneously and whose nodes have no information
about the network’s connectivity. Energy consumption is also a critical concern,
because the devices connected by radio networks are often battery operated. This
project investigates fundamental properties of radio networks, modeled as a
directed graph whose topology is initially unknown. The main objective is to
develop efficient protocols for information dissemination, with special
attention given to the task of information gathering, where all nodes
simultaneously attempt to send messages to some specified target node. Two
measures of efficiency are considered: the time to complete the task, and the
required energy consumption. The complementary goal is to study inherent
limitations of such networks by establishing lower bounds on these two
efficiency measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on information-
dissemination protocols in ad-hoc radio networks, where lack of information
about the topology and signal collisions hinder communication. This model of ad-
hoc radio networks was developed to study fundamental aspects of decentralized
networks of wireless devices, including, for example, sensor networks. At a high
level, the goal is to shed light on fundamental questions about capabilities and
limitations of such networks. These questions address the apparent dichotomy
between the time complexity of information broadcasting and gathering, the role
of feedback, and the tradeoff between running time and energy. To investigate
these questions, the project will focus on the development of faster protocols
and better lower bounds for basic communication-dissemination primitives,
including broadcasting, gathering, and gossiping. For some of these problems
there are still significant gaps between the lower and upper bounds on their
running time, and the investigator's work will contribute to closing or reducing
these gaps. Relatively little is known about energy complexity of ad-hoc radio
network protocols. Addressing this lack of knowledge, the investigator will
conduct a systematic study of energy complexity. The goals include designing
energy-efficient protocols and establishing tradeoffs between energy complexity
and running time. Along the way, the investigator will also work on developing
general techniques for designing efficient protocols for ad-hoc radio
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.