* 2153599
* IRES Track I: Advanced Imaging and Characterization at the Interface Between Living and Nonliving Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Hsin-Chiao Ou-Yang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The goals of this project are to develop advanced imaging techniques and
innovative microscopic probes to determine how biological cells respond to force
and to train U.S. students in these techniques. These experiments will help us
understand how stem cells differentiate into functional cell types, how cancer
cells spread, and how blood flow is regulated. Understanding how cells interact
with their environment is essential for developing treatments for a variety of
health-related issues, ranging across joint repairs, cancer therapeutics, tissue
engineering, and heart and vascular disease prevention and treatment. The
scientific goals will be accomplished via a focused international collaboration
that provides intensive research training for graduate and undergraduate
students. Each year, research will be conducted by 4 - 6 U.S. students working
toward their Ph.D. or undergraduate senior thesis under joint supervision of
professors from Lehigh University and researchers in the French National
Laboratories in the University of Bordeaux, France. Each of the participating
students will work in Bordeaux laboratories in the summer and at Lehigh for the
rest of the year. Gender balance and race and ethnic diversities will be
considered to ensure the development of the United States STEM workforce in a
diverse, inclusive and international environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
Lehigh faculty in science and engineering departments in collaboration with CNRS
researchers in the University of Bordeaux, France will conduct themed research
projects with aims to develop multiscale microrheology to investigate
mechanotransduction of multicellular organoids, time-lapse confocal imaging of
stem cell differentiation in 3D-printed scaffolds, and magnetic nanoparticle-
mediated transport of membrane-bound proteins on a supported membrane. Three
model systems are to be developed for such investigation: organelles confined by
sub-millimeter hydrogel capsules, 3D printed bio-scaffolds and supported lipid
membranes embedded with magnetic nanoparticle-labeled membrane-bound proteins.
Multiscale imaging modalities, including fluorescence confocal microscopy and
optical coherent tomography, will be used to examine cellular and extracellular
milieu at different length scales. Multiscale rheology probes, including
microbeads manipulated by optical tweezers, deformable microgels and oil or fat
droplets, will be used to map the stress-strain field in subcellular to
multicellular domains. Correlation between cellular growth and response and the
stress-strain maps will guide the researchers in developing theoretical models
as well as testing the validity of these models. This project will advance
understanding of mechanotransduction of stem cell differentiation and cell
migration in complex three dimensional environments. Experiments on transport of
membrane proteins will generate new data and experimental approaches to discover
the mechanisms that cells use to respond to blood flow. Success of this project
will be assessed by journal publications and by presentations of research by the
participating students in national and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.