* 2153259
* Collaborative Research: IRES: Track I: GYP-NEXTGEN: Empowering future scientists within an international consortium focused on gypsum plant communities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* C. Donovan Bailey, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 110,070.00

Unusual soil types such as gypsum are home to a significant proportion of the
world’s plant diversity, host unique and often rare biological communities of
conservation concern, and serve as excellent systems to further our
understanding of basic evolutionary and ecological processes. Through IRES Track
I funding, the GYP-NEXTGEN project allows John Carroll University, New Mexico
State University, and Oberlin College to support annual 6-student cohorts (two
students per institution per year for three years) to conduct mentored research
projects with partners in Spain at the Instituto Pirenaico de Ecología,
Universidad de Almería, and Universidad Rey Juan Carlos. The main objective is
to advance our understanding of the unique plants and associated organisms that
specialize on unusual gypsum soils, while simultaneously providing high-quality
international research experiences to a diverse set of US undergraduates (18
students, total). The student participants will be drawn from three diverse
institutions, including a Hispanic-serving institution and two undergraduate-
focused institutions, one of which has many first-generation students. GYP-
NEXTGEN builds on an existing US-Spanish collaboration, providing US students
the opportunity to work alongside many of the worldwide experts in this research
area. GYP-NEXTGEN will train 18 future scientists for a global workforce,
developing their cross-cultural, interpersonal, and academic research skills in
STEM fields. Each student will be closely mentored by US and Spanish scientists
as they develop research proposals, conduct studies in the field and laboratory,
and prepare their work for presentation and further publication. Students will
advance their scientific communication skills through direct outreach to local
schools in Spain to talk about their work, and in the US and Mexico through
production of a bilingual podcast about their projects. The project also
provides professional development opportunities for a diverse faculty team in
the US and Spain. By leveraging and expanding upon GYPWORLD, GYP-NEXTGEN
strengthens the links between the US and Spanish partner institutions, enables
substantive advances in basic research and conservation of gypsum ecosystems,
and creates meaningful opportunities for professional development for
undergraduates, junior faculty, and senior faculty
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unusual soil types such as gypsum offer unique
opportunities for understanding basic ecological and evolutionary processes.
Organisms adapted to these soils are often inherently rare and of conservation
concern. Despite their global presence in arid and semi-arid regions, gypsum
ecosystems remain understudied compared to other harsh soil types, yet they host
biodiverse endemic plant and biological soil crust communities on five
continents. This project builds on an existing collaboration between US and
Spanish partners, providing opportunities to mentor and train 18 students total
from three US institutions (John Carroll University, New Mexico State
University, and Oberlin College) at three Spanish institutions (Instituto
Pirenaico de Ecología, Universidad de Almería, and Universidad Rey Juan Carlos).
By further linking US and Spanish partners, this project will advance
fundamental research questions related to the physiology, ecology, evolution,
and conservation of gypsum ecosystems. Our main objective is to advance our
understanding of gypsum ecosystems while simultaneously providing high-quality
international research experiences to a diverse set of US undergraduates.
Importantly, Spain is the international hub of gypsum ecological and
evolutionary research, and the Spanish PIs included in GYP-NEXTGEN represent
most of the global leaders in gypsum ecology and evolution. Students will be
mentored through an integrated campaign of activities before, during, and after
their research experiences in Spain, to ensure consistent high-quality
mentorship. GYP-NEXTGEN will train 18 future scientists for a global workforce,
developing their cross-cultural, interpersonal, and academic research skills in
STEM fields. Each student will be closely mentored by US and Spanish scientists
as they develop research proposals, conduct studies in the field and laboratory,
and prepare their work for presentation and further publication. Students will
advance their scientific communication skills through direct outreach to local
schools in Spain to talk about their work, and in the US and Mexico through
production of a bilingual podcast about their projects. The project also
provides professional development opportunities for a diverse faculty. By
leveraging and expanding upon the existing European Union funded GYPWORLD
project, GYP-NEXTGEN strengthens the links between the US and Spanish partner
institutions, enables substantive advances in basic research and conservation of
gypsum ecosystems, and creates meaningful opportunities for professional
development for undergraduates, junior faculty, and senior faculty
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the International
Research Experience for Students program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.