* 2153641
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: US-Kenya Collaboration to Foster Underrepresented Students' Capacity in Community-Based Engineering Education Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephanie Claussen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2025
* USD 119,867.00

Despite increased attention to and support for international opportunities for
students, there are clear gaps in terms of who participates in such experiences
and where they travel. Engineering students participate at lower rates, and
racially and economically minoritized college/university students are the least
likely to have the opportunity to participate. In addition, such international
trips rarely take place in sub-Saharan Africa. To address this need, this IRES
Track 1 project supports U.S. underrepresented students in conducting research
in community-engaged engineering and the design of localized engineering
education in Eldoret, Kenya. Students will work with research mentors in social
work, engineering, and from the community itself, which will support their
critical understanding of collaboration in international development and
engineering problem-solving. We work across two collaborating institutions,
Purdue University (PU) and San Francisco State University (SFSU), and we engage
two departments at Moi University in Kenya, Education/Social Work and
Engineering, and a community partner organization, Tumaini Innovation Center.
This project will allow a broader population of U.S. engineering students to
participate in an international research experience. This program gives first-
generation, racially-minoritized, or low socioeconomic-status students the
opportunity to carry out research abroad and experience the research process
while also empowering them through mentorship and reflection. The student
research projects will expand existing research in both Kenya and the U.S. in
community-engaged engineering and localized engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses an integrated set of
research and practice aims, both through the research that student IRES
participants will conduct and in the thoughtful evaluation of the program.
First, the research conducted by the student researchers will contribute to rich
scholarship in both community-engaged engineering and the development of
localized engineering teaching and learning. There is a great need for
additional research on how engineers can engage with communities in just and
sustainable ways and for how engineering education can meet the unique needs of
individual communities and student populations. The IRES student research
projects have the potential to identify opportunities and approaches for
developing engineering education that builds effectively on local knowledge.
Second, the evaluation of this program can contribute to our understanding of
student learning, intercultural growth, and experiences in international
research. In particular, our project will focus on racially and economically
marginalized and first-generation students, who are typically not represented in
existing research on such programs. Through our engagement with multiple U.S.
institutions (Purdue and SFSU) and our focused engagement with groups that
support underrepresented students in engineering at both institutions, our IRES
program will provide a mechanism for broad impacts on the fields of engineering
education and engineering practice. Through our detailed student recruitment
plan and our thematic focus, our IRES program will broaden access to impactful,
community-centered engineering education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.