* 2153635
* IRES Track I: International Partnership for Responsive Infrastructure using Sustainable Multifunctional Materials (iPRISM)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paris vonLockette, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

Globally there is a critical need to reduce the energy use and environmental
impact of buildings. Currently, the operation of buildings accounts for 40% of
the energy consumption in the United States with buildings producing ~39% of
process-related CO2 emissions globally. At the same time and in recent decades,
materials research has advanced significantly through groundbreaking work on
bioinspired materials that are smart, adaptive and responsive. The iPRISM
program will leverage these advances by implementing new material technologies
that enable buildings to sense, adapt and respond to functional and
environmental conditions. In the process, these new technologies will improve
the construction, performance, and maintenance of buildings, resulting in lower
CO2 emissions and lower energy consumption. In addition, iPRISM will build on
the strong partnership between the Penn State Center for Living Multifunctional
Materials Systems and North Carolina A&amp;T in the United States and the
University of Freiburg livMatS Center of Excellence in Germany to increase
participation of U.S. students from traditionally underrepresented groups in
material science and research abroad. The iPRISM students will be guided in
their research by world-renowned experts and will have access to unique
facilities, including full-scale built structures that incorporate novel and
nature-inspired composites. The iPRISM focuses on the development of novel
synthetic ‘living’ materials critical to improving the construction,
performance, and maintenance of buildings to increase their adaptiveness.
Student research projects focus on key knowledge gaps in the design,
manufacturing and characterization of living materials closely integrated with
needs in sustainable, resilient and adaptive building design. In the
construction stage, building materials will respond to light-triggers to adapt
to the additive manufacturing process, and nature-inspired load-adapted
composites will enable sustainable and green building materials. During the
performance stage, responsive materials will facilitate smart building skins
interacting autonomously with their physical environment and new self-powered
materials will lower the energy needs of buildings. Finally, in the maintenance
stage, multifunctional materials will advance sensor networks to monitor
building operations. Our technical approach rests on strategies inherent to the
development of engineered synthetic living materials and well-suited to emergent
approaches and needs in realizing adaptive architecture, considering autonomous
adaptation, robustness, resilience, energy harvesting, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-German partnership builds on
multidisciplinary research at the intersection of biology, material science and
engineering, strengthens international research collaborations, and contributes
to enhancing the competitiveness of the U.S. workforce in the global economy.
The iPRISM research will achieve innovations in smart buildings with promise to
improve the manufacture and maintenance of other large infrastructures. Our
educational impacts include student mentoring, with a key goal of broadening
student participation in materials science and STEM fields by leveraging
programs at Penn State and a long-lasting partnership at NC A&amp;T. These goals
will strengthen the pipeline for the advancement and scientific leadership of
students from underrepresented groups. Students will participate in scientific,
social and cultural activities that will develop their professional skills and
network, an impact that extending beyond the proposed
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.