* 2153413
* CRII: RI: TRUST—TRustworthy Uncertainty Propagation for Sequential Time-Series Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Dimah Dera, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 04/30/2024
* USD 190,922.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The massive production of time-
series data through the internet of things, the digitalization of healthcare,
and the rise of smart cities have surged the need for competent time-series
modeling, analysis, and forecasting. Many critical applications rely on time-
series analysis, including video analytics, stock market analysis, earthquake
prediction, economic forecasting, healthcare monitoring and disease prognoses.
Recent sequence machine learning (ML) models have achieved remarkable success in
processing entire sequences of data (such as speech or video) and learning long-
term dependencies of time-series. However, these sequence models are unable to
understand or assess their uncertainty, particularly critical when predicting in
heterogeneous and noisy environments or in the presence of an adversary. For
example, missing a prediction of heart failure due to artifacts in the
electrocardiogram (ECG) physiological signal or failing to detect a security
vulnerability in a software product could cause tragic health, financial and
societal damage to people and industries. This project will develop significant
theoretical and algorithmic foundations for uncertainty quantification, self-
assessment, and adversarial detection in modern ML sequence models towards safe
and reliable time-series intelligent machines. The project will develop
pioneering algorithms that are universally robust under noisy conditions and
adversarial susceptions. The main focus is on sequential ML algorithms with
quantified uncertainty for the provided solutions. Open-source implementations
of the proposed algorithms will be publicly available for rapid dissemination
and contribution to the ML community. Furthermore, the proposed research will
support the cross-disciplinary development of a diverse cohort of graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley and develop
new courses, certificates, and research projects in trustworthy and robust
ML.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical aim of the project advocates a
novel Bayesian estimation framework that propagates distributions across models’
non-linear layers inspired by powerful statistical frameworks for optimal
tracking in non-linear and non-Gaussian systems. A comprehensive analysis of
models’ performance and uncertainty measures under noisy conditions and
adversarial attacks will pave the way for deploying sequential ML algorithms in
a wide range of real-world applications. Applications of this research include
industry and healthcare partners in the areas of security of industrial systems
(in collaboration with Lockheed Martin Inc.) and brain tumor detection and
surveillance from magnetic resonance imaging (in collaboration with MRIMath,
LLC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.