* 2153163
* Pursuing patterns in the statistics of utility data to analyze grid resilience
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Ian Dobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 340,000.00

This NSF project analyzes statistical patterns that have occurred in blackouts
or outages of our nation's bulk electrical power transmission grid. The patterns
will be extracted from standard utility data that record details of these
outages. The project aims to explore and understand these statistical patterns
to improve the grid resilience. For example, quantifying the typical patterns in
component outages and recovery when severe weather hits the grid can inform
making the grid more resilient. Quantifying the most likely patterns of how
blackouts start and spread can detect the vulnerabilities to a cascading
sequence of outages of grid components. The project complements the knowledge of
individual blackouts and their mechanisms in the power engineering field with
new approaches based on the statistical patterns occurring across all blackout-
related outages in detailed utility data. Processing this real data is
foundational to quantifying and preventing blackouts and grounding the field in
observed data. New metrics calculated from observed data can transform detecting
and help in fixing the most likely grid vulnerabilities. The intellectual merits
of the project include deploying an interdisciplinary range of statistical and
engineering approaches to analyze, confirm and explain patterns observed in
detailed utility outage data. The broader impacts of the project include ways to
improve the resilience of the nationâ€™s transmission grid by quantifying and
mitigating blackouts. The project will improve classroom education by developing
interactive teaching methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
statistically test heavy-tailed probability distributions, design robust
resilience metrics, model outage timing with Poisson processes, extract outage
and restore processes from data, adapt ideas from motifs from network theory to
contingency lists, and identify mechanisms of outages from data. The project
will also pursue an entirely new explanation of how the Zipf distribution of
event size can arise from the power system engineering that responds to cascades
of outages by mitigating those cascades. The expected outcomes include practical
resilience event definitions, useful resilience metrics, and expanded risk-based
contingency lists for transmission systems that can be calculated from standard
utility data and that can be used to help utilities and regulators quantify and
mitigate blackout risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.