* 2153576
* Hypergraphs and Ramsey Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Dhruv Mubayi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 178,865.00

The PI will develop the theory of families of finite sets, focusing on the
relationship between local and global properties. Questions about the
local/global relationships in large structures impact several areas of
mathematics (number theory, combinatorics, logic) as well as other fields like
information theory, coding theory, theoretical computer science, and the social
sciences. The study of these objects has gained particular importance in recent
years due to the many large real world networks that have emerged and are being
studied. Developing new techniques to study these complex systems will be a
major task for future researchers and the PI plans to contribute to this through
his theoretical work. The PI plans to involve graduate students in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on two particular areas of
combinatorics: Extremal hypergraph theory and Ramsey theory. In the first area,
the main object to be explored is the "feasible region" of a hypergraph. This
captures two of the most important themes in extremal combinatorics: shadow
theorems exemplified by the Kruskal-Katona theorem, and extremal hypergraph
problems exemplified by Turan's theorem and its various extensions to
hypergraphs. The PI and his coauthors have developed the basic theory of
feasible regions for both hypergraphs and induced graphs in a series of papers.
Still, many foundational issues remain unresolved and settling these could be
considered one of the main thrusts of this project. In the second area, the PI
plans to work on fundamental problems in Ramsey theory. The main problems that
will be explored here are the determination of the tower growth rates of
diagonal and off-diagonal classical hypergraph Ramsey numbers, as well as of the
closely related Erdos-Hajnal function. The PI will also try to obtain better
bounds for off-diagonal graph Ramsey numbers using pseudorandom
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.