* 2153851
* CAREER: Simulation of Geometrically Flexible Materials with Applications to Computer Graphics and Computational Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Chenfanfu Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2025
* USD 413,762.00

High-fidelity physics-based simulation of 3D materials and natural phenomena has
become essential in many computational science domains such as structural
engineering and vehicle/aircraft design, as well as a critical component in
motion pictures, visual effects (VFX), animation, and video games. Numerical
simulations have further found an increasing breadth of new applications such as
real-time VFX previews, virtual reality games, interactive surgical training,
predictive soft robotics, and computational fabrication. While theoretical
computation capacity is now less of an impediment, a timely opportunity emerges
for innovations in designing new numerical algorithms that mathematically
resolve complex geometry and multi-physics with high accuracy and can best
utilize new computational platforms with plausible scalability. While
contributing towards this direction, the project will also directly promote
modern interdisciplinary studies and education in scientific computing,
mechanical engineering, and human-robot interaction. The application to
simulating virtual humans will enable clinical training software, which not only
improves patient care but also eliminates animal experiments. The support for
large-scale geophysical simulation saves lives by improving the prediction of
disasters like avalanches and landslides. The innovation of a versatile multi-
physics system facilitates advances in climate sciences by modeling Arctic sea
ice. This project will produce highly useful software systems for non-simulation
experts and educational tools for STEM students. It will also strongly encourage
the involvement of undergraduate students, underrepresented minorities, and
women through a versatile set of educational events, exchange programs, and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop innovative
computational algorithms, including flexible treatment of thin structures with
the Material Point Method, a unified multi-material multi-physics framework to
capture versatile phenomena, along with novel approaches harnessing the power of
next-generation multi-GPU platforms. Co-dimensional geometries (metallic shells,
fluid sheets, filaments, biological membranes, fibrous composites, threaded
alloys, etc.) will be a primary focus. The project will build innovative
geometric representations that are robust for heterogeneous materials, and
numerical algorithms that naturally capture multi-physics. The innovative
treatment of thin structures will enable new applications such as fiber-level
wood crack prediction and fibrous food design/processing. The unified framework
will create an exciting opportunity to improve clinical planning and training by
enabling high-fidelity biomechanical simulation directly from tomographic
imaging, while investigations into numerical stability and computational
scalability will advance synergistic domains in computer graphics and
computational science at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.