* 2153614
* IRES-Track I: People, primates, and tropical forests: Integrated primatological and ecological research to advance human-primate coexistence and ecosystem health in Indonesia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Erin Riley, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,833.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides opportunities for a total
of 15 U.S. students from San Diego State University to engage in a 6-week long
international field research experience focused on human-primate coexistence and
ecosystem health in Sulawesi, Indonesia. This project will expand the diversity
of the STEM workforce by recruiting student participants from underrepresented
groups. Drawing from the expertise in primatology and tropical ecology of the PI
and foreign mentor, students will conduct research that will advance our
understanding of how primates adapt to human-induced environmental change, with
implications for ways for people and primates to coexist, and how human
activities affect the health of tropical ecosystems. Student participants will
learn how to write a research proposal and carry out independent field research.
Students will also benefit from the fieldwork experience in terms of personal
growth and maturity and the development of invaluable life skills, such as
interpersonal and cross-cultural communication. This international research
experience will produce cohorts of students who are better prepared for research
and for employment in increasingly multicultural workplace environments. It will
also help increase the diversity of ideas and perspectives on ways to advance
ecosystem health and the sustainable coexistence of humans and
wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage U.S. students in high-
quality collaborative research in an international setting and expand the
diversity of the STEM workforce by recruiting students from underrepresented
groups. Five students from San Diego State University, a designated Hispanic
Serving Institution and Asian American Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution, will conduct field research in Sulawesi, Indonesia for a 6-week
period during each summer of the award. Drawing from the intersecting fields of
primatology and tropical forest ecology, the overarching theme of the research
is human-primate coexistence and ecosystem health. Under the mentorship of the
PI and the foreign faculty mentor at Hasanuddin University, South Sulawesi,
students will develop projects focused on human-primate conflict at the forest-
farm edge, human-primate interactions in a provisioning context, the impact of
climate change on plant phenology, and the role of primates in tropical forest
regeneration. Students will gain experience developing a research question,
writing a research proposal, collecting data, using those data to test
hypotheses, and analyzing and disseminating the research findings. This
international research experience will enable students to develop skills in
diverse research methods and to build teamwork, problem-solving, and cross-
cultural communication skills critical for becoming globally competent
scientists and professionals. The inherent collaborative nature of this project
means that there will be direct contributions to the capacity building of
faculty, students, and park staff in Indonesia as well, via expanded research
skills and dissemination of research findings to international audiences. The
project results will also help inform forest management policy, the development
of mitigation efforts aimed at minimizing the frequency and intensity of human-
primate interactions, and conservation outreach programs focused on expanding
people’s awareness of the threats to Sulawesi’s endemic flora and fauna.
Ultimately, this project will showcase the value of interdisciplinary research
and international collaboration in addressing today’s grand challenges and
produce a cadre of STEM students who are globally engaged scientists and
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.