* 2153452
* Collaborative Research: Track 1, IRES sites: International Research Experience for Students in Freshwater Ecosystems at the Epicenter of Neotropical Biodiversity, Guiana Shield
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Van Kley, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2025
* USD 144,526.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project provides a
unique opportunity for US undergraduate students to learn multidisciplinary
approaches in freshwater ecology and biodiversity research in a tropical region
facing serious and immediate environmental challenges. The project will immerse
two cohorts of undergraduate students from Stephen F. Austin State University
and Texas A&amp;M University in research on Neotropical biodiversity,
instruction in ecological principles and methods, and application of research
findings to address human impacts on ecosystem services in Guyana, a biodiverse
and developing country in South America. Through both field and laboratory
research, students will collaborate with US and Guyanese scientists to fill
significant knowledge gaps regarding tropical freshwater biodiversity and
environmental conditions within streams, rivers and floodplain habitats in the
Essequibo River Basin. The project builds upon ongoing research collaborations
between US PIs and researchers at University of Guyana. In addition to
developing students’ technical skills and advancing scientific knowledge, these
collaborations will foster professional relationships and contribute to a new
generation of internationally engaged scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Guiana Shield ecoregion in north-eastern South America (extending across
countries of Guyana, Brazil, Suriname, French Guiana and Venezuela) is known for
exceptional aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity, including high levels of
species endemism. Even so, this region remains poorly explored, and early
indications are that hundreds of species remain undescribed. Most surveys have
been conducted regions with relatively easy access, which severely limits
understanding of ecology and biogeography as well as the ability to set
conservation priorities. In Guyana, gold mining, logging, agriculture expansion,
and petroleum extraction are increasing with impacts to freshwater ecosystems
and biota. Gold mining is a particularly serious concern because it contaminates
rivers and streams with mercury, which enters food webs and ultimately affects
human health, especially in rural communities that depend heavily on inland
fisheries. During each of two years, six students will participate in a 5-week
summer fieldtrip in Guyana. Students will employ methods for collection of
environmental data, survey of aquatic biota (e.g., fishes, amphibians, aquatic
macroinvertebrates and plants), taxonomy, and ecology within the Mazaruni and
Rupununi rivers and associated tributaries and wetlands. Students will
participate in collaborative projects with local mentors and students from
University of Guyana as well as the US PIs. Field and lab activities will teach
students about collaborative international research and allow them to understand
how their contributions can influence conservation of freshwater biodiversity
and management in support of important ecosystem services provided by aquatic
ecosystems in the tropics. This project is funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.