* 2153855
* Collaborative Research: Differentiable and Expressive Simulators for Designing AI-enabled Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 426,203.00

This project develops a novel principled and systematic approach to closing the
so-called sim-to-real gap in robotics. The work delivers a breakthrough in
future robot technologies, as well as Computer Aided Engineering, which anchors
US industries such as automotive, aerospace, and space exploration. Therefore,
results from this award bring benefits to the society and increase US
competitiveness. This project produces knowledge and establishes algorithms that
enable computer simulation to reduce design time and costs in engineering
intelligent and safe robots. Artificial intelligence (AI) is poised to endow the
next generation of robots with mobility and decision-making skills. However,
experimentation and acquisition of large amounts of training data encapsulating
physical interaction between the robot and its environment can be costly and
sometimes risky to the robots and practitioner. Existing simulation techniques
provide virtual testbeds in which the robot can learn efficiently and safely,
but have one major drawback - robots designed via computer simulation operate
differently, often less effectively, when deployed to the real world, which is
called the sim-to-real gap. This award supports fundamental research to reduce,
and whenever possible eliminate, the sim-to-real gap, unlocking the full
potential of AI-enabled robots. The new modeling techniques and numerical
algorithms developed are able to accurately capture the phenomena of the real
world by combining well-known physics equations and empirical traits learned
from data. The project also advances the state of the art in robotic
technologies and broaden the participation in computing of high-school students
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Presently, robotic
simulators are hampered by two main problems. First, the robot models used are
not accurate and expressive enough. Second, the methods that seek to improve
these models are both laborious and robot specific. This research aims to create
a new generation of expressive and differentiable simulators to address both
problems. A simulator is expressive if it has the ability to capture the physics
of interest. A “differentiable simulator” is one that in addition to predicting
the time evolution of a robot, can also produce gradient information, thus
allowing the simulator to be automatically adjusted to better match the real
world. The research team focuses on establishing the mathematical foundation,
prototyping robotics simulators with learnable components, investigating
practical ways to leverage these simulators in robotic applications, and
evaluating the impacts of expressive and differentiable simulators on closing
the sim-to-real gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.