* 2153229
* CRII: CPS: Human-Centric Connected and Automated Vehicles for Sustainable Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Yao Ma, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel
modeling, control, and optimization methods for connected and automated vehicles
to operate in human-dominated traffic to improve the efficiency and
sustainability of the urban transportation system while respecting individual
drivers’ unique behaviors and social norms accordingly. The significance of the
research is highlighted by the following two needs. First, the inefficiency of
the urban transportation system has resulted in substantial fuel waste and
emissions over the decades. Leveraging vehicles’ growing autonomy and
connectivity, a significant boost of energy efficiency, emission performance,
and traffic management can be achieved through dedicated control and
optimization of vehicle maneuvers and routes. Second, human drivers will remain
the majority of operators on the road in the foreseeable future. The resulting
mixed traffic where connected and automated vehicles and human drivers share the
road with frequent interactions requires detailed modeling of human drivers’
behaviors in a socially compatible context. The proposed research can generate
socioeconomic incentives such as improving the efficiency of the urban
transportation system and promoting technology acceptance for sustainable
mobility, thereby alleviating the nation’s energetic and environmental concerns.
The scientific outcome of the project will advance convergent research areas of
control theory, optimization, human behavioral study, and machine learning. The
project will involve an interdisciplinary team of students through hands-on
research opportunities at Texas Tech University, which has been historically and
actively engaged in serving the traditionally underrepresented student body in
STEM, contributing towards equitable and inclusive educational and social
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three objectives through a
rigorous theoretical treatment and experimental campaign: (i) characterizing
human driving behaviors in realistic and common traffic scenarios. (ii)
quantifying the impacts of various driving behaviors, especially when
interacting with connected and automated vehicles, on the efficiency and
sustainability of urban transportation systems. (iii) designing a socially
compliant control and optimization scheme of human-centric connected and
automated vehicles for minimal energy consumption and emissions. A progressive
development, validation, and testing plan will be implemented with a high-
fidelity vehicle and traffic dynamics model, human subject tests in virtual
driving simulation, and in-field motion planning on a fully equipped drive-by-
wire vehicle. The research is expected to yield formal methods and tools in the
broader field of data-enriched modeling, control, and optimization of human-
centric cyber-physical systems that can have transformative impacts beyond the
specific application considered in this project, such as robotics, shared
autonomy, and reinforcement learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.