* 2154154
* Excellence in Research: The role of wave-current-ice interaction to a freshwater plume dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Meng Xia, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2025
* USD 499,999.00

River plume dynamics are an important phenomenon to an estuarine circulation
contributing to transport of estuarine materials and momentum balance, which are
seasonally active in intertidal zones depending upon the Coriolis force, wind,
tide, and freshwater discharges. For example, Lake Michigan (one of the Great
Lakes) witnesses 10 km wide plume that resuspends materials extending over 100
km southern shore in every spring. However, factors responsible for the
variability are not yet understood. The temperate climate of southern Lake
Michigan is potentially influenced by the colder climate and ice covers in its
northern basin. Southern basin is intervened by the denser population in the
surroundings and prone to water pollution though the riverine channels. This
proposed project aims to use a coupled hydrodynamics and ice numerical model
developed for the Lake Michigan to investigate the: (a) effects of the wave-
current-ice-plume interactions on coastal plume formation, (b) mechanism of
plume interaction with the ice dynamics when ice cover is mobile, (c) projection
of plume behavior/occurrence under climate scenarios in southern Lake Michigan.
This project will help expand a pool of minority students in the field, by
supporting the only physical oceanography numerical modeling laboratory within
the HBCU community in the continental US and by providing students from
underrepresented groups with opportunities to integrate research with their
education through inquiry-based learning at an HBCU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will advance understanding of the factors governing plume
behavior in a large lake and how the lake current, waves, and ice are in turn
influenced by the plumes, using numerical hydrodynamic-wave-ice modeling.
Idealized numerical experiments will separate the factors in the complex system
of plume interactions with currents, waves, and ice and reveal important factors
that dominate the impacts on plume behavior. The future projection of the plume
dynamics in southern Lake Michigan considering scenarios of climate change can
forward the study to investigate nutrient distributions and productivity
resolving one of the real-world challenges. Specifically, the proposed project
will lead to the following intellectual merits: Advanced understanding of
river/sediment plume interactions with currents, waves, and ice cover and the
energy balance in these interactions; Future projections of plume dynamics out
the mid-century under the climate change scenarios that will lead to understand
the nutrients distribution and redefine the productivity zone; Future
projections of current, wave, and ice environments in southern Lake Michigan out
to the mid-century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.