* 2154353
* Photoelectrocyclizations to Anti-Inflammatory Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Andrew Roberts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 221,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, this University of Utah team (Dr. Andrew Roberts serves as
substitute-PI for Jon Rainier) will study the generation and structural
elaboration of small molecule anti-inflammatory agents. The means with which the
Rainier team intends to generate the anti-inflammatories will involve
electrocyclization reactions. Toward these goals, Rainier and his coworkers will
work to develop, optimize, and utilize chemistry that promises to convert
readily available precursors into relatively complex molecular systems using
environmentally sustainable reagents, namely light. In addition to the science
being developed, this award also promises to help to develop the next generation
of scientists who will, following their graduation, go on to careers in industry
and academia helping to develop new chemistry and important medicines,
materials, agricultural products, and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
photoelectrocyclization studies outlined in this award provide for a creative
route into the scaffolds of important anti-inflammatory agents. The core model
systems to be explored are bis- and mono-arylcyclobutenones from cross-coupling
reactions, converting these into relatively complex polycyclic systems. The
Rainier group intends to examine the effect of substrate, substitution, reaction
conditions, and additives on the electrocyclization reactions of bis-aryl
alkenes. These efforts will be focused on studying the efficiency of each
reaction and the dependency of the observed stereochemical outcomes on each of
the variables. More fundamentally, these studies are expected to provide an
enhanced understanding of excited state reactivity and will test the ability to
trap and manipulate reactive intermediates generated through such
photoelectrocyclization reaction manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.