* 2154892
* CAS: Four-Coordinate Iron- and Cobalt-Carbene Complexes for Carbene-Transfer Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Carsten Milsmann, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 440,283.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Carsten Milsmann of West Virginia University will study transition metal
catalysts based earth-abundant metals, specifically iron and cobalt. The
construction of complex organic molecules is an important target in the
development of novel pharmaceuticals, functional materials, and consumer
products. The elaboration of building blocks such as olefins, aromatics, and
saturated hydrocarbons into more complex structures can be achieved by chemical
reactions involving carbene fragments, which typically require metal catalysts
to proceed efficiently. The best catalyst systems available currently rely
heavily on rare and precious metals, which increases the cost of the resulting
products and presents sustainability challenges due to limited resource
availability. This research aims to develop design principles for earth-abundant
metal complexes that can replace precious metals in carbene transfer catalysis.
The development of iron- and cobalt-catalyzed processes in particular has the
potential to improve fine chemical production in the United States. Dr. Milsmann
and his students will actively participate in community outreach involving the
development and presentation of chemistry demonstrations at the K-12 level, and
will develop new hands-on experiments for middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry,Carsten Milsmann of West Virginia
University will study the electronic structures of four-coordinate iron- and
cobalt-carbene complexes and their resulting reactivities as competent
intermediates in carbene transfer catalysis. Of particular interest are
complexes with square-planar or cis-divacant octahedral geometries that possess
open coordination sites adjacent to the carbenoid ligand. The first aim of these
studies is to establish how changes in the molecular structure and coordination
geometry influence the electronic structures of the resulting complexes and
their reactive metal carbenoid fragments. The second aim seeks to connect
differences in electronic structure to changes in reactivity by studying
catalytically competent, isolable iron- and cobalt-carbene complexes. A key
hypothesis of the proposed research is that open coordination sites in square-
planar carbene complexes will allow unprecedented control over the
regioselectivity of carbene transfer using directing groups on the substrates.
Finally, the third aim is to investigate the potential of four-coordinate iron
carbenes to engage in [2+2] cycloaddition chemistry, which is a key step toward
iron catalyst-mediated olefin metathesis. The proposed complexes possess
coordinatively unsaturated metal centers, potentially opening up new
opportunities for the control of reactivity compared to previously reported
iron-carbene complexes. These studies will directly probe recent computational
predictions that have identified iron-carbene complexes with pincer-type ligands
as promising candidates for olefin metathesis
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.