* 2154373
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a computer-guided, orthopedic laser surgical system
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Nathan Monty, SPATIAL SURGICAL LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 997,189.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve distal extremity joint
arthroplasty. Arthroplasty is a surgical procedure to restore the function of a
joint. The proposed technology replaces cold knife, electrocautery, orthopedic
saws and drills with a hand-held, all-tissue laser ablation system that fast
cuts bone without necrosis. The effect is to reduce surgical time, create more
precise cuts and drill holes, decrease recovery times, and reduce the need for
opioid medications after surgery. The integrated visualization system may allow
orthopedic surgeons to perform precise surgical planning that is difficult or
impossible with current methods. While important in hips or knees, surgical
precision is critical in wrists, ankles, and fingers/toes. The proposed device
produced in this project may improve surgical success rates and reduce
complications and revision surgeries, which will reduce patient suffering and
excess healthcare costs. At the same time, the proposed tools may enable safe
and successful distal extremity joint arthroplasty to be performed
routinely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to develop an all-tissue laser-based orthopedic surgery
system that integrates cameras for real-time, three-dimensional (3D) vision
within a single handpiece. Conventional saws and drills compress and shear
bones, causing postoperative joint pain and prolonging recovery times. A laser
cuts by ablating tissue at its specific molecular absorption without killing the
surrounding tissue (i.e., necrosis). One critical technical innovation in this
project is to use a pulsed, high peak power, 9.3 μm wavelength carbon dioxide
(CO2) laser that rapidly ablates hydroxyapatite (bone) and water (soft tissue).
The laser pulse widths are chosen to approach the tissue’s Thermal Relaxation
Time, TRT, which eliminates necrosis. Another critical technical innovation is
to integrate various cameras (similar to smartphone and confocal microscope
cameras) within the 9.3 μm ablation laser pulse train to provide real-time,
high-definition, intraoperative vision. The proposed device may be enhanced to
demonstrate sufficiently large bone ablation patterns, clinically acceptable
bone ablation speeds, and non-tapered laser drilling tapering. The instrument
will be housed in a handheld device that mimics existing orthopedic tools and
will be run by firmware to perform at speeds necessary for clinical
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.