* 2154473
* Travel: III:  Student Travel Support for 2022 ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Huiping Cao, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The award enables about 20 US students to attend the 2022 Association of
Computing Machinery International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
(WSDM, pronounced "wisdom"), which will be held in Phoenix, Arizona
(https://www.wsdm-conference.org/2022/) from February 21 to February 25, 2022.
The aim is to support a diverse group of students and make it possible for them
to attend the conference and discuss and disseminate their work. The conference
also provides an opportunity for them to interact with national and
international researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSDM conference, which was
established in 2008, brings together researchers and industry practitioners into
a comprehensive program for publication, education, and interaction, including
research papers, tutorials, doctoral symposium, and a machine learning
competition-style event (WSDM cup). The program includes publications relating
to web search and data mining defined broadly, and particularly encourages
publications on practical yet principled novel models of search and data mining,
algorithm design and analysis, economic implications, and in-depth experimental
analysis of accuracy and performance. The program also includes workshops that
demand dedicated coverage due to their relevance to the current research and
development in web search and data mining, and keynote talks by leaders in
academia and industry. All these activities provide a unique opportunity for
students to share their knowledge, experience, and research projects with
internationally recognized researchers from both academia and industry. In
recent years, about 500 attendees attended WSDM, and we expect the same this
year as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.