* 2154089
* Computational framework for identifiable and phase-consistent allele-specific expression quantification
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Seyoung Kim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2025
* USD 701,728.00

Haplotype inference and allele-specific transcript expression quantification are
two fundamental&lt;br/&gt;problems in genetics and genomics. Haplotype inference
aligns maternal and paternal alleles of&lt;br/&gt;genetic variants along two
diploid chromosomes, whereas allele-specific expression&lt;br/&gt;quantification
obtains the expression levels of transcripts of maternal and paternal origins
from&lt;br/&gt;RNA-seq reads. These two problems are coupled in that one can
affect the accuracy of the&lt;br/&gt;other: accurate allele-specific expression
quantification requires accurate haplotypes to map&lt;br/&gt;RNA-seq reads to
and the accuracy of haplotype inference can be enhanced by allele-
specific&lt;br/&gt;RNA-seq reads. While existing works have considered these two
problems separately, this project&lt;br/&gt;develops a computational framework
to address these two fundamental problems jointly in a&lt;br/&gt;single
statistical framework to enhance the accuracy of both inferred haplotypes
and&lt;br/&gt;allele-specific expression quantification. The computational
methods to be developed in this&lt;br/&gt;research will advance various aspects
of biological research that require accurate allele-
specific&lt;br/&gt;expression estimates and haplotypes, including mapping
allele-specific eQTLs, detecting&lt;br/&gt;imprinted genes, imputing untyped
variants, finding signatures of natural selection, and&lt;br/&gt;detecting
recombination events. The outcome of the research will be used in outreach
activities&lt;br/&gt;in minority serving institutions to recruit graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a computational framework
for obtaining accurate allele-specific&lt;br/&gt;expression measurements and
haplotypes from RNA-seq and genotype data. Two existing&lt;br/&gt;frameworks,
one for transcript expression quantification and the other for haplotype
inference&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., Beagle), are combined into a single framework, while
keeping the computational efficiency&lt;br/&gt;of the original frameworks. Each
of these two existing frameworks is modified to address
two&lt;br/&gt;previously-unmet challenges regarding allele-specific reads: for
the RNA-seq quantification, the&lt;br/&gt;project develops a mathematically
rigorous approach to obtaining identifiable allele-specific&lt;br/&gt;expression
estimates at gene level, at transcript-set level, or at individual transcript
level,&lt;br/&gt;whereas for haplotype inference, the project couples the model
in Beagle with RNA-seq&lt;br/&gt;quantification methods of these investigators
to jointly estimate identifiable allele-specific expression levels
and&lt;br/&gt;haplotypes that are consistent with each other. The computational
methods are benchmarked&lt;br/&gt;on allele-specific eQTL mapping, using
genotypes and RNA-seq reads from human trios and&lt;br/&gt;LG/SM intercross mice
with known haplotypes. The outcome of the research is available
at&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~sssykim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.