* 2154331
* Graph Edge Coloring
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Guantao Chen, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 179,870.00

The edge-coloring problem (ECP) aims to color the edges of a graph with the
minimum number of colors so that no two adjacent edges receive the same color.
Its optimal value is called the chromatic index. In addition to its great
theoretical interest, ECP arises in various applications such as the scheduling
problem and fiber-optic communication. It has attracted tremendous research
efforts in several fields, such as graph theory, combinatorial optimization, and
theoretical computer science. Holyer in 1981 proved that it is NP-complete in
general to determine the chromatic index, so there is no efficient algorithm for
solving the ECP exactly unless NP=P. Hence, extensive research has been focusing
on near-optimal solutions, good estimates of the chromatic index, and some
conditions under which the ECP can be precisely solved in polynomial-time. The
Goldberg-Seymour conjecture, confirmed recently by the PI and his collaborators,
implies that we can approximate the chromatic index within one of its true value
in polynomial time. The proposed research lies in determining the families of
graphs whose chromatic index can be found in polynomial-time, which the PI has
been and will continue working on with his current and former graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A noticeable lower bound for the
chromatic index is the maximum degree. The relationship between these two
invariants is well studied, with many beautiful results. Apart from the maximum
degree, there is another lower bound for the chromatic index, called density.
Some longstanding conjectures have been brought forward on the roles that
density plays when determining the chromatic index, however, most of which lack
techniques to attack. The combination of these two lower bounds gives a
classification of all (multi)graphs: a graph is of the first class if its
chromatic index equals the maximum value of these two lower bounds and is of the
second class otherwise. Clearly, the first class graphs are those whose
chromatic index can be computed polynomial-time, and all class one simple graphs
are of the first class. This project aims to show several commonly known
families of graphs belonging to the first class. There are three longstanding
unsolved problems in this direction (stated initially in different terms):
simple graphs with a large maximum degree are of the first class (Hilton’s
Overfull Conjecture); all planar graphs are of the first class (Seymour’s Exact
Conjecture); the graph obtained from a regular simple graph by doubling each
edge is of the first class (The Generalized Fulkerson Conjecture). The methods
developed by the PI and his collaborators recently have shown some potential for
more substantial progress toward these problems. Additionally, the PI plans to
extend the techniques developed for edge-coloring to tackle some problems in
graph total-coloring, including Goldberg’s conjecture on the equality of the
total chromatic number and the chromatic index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.