* 2154530
* Influence of Double Network, Internetwork Connectivity and Sacrificial Bonds on the Frictional Characteristics of Double Network Hydrogels: Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 424,324.00

This grant will support research that will advance the knowledge related to a
structure-property relation for double network hydrogels, promoting the progress
of science. The exceptional lubrication behavior of biological tribosystems
stems from its biphasic composition, a complex macromolecular network with a
water-based lubricant. As a prominent example, articular cartilage balances
lubricity with strength. To date, there is an urgent need to generate
tribological understanding and models for novel biomaterials that can serve as
replacement for cartilage. Double network (DN) hydrogels consist of two
interpenetrating polymer network that resemble cartilage, are strong and tough,
and have thus emerged as promising biomaterials. This research will advance the
understanding of the mechanics associated with DN hydrogels, and specifically
how double networks afford control of friction. The implications of this work go
beyond fundamentals of soft matter tribology and extend to biomedical
applications and soft robotics, where the processes occurring at the migrating
hydrogel interface are relevant. Furthermore, the collaborative project will
help develop the workforce in the U.S., broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research, and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
provide a fundamental understanding of the relation between microstructure of DN
hydrogels and their frictional characteristics via experiments and modeling. Two
major lines of research are proposed here: one combining physically and
chemically crosslinked networks and a second one combining two chemically
crosslinked networks, which lead to intrinsically different microstructures. The
intellectual merit of this research will include: (1) thorough data of friction,
structural, and mechanical properties of DN hydrogels as a function of
composition via (novel and improved) experimental toolsets and a new mechanics
model to quantify friction; (2) advances in the fundamental understanding of the
effect of double network, sacrificial bonds, internetwork connections and charge
on frictional dissipation mechanisms; and (3) discovery of hydrogel materials,
capable of achieving low friction coefficients and augmented wear resistance
through the precise control of their microstructure. To examine lubrication
mechanisms, friction, adhesion and rheological measurements will be carried out
on hydrogels to probe multiple dissipation mechanisms. The comparison between
experimental and modeling results will enable us to elucidate the underlying
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.