* 2154852
* Electronic and Structural Factors Governing the Intersystem Crossing and Internal Conversion Dynamics of Aza-Substituted Nucleobases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Susanne Ullrich, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,787.00

With support of the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Susanne Ullrich and her team at the
University of Georgia will study the response of modified nucleobases upon
exposure to UV (ultraviolet) light. The canonical nucleobases, which form the
building blocks of our DNA, protect themselves against photodamage through
internal conversion processes that dissipate harmful UV energy into heat.
However, minor changes to the nucleobases, such as substitution of a single ring
carbon atom with nitrogen, can profoundly alter their UV photo-response and
eliminate their inherent photo-protection. Depending on the position of
substitution, internal conversion processes can become inaccessible and instead
long-lived, highly reactive triplet excited states are formed. Besides
fundamental interest in the unique photophysics of these azabases, modified
nucleobases have desirable properties for various uses in biological and
pharmacological applications. For example, long-lived reactive triplet states
are key to some forms of cancer treatments, antiviral and antimicrobial
medicines, and photodynamic therapies. The project will train undergraduate and
graduate students as well as summer interns who participate in this research.
Outcomes of the project will be broadly disseminated to the public through open
house activities and science show performances.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in this project, Ulrich and her team at the
University of Georgia will apply time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (TR-
PES) and ion yield (TR-IY) measurements to the study of ultrafast internal
conversion and intersystem crossing dynamics in a series of azabases. Azabases
can be classified into two types: In type 1 azabases, internal conversion is
quenched and intersystem crossing into the triplet manifold becomes highly
efficient. In contrast, type 2 azabases maintain efficient internal conversion
pathways similar to the classic nucleobases. Using gas-phase experiments
supplemented by ab initio calculations the molecular-level mechanistic details
governing this unique behavior will be derived. A new VUV (vacuum ultraviolet)
source, based on a collaborator’s design will be integrated into the existing
experimental setup. Through photo-exciting these molecules with UV radiation and
probing the evolution of the excited states with VUV, critical information
pertaining to their deactivation mechanisms can be gleaned. TR-PES directly
observes all relaxation pathways and identifies excited states based on their
photoelectron spectra. TR-IY instead provides mass information that helps
identify excited states based on characteristic fragmentation patterns.
Supplemental theoretical efforts, in collaboration with Professors Barbatti (Aix
Marseille) and González (University of Vienna), will go beyond simple static
pictures, using dynamics simulations with non-adiabatic and spin-orbit couplings
and simulating TR-PES spectra. Comparing a systematic series of azabases and
contrasting their type 1 and type 2 behavior has the potential to unravel the
electronic and structural factors that control intricate details of their
excited state potential energy surfaces such as couplings between excited
states, potential energy barriers, and accessibility of conical intersections
and crossing points. The intrinsic molecular photoproperties observed here
combined with knowledge of solvent effects gleaned through published solution-
phase studies, are expected to contribute to a better understanding of azabase
photophysics under the widely varying conditions of biological
microenvironments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.