* 2154449
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating Exciton Transport in Hierarchical Organic Materials through Time-Resolved Electronic and Vibrational Spectroscopy/Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jean Hubert Olivier, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 280,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Erik Grumstrup at
Montana State University (MSU) and Jean-Hubert Olivier at the University of
Miami (UM) is investigating energy transport in light-harvesting
superstructures. These organic platforms are comprised of aromatic dyes, stacked
in a face-to-face conformation and then covalently “stapled” together with
molecular tethers. The structural rigidity conferred by the tethers enables the
construction of nanoscale objects that are structurally and electronically well-
defined. By varying the physical rigidity of the tethers through synthetic
chemistry, the researchers aim to show that energy transport is enhanced when
the vibrations between individual molecules are reduced. To study this effect,
the research team will use a variety of time-resolved spectroscopies and
microscopies that allow direct imaging of energy transport through the
nanostructures in the solid state. The overall scientific goal of this work is
to provide a fundamental understanding of the level of disorder that can be
tolerated in organic materials while still achieving long-range energy transport
necessary for applications in catalysis and energy conversion. To broaden the
impact of the work, the research team will develop a science communication
channel on YouTube that is thematically centered on the role of chemistry in
addressing contemporary problems in climate and energy and will leverage these
materials to develop a co-hosted general audience seminar series at UM and
MSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exciton diffusion lengths in organic nanostructures
are often measured in the 10s of nanometers, rather than the micron length scale
of inorganic semiconductors. Only a few examples of long-range exciton transport
have been reported for organic materials, however these demonstrations are
serendipitous, and to date, a fundamental understanding of the relevant
structure-function relationships that ensure long range exciton transport is
lacking. This project leverages a class of covalently tethered molecular
assemblies that feature synthetic “knobs” to regulate both dynamic (electron-
phonon coupling) and static heterogeneity (length of tethered dye assemblies)
without changing the molecular core through which excitons are transported.
Exciton transport in a series of increasingly rigidified assemblies will be
measured using a variety of ultrafast spectroscopies and microscopies, both in
solution and in the solid state. Experimental data from both solution and solid-
state spectroscopic studies will be compared to structurally-accurate kinetic
Monte Carlo models, which will be utilized to extract fundamental constraints on
the structural and electronic parameters that engender long range exciton
transport. Results from these combined studies will deliver new fundamental
insight into: 1) how excited state properties of solvated assemblies, such as
exciton delocalization and diffusion, can be tailored by tuning interchromophore
rigidity, and 2) how exciton transport properties are parameterized by
structural domain heterogeneity in hierarchical
superstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.