* 2154176
* I-Corps: Autonomous smart Intravenous (IV) Pole that follows patients to reduce falls and collisions
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Debajyoti Pati, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a smart intravenous (IV) pole to help prevent patients from
falling in the hospital. A relatively large percentage of falls in a patient’s
room are associated with the IV pole, which introduces a serious risk. The
solution has potential applications in both hospitals and long-term care
facilities, where IV pole-associated falls occur. Patient falls affect one
million hospitalized patients and cost US care providers $50 billion annually.
Hospital falls are “Never Events” that are not reimbursed by the Centers for
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. In addition, more serious falls result in
longer length of stay and may cause additional complications such as the
increased risk of infections. The utilization of the proposed solution also may
provide other tangible benefits to hospitals as it may improve the safety rating
of hospitals, and the patient experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a smart intravenous IV pole device that
is fundamentally different from the versions of this product currently in the
market that may reduce the risk of falls at hospitals and other healthcare
settings. The artificial intelligence-based features of this product may
eliminate multiple risks associated with the current IV poles. Previous studies
by the team show that 70 and 23 percent of all fall initiations, in a trip to
the bathroom and around the bed respectively, are associated with the IV pole.
Patients’ forced postural changes resulting from subject-environment-
equipment/furniture interactions were identified as a key determinant of fall
initiations. Movement, while attached to an IV pole, involves constant pushing,
pulling, and other forced postural changes, which introduce destabilizing
biomechanical forces associated with fall initiations. Using the proposed
technology solution eliminates postural changes forced by the IV pole, releases
both hands of a patient for conducting tasks, and enables simultaneous use of a
walker or wheelchair, among other safety improvements. A preliminary study with
young, healthy subjects shows a substantial improvement in gait speed and trunk
lean – two factors associated with falls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.