* 2154322
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Compiler-Assisted Embedded Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* John Criswell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 585,484.00

There is a multi-billion dollar market for low-cost, energy-efficient embedded
systems. Unfortunately, as the software for such systems is typically developed
in C, they suffer from the same programmer-induced memory errors that have
plagued general-purpose systems. Unlike most general-purpose computers, however,
exploitation often leads to real-world physical consequences. This project will
develop new methods to secure embedded software. Rather than place the security
burden entirely on developers of embedded systems, the objective of this project
is to shift the enforcement of fundamental security properties to the compiler,
using a combination of compile-time static analysis, runtime instrumentation,
and hardware support. The project will also consider compiler enhancements to
enable end-developer security customization and promote software
longevity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a scientific foundation
for compiler-assisted security on low-cost embedded systems. Such systems are
already widely deployed in existing domains, such as cyber-physical systems, and
are increasingly a part of emerging technologies, such as the internet-of-things
(IoT). The project will produce open-source software and educational artifacts
for both researchers and developers, including compiler enhancements, benchmark
applications, and tutorials on the artifacts to be presented at tutorials and
conferences. Finally, this project will improve student education outcomes at
the participating institutions by integrating the research activities with
security competitions for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.