* 2154773
* Regioselective [2+2+2] Cyclotrimerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Brian Popp, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Gregory Dudley and Brian Popp of West Virginia University are studying selective
new methods for preparing complex derivatives of benzene and other aromatic
(benzenoid) compounds. Aromatic compounds offer many benefits to society with
applications in the healthcare, agriculture, electronic, and energy sectors, but
the elaboration of more complex examples is a challenge because it requires the
correct placement of multiple substituents around the periphery of these cyclic
molecules. The central hypothesis of the funded project is that derivatives of
acetylene, a readily available two-carbon building block, and related compounds,
can be stitched together with catalysts in a three-fold fashion to make
derivatives of benzene with the orientation of their combination being precisely
controlled by the nature of the three building blocks and the type of catalyst
employed. The research, which will be integrated with university education and
other synergistic activities, has the potential to advance fundamental knowledge
in the field of chemical synthesis and create positive impact across and beyond
the molecular sciences. The broader impacts of the funded project extend to
supporting a wide range of outreach activities conducted by the research team
members that will foster broadening participation in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) and including engagement of individuals from
underserved Appalachian communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regioselective [2+2+2]
cyclotrimerization as a route to aromatic compounds is a long-standing challenge
with no general solution. Compared with functionalization of pre-existing
arenes, direct benzannulation strategies are attractive but they have been
notoriously difficult to reduce to practice, especially as a means to access
highly substituted aromatic ring systems. The funded project is focused on
overcoming these difficulties by combining a range of substrate control
principles designed to enable the convergent assembly of alkynes and/or alkyne
surrogates with precise regiocontrol. Two approaches to achieve high
regioselectivity in Rh- or Ni-catalyzed benzannulation chemistries are being
pursued: the first involves hydrogen bonding and other templating effects
(including covalent tethering) between substrates, and the second utilizes vinyl
sulfones as alkyne surrogates with a distinct stereoelectronic profile. Target-
oriented synthesis (to illudalane-type sesquiterpenoids) and methodological
development efforts in the Dudley laboratory will be focused on regioselective
two-component couplings for the convergent synthesis of tetra-, penta-, and
hexa-substituted benzene rings in which two of the three building blocks
(alkynes and/or vinyl sulfones) are tethered together. Concurrent experimental
and computational mechanistic and organometallic studies in the Popp laboratory
will be focused on the development of three-component couplings involving vinyl
sulfones as polarized alkyne surrogates. These complementary efforts involve
graduate and undergraduate students working together in an immersive research
training environment and it is anticipated that the experiences gained will help
them to emerge as potential future leaders of the global innovation-based
economy. The research is expected to lead to significant advances in the
chemical synthesis of highly substituted benzene derivatives and to provide new
design paradigms for regioselective [2+2+2] cyclotrimerization reactions based
on theory, mechanism, and experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.