* 2154668
* GOALI: High Throughput Discovery and Optimization of Photochemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 560,904.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Corey Stephenson and Robert Kennedy at the University of Michigan–Ann
Arbor are merging state-of-the-art, high-throughput experimentation technology
with light-driven photochemical catalysis. Success in this project will provide
new methods for the synthesis of organic molecules that are more efficient and
sustainable. The guiding principles of these technologies will accelerate
methods to synthesize high value molecules such as pharmaceutical building
blocks while simultaneously reducing the waste and environmental footprint as
compared to traditional chemistries. Photochemistry uses light as the driving
force to form new chemical bonds. This approach often enables the formation of
unique bonds not accessible through simple heating. Despite its high potential,
technologies for efficient development and optimization of photochemistry have
trailed behind thermal methods at large scale. In this project, Dr. Stephenson
and Dr. Kennedy are studying the adaptation of photochemical systems to low-
waste, high-throughput microfluidic technology for the development of new
processes and eventual large scale application. This research project is carried
out in collaboration with the AbbVie Process Research and Development team,
allowing for the streamlined incorporation of the new methods to be immediately
implemented into the large scale synthesis of pharmaceutical intermediates.
Additionally, the Stephenson and Kennedy research groups are involved in several
outreach programs that engage grade school (3rd-12th grade) students, with the
intention of inspiring the next generation of scientific leaders. Stephenson’s
involvement in the Females Excelling More in Mathematics, Engineering, and the
Science (FEMMES) and the Michigan Math and Science Scholars (MMSS) programs at
the University of Michigan has allowed for the direct engagement of grade school
students with synthetic chemistry in a fun and supportive atmosphere, while also
encouraging them to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research between the Stephenson and Kennedy groups at the
University of Michigan and the AbbVie Process Chemistry group will adapt droplet
microfluidic technology to the rapid development of photochemical methods in
chemical synthesis. Droplet microfluidic systems are a state-of-the-art high
throughput experimentation technology (HTE) offering upwards of a 1000-fold
reduction in scale while simultaneously increasing throughput over current HTE
methods. This microfluidic platform will facilitate the rapid optimization of
new photochemical methodology while allowing for a direct translation to
scalable chemistry-in-flow approaches. Furthermore, the developments in
microfluidic technology proposed herein have the potential to provide for
kinetic and mechanistic insights into the reactions under study even at the
picomole scale. To gain a detailed understanding of reaction mechanism, methods
will be developed for a novel in-flow process for mechanistic analysis, in
collaboration with the AbbVie Process Research and Development team, where
successful candidate reactions can be rapidly translated to industrial
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.