* 2154772
* Tetrafluoro(trifluoromethyl)sulfanes Chemical Reactivity and Polar Hyrdophobicity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2025
* USD 472,369.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor John T. Welch of the University
at Albany, will investigate a novel thermally and chemically stable functional
group that may ultimately replace persistent and toxic compounds used in the
preparation of pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals. Unfortunately, the problem of
environmental persistence is endangering the use fluorine chemistry in new and
currently marketed products for materials science, agrochemical, biochemical and
medicinal chemistry is endangered by. For at least 75 years, fluorination and
the introduction of fluorinated functional groups has led to significant
advances in materials research, in the life sciences and in fundamental chemical
investigations. Nearly 20% of pharmaceuticals and 40% of agrochemicals contain
fluorine, typically in selectively fluorinated functional groups. It is
increasingly apparent that undesirable environmental effects accompany these
versatile substituents. Environmental persistence accompanied by bioaccumulation
is of particular concern to human health. The chemically and physically robust
fluorinated hypervalent sulfur compounds that will be studied are predicted to
decompose in an environmentally benign manner preserving the commercial utility
of fluorination and fluorinated functionality. These investigations may enable
economic competitiveness in the global marketplace that requires environmentally
benign replacement groups such as the structures under investigation. Pursuit of
this national interest requires the training of research students in the
handling of extraordinarily reactive reagents such as bromine trifluoride,
chlorine fluoride or fluorine, reagents essential to fluorochemical research.
Seventh through twelfth grade students from historically underrepresented groups
and economically disadvantaged backgrounds will be engaged in mentored
laboratory research, and in collaborative, task-oriented learning to understand
the importance of chemical literacy in community activism. The proposed research
program will help sustain our ability to train students in this crucial area of
chemical technology and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic
interactions and the steric demand of the trifluoromethyl tetrafluorosulfanyl
(CF3SF4) group can control reactivity and selectivity CF3SF4-containing
reactants. This novel substituent is predicted to have ideal parameters to
exhibit the sort of polar hydrophobicity attributes that make it useful for the
functionalization of agents designed for protein binding as tools for chemical
biology or as candidates for medicinal chemistry. But there are few synthetic,
mechanistic and property-related studies surrounding this interesting functional
group. The polar and electronic effects of CF3SF4-group substitution on the
stereoselectivity of the parent CF3SF4-methyl carbene will be investigated. As
rearrangement of carbene insertion products often involve radical intermediates,
electrolytic decarboxylation will be used to form CF3SF4-substituted methyl
radicals for comparative reaction studies. The influence of the of the CF3SF4
group on reactions will be compared and contrasted with the effect of the
trifluoromethyl group. The experimentally derived results will be used to
validate the computational predictions of the reactivity of the CF3SF4
-substituted reactants. The CF3SF4-containing products will be tested for
susceptibility to benign degradation processes by determining aqueous
photostability on irradiation at wavelengths greater than 290 nm. Susceptibility
to biodegradation will be determined by establishing the ability of members of
the genus Pseudomonas and Streptomyces to grow on CF3SF4-containing
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.