* 2154726
* Understanding and Controlling the Selectivity of Visible Light Photocatalysis in Metal Polypyridyl Artificial Metalloenzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jared Lewis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2025
* USD 496,845.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Jared C. Lewis of Indiana University is studying a new class of artificial
metalloenzymes (ArMs) that promise to advance the field of photocatalysis by
offering significant improvements in selectivity and function over existing
technologies. The proposed ArMs incorporate synthetic catalysts that use visible
light to effect a broad range of challenging chemical reactions, into protein
scaffolds that will enable spatial control over the course of these reactions.
As such, the designed ArM constructs will provide a unique platform to control
the selectivity of reactions that are useful for chemical synthesis and
potentially applicable for the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals,
and other advanced materials. The broader impacts of the funded project will
extend to an integrated outreach program focused on improving understanding of
the important topic of biocatalysis among graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students via innovative educational content modules. To complement this
activity, a high school teacher professional development program will be
developed that likewise explores the theme of
biocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how enzymes can serve as hosts
for different catalytic reactions and how second sphere interactions and
conformational dynamics influence the properties and reactivity of metal
cofactors, would greatly improve our ability to use proteins as supramolecular
hosts for catalysis. Furthermore, the insights gained from such endeavors will
shed light on design principles for implementing second sphere interactions more
broadly in catalysis. Previous studies in the Lewis group led to the development
of ArMs based on a prolyl oligopeptidase (POP) scaffold and robust methods to
evolve these ArMs were identified. The work revealed that attractive
interactions and conformational dynamics impact cofactor binding/bioconjugation,
catalytic selectivity, and photophysical properties of metal complexes linked to
POP. The funded project takes these ideas further and it will focus on the
development of a new class of POP-based metal polypyridine ArMs while entailing
efforts to: (a) understand metal polypyridine binding and photophysical
properties within POP, (b) evolve covalent metal polypyridine ArMs for selective
photoredox and energy transfer catalysis, and (c) engineer non-covalent ArMs to
control the selectivity of commercially available photocatalysts. The planned
research aims to illuminate on how non-covalent interactions in a
conformationally dynamic protein scaffold can modulate cofactor reactivity. This
approach will complement efforts in bioinorganic chemistry to model
metallocofactors with static synthetic cofactor analogues or the effects of
static protein scaffolds on metal ion reactivity. The potential to control the
selectivity of a broad range of photoredox properties using the proposed ArMs
also has the potential to significantly impact synthetic methodology. These
studies will provide an ideal backdrop for improving understanding of
biocatalysis at multiple levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.