* 2154489
* Inverse Problems for Nonlinear Wave Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 432,301.00

The project will study nonlinear wave phenomena and related inverse problems. Of
particular interest are topics related to nonlinear optics, including the static
(DC) and the optical (AC) Kerr effects, where the medium changes its index of
refraction either under the influence of a strong external electric field or by
self-modulation. The project will study nonlinear acoustics and nonlinear
elasticity as well. One of the main goals is to understand the underlying models
and the solutions well in the asymptotic high-frequency regime. The next goal is
to solve the associated inverse problems: to determine the parameters of the
medium from remote measurements. Ultrasound and elastography are known to work
in the nonlinear regime, which is one of the motivations. In addition, the
project will study the propagation of singular waves in case of a linear
elastic-fluid interaction across an interface, and the associated inverse
problem of recovery the parameters of the parameters of the medium, inspired by
geophysical applications. The project will also study a question on the proper
discretization of the geodesic X-ray transform and similar Radon transforms. The
project will provide research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator plans to analyze propagation of
waves for the nonlinear wave fundamental phenomena: nonlinear optics, acoustics
and elasticity. Such phenomena are described by quasilinear partial differential
equations, for which the geometric optics theory is less than complete. The PI
plans to exploit the specific nature of those models, combined with physics
intuition. The PI plans to explain the DC and the AC Kerr effects for the
nonlinear Maxwell equations, in particular, and to find the right asymptotic
regimes under which they occur: the relationship between the wavelength and the
intensity of the waves. Then the PI will study the associated inverse problems
of recovery of the parameters of the medium from remote observations. The PI
also plans to further study propagation of elastic and pressure waves in liquid-
solid media: reflection, transmission and mode conversion across a smooth
surface separating the two media. This is inspired by the model of Earth, where
the Crust and the Mantle are solid, the Upper Core is believed to be liquid but
the core is still solid. Finally, the PI plans to study sampling and proper
discretization and inversion of the geodesic X-ray transform and similar Radon
type of transforms. This is related to the recent work by the PI connecting
sampling theory with semiclassical analysis, relating the sampling requirements
to the semi-classical wave front set rather than looking into the “band limit”
(the support of the Fourier transform).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.