* 2154241
* Statistical Mechanics of Active Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Grzegorz Szamel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Grzegorz Szamel of Colorado State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop statistical mechanics of active matter. Active matter
consists of objects that use energy from their environment to perform systematic
motion. There is a wide range of examples, cells, bacteria, especially prepared
colloidal particles, and macroscopic objects like live animals. Due to the
continuous consumption and dissipation of energy by their constituents, active
matter systems can exhibit fascinating properties that are very different from
those of more familiar equilibrium systems. Szamel and his group will develop
new methods to study the properties of active matter and will advance the
fundamental understanding of these properties. Szamel's research projects will
expose undergraduate and graduate students to a variety of advanced scientific
methods. Szamel and his group will develop an outreach activity for high school
science students focusing on the scientific and historical importance of
Brownian motion, which will be accompanied by simple
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The description of static and dynamic behavior of
active matter is an outstanding scientific challenge, which has implications for
the understanding of biological systems and the design of bio-inspired
materials. Szamel and his group will derive and test efficient computer
simulation methods to study rheological properties of active matter. Next, they
will further develop the stochastic thermodynamics of active matter. They will
use it to develop feedback control protocols for single active particle engines.
Finally, Szamel and his group will elucidate the importance of the long-range
equal time velocity correlations, which spontaneously arise in systems of self-
propelled particles without explicit velocity aligning interactions. The
research activities will enhance the educational experience of undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates. First, through a
combination of different projects graduate students and postdoctoral associates
will gain deep knowledge of both computational, simulational, and purely
theoretical methods. Second, Szamel will develop a new advanced physical
chemistry of soft materials course, which will become an integral part of the
new undergraduate physical chemistry curriculum. Third, he will develop a
capstone program in computational and theoretical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.