* 2154880
* Methods for Regiocontrol in Polarized Polyene Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Justin Mohr, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2025
* USD 503,959.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Justin Mohr of the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is studying new
techniques to control the nature of chemical transformations occurring from a
class of versatile and readily generated intermediates called 'polarized
polyenes.' The type of reactivity being explored complements established methods
for organic synthesis and it is anticipated to streamline the manufacture of
pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other useful advanced materials. In
conjunction with catalyst discovery efforts, this research will target new
strategies to precisely control the atomic connectivity and three-dimensional
structure of complex products obtained from polarized polyenes. Crucially, and
because these starting materials are capable of reacting in a variety of
different ways, the research promises important fundamental advances in the area
of divergent chemical pathways management. A demographically diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students within the Mohr laboratory will conduct the
funded research. These individuals will gain valuable technical and scientific
skills of relevance to potential future careers in the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM)-based workforce. The broader impacts of the
project will include outreach activities conducted by the Mohr research team as
they engage with Chicago-area K-12 students to promote science education. In
addition, and to complement these and other ongoing efforts to broaden
participation, Dr. Mohr actively recruits undergraduate students belonging to
underrepresented groups to become involved in chemical research in his
laboratory at UIC, a minority-serving institution
(MSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of efficient strategies for the
assembly of polyfunctional molecules is facilitated by gaining new insights into
the fundamental reactivity of progressively more complex intermediates. It is
from this standpoint that the funded project focuses on the development of a
suite of gamma-selective transformations from conjugated dienol systems [e.g.,
1-(tert-butyldimethylsilyloxy)-1,3-cyclohexadiene], each example of which may
provide a useful new synthetic tool for the elaboration of desirable target
classes. Specific aims of the research include: (1) development of copper- and
nickel-catalyzed stereoselective C–C bond forming reactions through examination
of novel chiral ligand and chiral auxiliary designs, (2) expansion of metal-
catalyzed coupling techniques to include problematic primary halide coupling
partners, (3) examination of single-electron oxidation of dienol ethers to
generate novel radical cation intermediates exhibiting regioselective
reactivity, and (4) exploration of transition metal-catalyzed, site-selective
C–heteroatom bond formation in polyene systems. Ultimately, the research is
expected to help build a growing understanding of the basic factors that
influence and control regio- and stereo-selectivity in polyene
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.