* 2154372
* RUI: Using Colloidal Nanoparticles to Host Photogenerated Spin Qubit Pairs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jacob Olshansky, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 386,673.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Jacob Olshansky of the Department of Chemistry and
Jonathan Friedman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Amherst College
will be developing and analyzing a new nanoparticle-based system that has
potential to serve as a class of quantum bits (qubits) that can be initiated
with light. The development of quantum computers and other quantum information
science (QIS) technologies has received significant attention in recent years
owing to its promise to revolutionize computing. However, the specific molecular
systems that will comprise the qubits in these devices remain a challenge. In
the current work, the Amherst team focuses on photogenerated (light-initiated)
spin qubits that are designed to be generated in well-defined quantum states
without requiring expensive millikelvin cooling devices. The team will explore a
new nanoparticle-molecule conjugate system for hosting these photogenerated spin
qubits. They will characterize these conjugates with both time-resolved optical
and spin resonance measurements to evaluate their utility as qubit candidates.
The investigations will involve undergraduate students in cutting-edge research
that is both interdisciplinary and highly collaborative. The students trained
through this work will be better positioned to pursue careers in the burgeoning
field of QIS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photogenerated spin qubit pairs (SQP) offer
a promising platform for the development of QIS technologies since they are
generated in well-defined (non-Boltzmann populated) spin states. The proposed
work aims to expand the scope of the materials that can host these
photogenerated SQPs. Specifically, conjugates of nanoparticles and organic
molecules offer potential advantages over the all-organic systems typically used
to support SQPs. These conjugates are expected to be synthetically tunable, and
the unique spin environment provided by the nanoparticle may allow for qubit
specific addressability within the qubit pair. The initial work suggests that
SQPs hosted by conjugates of ZnO nanoparticles and organic dye molecules can be
detected and characterized with electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
techniques. The research team aims to build a deeper understanding of the spin
states in these conjugates through iterative synthetic modifications and spin-
state characterization using both custom-built and commercial EPR spectrometers.
They plan to demonstrate spin-specific addressability and perform spin-qubit
manipulations on multi-spin systems hosted by ZnO nanoparticles. Ultimately, the
work could provide researchers with both new materials and potentially new
techniques for exploring photogenerated SQPs in the context of QIS
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.