* 2154653
* The True Relationship between "Precursor" Phenomena, Magnetic Topology, and Solar Energetic Events
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Karin Dissauer, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 747,423.00

Small-scale changes occur on the Sun prior to the onset of powerful and
impactful events like solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs). These
changes are known as a “precursor” and indicate processes occurring that may
trigger the larger energetic events. This project investigates precursor events
to determine which can lead to these impactful events. Powerful solar flares and
CMEs create major space weather impacts that cause diverse effects for human
technology, including damage to satellites and power grid systems. The broader
impacts of the project include understanding these important natural phenomena,
training undergraduate students, supporting an early career researcher, and
creation of tutorials for the public on science topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science goal of the project is to establish the
uniqueness and causal relationship of precursor transient activity to solar
flares and CMEs in order to better understand magnetic reconnection and the
subsequent initiation of solar energetic events. The objectives to meet this
goal are (1) quantify the differences in temporal, spatial, and physical
characteristics of precursors against similar phenomena during activity-quiet
epochs, thus solidifying a statistical association and identifying physical
uniqueness, and (2) investigate the magnetic connection between precursors and a
subsequent event’s energy release and eruption dynamics, thus solidifying a
causal relationship. To achieve these objectives the researchers will analyze
~1000 events and matched event-quiet controls (both flare-quiet epochs and CME-
less flare events) in coordination with a newly-funded NASA effort
(HGI#80NSSC21K0738). The pre-event signatures’ temporal behavior, photospheric
magnetic context, coronal dynamics, temperature and density will be investigated
using high-order moment analysis of their photospheric vector magnetic field and
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) emission applying Differential Emission Measure (DEM)
analysis. Established statistical classifier codes and Bayesian counting
statistics will be used to evaluate the differences between flare/CME-related
precursors and transients from activity-quiet controls. Magnetic association
between pre-event brightenings and dimmings and the initial flare/eruption site
will be established using Magnetic Charge Topology (MCT) analysis, validated by
nonlinear force-free coronal models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.