* 2154609
* CAS: Mechanistic Studies on How to Maximize Dipole Effects on Charge Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Valentine Vullev, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 476,131.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Valentine Vullev of the Departments of
Bioengineering, Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California,
Riverside, is developing new ways for improving the efficiency of desired
charge-transferring processes while suppressing the undesired ones that lead,
for example, to losses in solar-energy-conversion devices and materials. Charge
transfer processes are essential, not only for sustaining life on Earth, but
also for many modern technologies such as solar energy capture. Electric dipoles
inherently affect charge transfer. The ubiquitous nature of dipoles, therefore,
warrants deep understanding of their effects on charge transfer. Professor
Vullev's group will develop optical approaches for probing and mapping the
localized nanometer-scale electric fields around dipoles. Such knowledge would
allow the Vullev team to quantify the dipole effects on charge transfer and to
map out ways to benefit from such effects. The project lies at the interface of
organic chemistry and bio-inspired molecular engineering, and is expected to
provide research team member with valuable interdisciplinary training. The
Vullev research group is active in outreach activities involving K-12 students,
and aspires to include students from groups that have been underserved in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two objectives: (1) to develop
spectroscopic approaches, using electrochromism, i.e., optical Stark effects,
for probing and mapping molecular dipoles. This knowledge will allow
experimental quantification of the extent to which the potentials of the
electron donors and the acceptors are affected by the dipole-generated fields;
(2) to study how dipole magnitude and orientation influence charge-transfer
kinetics. A key pending question that this project seeks to address is the
extent to which dipole effects on the rates of charge transfer change for
processes with different thermodynamic driving forces, in relevance to the
reorganization energy. Bio-inspired molecular electrets (systems with ordered
electric dipoles) composed of different anthranilamide residues are the key
structural motif for the systems designed for study in this project. In the long
term, this project aims to establish important structure-function relationships
for optimizing charge transfer processes of interest, allowing the molecular
engineer to suppress undesired events, such as charge recombination, in the
design of the system. If successful, the results this research project could
impact a broad range of scientific areas, including energy conversion,
bioenergetics, molecular and organic electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.