* 2154928
* GOALI: CAS: Iron-Catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura Cross Coupling Using Pseudohalide  Alkyl Electrophiles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeffery Byers, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jeffery Byers of Boston College, in close collaboration with partners
at the Sanofi pharmaceutical company, is studying a new method to assemble
complex molecules with relevance to the pharmaceutical industry. The new method
involves readily available raw materials and more abundant, iron-based catalysts
in contracts to the precious metal-based catalysts, typically palladium-based,
that are almost always used for the targeted reactions. Additionally, the method
provides greater control over the three-dimensional structure of the product
molecules, a critically important characteristic desired in most drugs. To
complement the scientific goals of the proposal, the partnership between Boston
College and Sanofi will be leveraged to educate the general public about the
values of sustainable chemistry and its role in the pharmaceutical industry
through town hall meetings and student visits to
Sanofi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this GOALI award, the Byers research group at
Boston College and their collaborators at Sanofi Pharma will work to develop
Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reactions of alkyl pseudo-halides with aryl
boronic and alkyl boronic esters and/or boranes catalyzed by iron-based
complexes. The Suzuki-Miyaura cross coupling reaction is one of the most widely
used C–C bond-forming reactions in academic and industrial chemistry. However,
palladium-based catalysts have limited reactivity with sp3-hybridized
substrates, which has resulted in an over-representation of flat molecules being
investigated as therapeutic candidate molecules in pharmaceutical chemistry
circles. It is hoped that by introducing Fe-based catalysts, a wider array of
sp3-hybridized substrates will be accessible. Replacing the alkyl halide
electrophile in these reactions with alkyl pseudo-halides is expected to have
significant impact in the pharmaceutical industry as alkyl pseudo-halides are
conveniently prepared from alcohols, which, due to their stability and low
toxicity, are well represented in compound libraries in the pharmaceutical
industry. The project will take advantage of the high and medium throughput
instrumentation that is at Sanofi for the development of aryl-alkyl and alkyl-
alkyl cross coupling reactions and enantioselective and/or enantiospecific cross
coupling reactions. Moreover, in situ monitoring of reactions will facilitate in
depth mechanistic investigations, which are lacking in the field of iron-
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.