* 2154665
* New Strategies for the Synthesis of Complex, Polycyclic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Corinna Schindler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2025
* USD 517,568.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Corinna Schindler at the University of
Michigan to develop new strategies for the synthesis of naturally occurring
molecules that hold great promise due to their biological activity. The
selective synthesis of complex, polycyclic structures remains challenging as the
majority of currently available methodologies have been developed for simple
molecular scaffolds. Consequently, more complex structures often fail to react.
The research described seeks to advance sustainable synthetic strategies relying
on either the recognition of hidden symmetry elements or visible light
photocatalysis to greatly simplify access to these desirable compounds of
biological importance. This research focus is an integral component of the
principal investigator’s educational plans which include training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, both in large introductory science
classes and in her research laboratory, as well as outreach programs designed to
engage Detroit elementary school girls, middle school students, and the general
public to spark and sustain an interest in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of Professor Schindler’s research
program is to address the challenge of selective carbon-carbon bond formation in
complex systems. The studies proposed will establish new synthetic approaches to
enable direct access to four classes of important complex, polycyclic molecules
of biological importance. Specifically, two distinct objectives will be pursued
that (i) build on and develop hidden symmetry elements as an enabling design
element in complex molecule synthesis and (ii) advance visible light-mediated
[2+2]-cycloadditions to rapidly access strained, polycyclic systems
incorporating four-membered rings. Together, these new strategies are expected
to (iii) enable the synthesis of desirable biologically active complex,
polycyclic molecules. The objectives described seek to complement and advance
currently existing synthetic methods to enable rapid and efficient access to
carbocyclic structures of biological importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.