* 2154351
* Exploring Anisotropy in the Deep Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hans-Rudolf Wenk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Large regions of the Earth are anisotropic for propagation of seismic waves,
which are waves that propagate at different speeds in different directions.
Anisotropy is present in the crust, in the upper mantle, particularly subduction
zones, in the lower mantle mainly the lowermost zone, and the inner core. The
detailed mechanisms that produce the crystal alignments that lead to anisotropy
in the deep Earth are still poorly understood. This project will conduct
experiments and modeling of high pressure and temperature to explore the
processes by quantitative analysis of preferred orientation patterns of crystals
that form at deep Earth conditions. The project will provide data that are
critical for interpreting macroscopic seismic observations. But the methods in
synchrotron diffraction that will be developed, as well as advanced methods of
data analysis, are also relevant for a broad range of physical sciences. The
experimental as well as modeling methodologies that are developed will be made
available to other researchers. They will be promoted through publications,
workshops, training and distribution of software. The research will fund the
research of a PhD student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project
is to advance understanding of mechanisms that are active during geodynamic
convection. Plastic deformation has been largely attributed to dislocation creep
but other mechanisms are likely to play an important role, particularly dynamic
recrystallization. This project will explore new methods such as synchrotron
multigrain crystallography to study nucleation and grain growth in situ at lower
mantle conditions. The outcomes of these experiments on lower mantle minerals
such as ringwoodite, bridgmanite, ferropericlase and postperovskite will be used
to model anisotropy in a convective lower mantle. Contrary to previous models
that relied on dislocation glide, this work will include recrystallization and
also investigate the influence of preferred crystal alignment on dynamic
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.