* 2154962
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Empowering Network Attack Detection with Complex Graph Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Jundong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Modern malware and cyber attacks utilize a wide range of attack techniques and
campaigns to target and exploit victim machines. However, large networks (e.g.,
enterprise networks, campus networks) face enormous challenges in detecting
evolving attacks especially with the sheer amount of network traffic each day.
This project develops new attack detection approaches for large networks using
complex graph modeling. The projectâ€™s novelties are (i) constructing a complex
graph model to represent network traffic with new techniques to enrich the
graph, and (ii) developing novel graph-based learning algorithms to detect
anomaly with minimum ground truth data. The project's broader significance and
importance are (i) wide dissemination of research results to help the community
(e.g., the Security Operations Center) combat complex cyber attacks, and (ii)
curriculum development to provide graduate and undergraduate students with
experience on analyzing attacks in real-world
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project (i) constructs the
complex graph model with a new graph refinement framework to enrich graph
structure and selective labeling techniques to create labels for targeted
nodes/edges given resource constraints; (ii) designs a suite of graph-based
semi-supervised detection algorithms to take advantage of both labeled and
unlabeled data to detect attacks in both static and dynamics network graphs; and
ss(iii) develops novel graph-based weakly-supervised frameworks that only rely
on limited labeled data or even without any labels to detect attacks. The
project uses large-scale network traffic logs collected at a campus network to
evaluate the effectiveness and accuracy of the new detection methods in a
practical real-world scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.