* 2154168
* Collaborative Research: Visual adaptations in hydrothermal vent shrimp and the role in feeding modalities and habitat selection
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Heather Bracken-Grissom, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,089.00

Hydrothermal vents have given rise to remarkable marine ecosystems that contain
organisms with specific adaptations for surviving in this extreme environment.
Alvinocarid decapod shrimp are among the most abundant animals inhabiting these
habitats and can be found in massive swarms at Pacific, Indian and Atlantic vent
sites. Different species are found at different vent sites; and when species
occupy the same vent site, some species are found close to the vents, with
others on the periphery. Previous studies have demonstrated that vent shrimp
species with enlarged eyes on their backs rely primarily on carbon provided by
bacteria on the sides of black smokers, while others with fused, forward-facing
eyes are predators/scavengers, around the vent periphery, suggesting that there
may be a correlation between eye structure, feeding mode and habitat selection.
However, adult vent shrimp are thought to be blind, but this conclusion may have
resulted from the eyes being severely damaged due to collections under extremely
bright submersible lights. Using methods the PIs have developed over decades to
collect deep-sea species with extremely sensitive visual systems without
blinding them, the visual systems of vent shrimp will be examined. These studies
will be coupled with a systematic survey of pelagic and benthic light production
(luminescence – both non-living chemiluminescence and triboluminescence as well
as biological bioluminescence) at the vents to determine if vent shrimp can see
any of these light sources. The results of this research will significantly
advance the fields of vent biology and visual ecology, potentially transforming
our current understanding of how light is generated at vent sites and how
animals use this light to survive, as well as providing possible hypotheses as
to how vent shrimp find these locations, and why different vents (diffuse, white
smokers, black smokers) are dominated by different shrimp species. This proposal
will support three graduate students, one postdoc and six undergraduate
students, and outreach will be extended to secondary schools in underserved
regions in three states by creating curriculum and activities correlated with
this research that will help teachers blend this research into their STEM
curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Originally described as eyeless, vent shrimp
are now known to undergo dramatic transformations in eye morphology with some
species having massive fused eyes on their backs (dorsal eyes), while others
have fused anterior eyes, and these different eye structures may be correlated
with their feeding preferences. However, all the structural studies that have
been undertaken on the benthic adults suggest that they are blind or the eyes
are degenerating. In addition, the supposition that the vent environment lacked
enough ambient light to make the metabolic costs of vision worthwhile supported
this conclusion. Other structural studies, however, demonstrated that the
pelagic post-larvae/juveniles have stalked eyes with normal ultrastructure, and
it is therefore unlikely that the metamorphosis from normal stalked eyes (post-
larvae) to the huge dorsal eyes (adults) results in a degenerated eye. The
“degeneration” likely resulted from photoreceptor destruction occurring during
collections of benthic adults under extremely bright submersible lights. There
may also be several sources of sufficient ambient light produced by both abiotic
triboluminescence/chemiluminescence as well as bioluminescence. Although several
studies suggest bioluminescence does not exist at these vent sites, incorrect
methodology may have resulted in this conclusion. This project will use genetic
techniques to allow for post-larvae-adult matching; physiological experiments to
provide information on photosensitivity (absolute sensitivity as well as color
sensitivity, as there has been speculation that the benthic adults may be able
to see infrared light) in both post-larval and adult shrimp; ultrastructural
techniques to characterize eyes collected in the dark as well as under bright
submersible lights; and low-light imaging techniques to examine sources of
abiotic and biotic light in the vent environments. These data will be utilized
together with computation modeling to determine if vent light sources are
visible to hydrothermal vent shrimp eyes over relevant distances. These unusual
visual systems of vent shrimp, likely serving as extremely sensitive light
receptors, may also serve as a model for low-light camera systems, much as the
optics of lobster eyes served as a model for designing an ultra-sensitive X-ray
telescope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.