* 2154681
* CAS: Lignin Valorization via Microscopic Reverse Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tianning Diao, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Tianning Diao of New York University is developing methods to convert
waste from the pulp and paper industry to useful chemical feedstocks. The
chemical products could be used as building blocks for the synthesis of polymers
(plastics) and value-added complex molecular targets with useful biological
activity (e.g. pesticides, agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals). If successful, the
process would improve the overall efficiency of biomass conversion and mitigate
waste generated from biorefinery and the paper industry. The idea is to use
biomass or lignin as a sustainable source of feedstock chemicals and as an
alternative to petroleum-based chemical feedstocks. The project provides
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to receive training at the
interface of organic, inorganic, and green chemistry. Outreach programs area
also being developed to empower members of the LGBTQ+ community and encourage
them to pursue a career in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). An initiative to combine art with chemistry through social media engages
the public and promotes interest in chemistry to the greater
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A standing challenge in biomass conversion is
the selective degradation of lignin, an abundant natural source for substituted
aromatic molecules. This project seeks to address this challenge by developing a
method inspired by the biosynthesis route of lignin, which proceeds through a
series of oxidation and radical coupling processes to form the irregular lignin
polymer. Specificially, a Ti(III)-mediated process is beginning to show promise
for lignin depolymerization, and will be studied mechanistically and optimized.
Electrocatalytic methods will also be explored. Catalysts that appear to
formally reverse the biosynthesis route may be exploitable to achieve high
selectivity in lignin depolymerization, an area that is ripe for development
given the strong international interest in replacing petroleum feedstocks with
biorenewable chemical feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.