* 2154893
* CAS:Mechanochemical Activation Carriers and Mechanisms by in Situ Chemical Kinetics Monitoring
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Silvina Pagola, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 398,984.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry (CHE) Division, and the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) Program of the Division of Materials Research (DMR), Dr.
Silvina Pagola at Old Dominion University will investigate fundamental aspects
of mechanochemical reactions and their mechanisms. Mechanochemistry is the field
of chemistry studying reactions induced by mechanical forces and the
Incorporation of mechanical energy. Mechanochemical reactions largely reduce or
avoid the use of reaction solvents. They are "green" chemical processes,
increasingly used toward the preparation of inorganic, organic and metal-organic
materials. However, the chemical mechanisms of mechanochemical reactions remain
poorly understood, which limits their implementation. This project will test a
theoretical model hypothetically embodying critical differences between the
energetics of mechanochemical reactions and their counterparts driven only by
thermal activation. Methods to determine the activation barriers of
mechanochemical reactions will be developed. These studies have the potential to
open up a new perspective on mechanochemistry, and new ways of quantitatively
modeling mechanochemical activation. Such an approach has the potential to serve
as a valuable tool for others seeking to develop mechanochemical approaches as
more sustainable alternatives to existing chemical processes, with attendant
environmental and economic benefits. Educational activities associated with this
project include the training of graduate and undergraduate students, along with
the inclusion of individuals underrepresented in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) fields. Yearly workshops on solving crystal
structures from X-ray powder diffraction using freely distributed software will
be also organized. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop methods
to measure and interpret the meaning of the activation barriers of
mechanochemical reactions. Knowledge from homogeneous-phase kinetics and
chemical mechanisms will be combined with the use of recently developed in situ
kinetics monitoring techniques and instrumentation to measure the activation
barriers of mechanochemical reactions. The validity and scope of a “stress-
augmented thermal activation” theoretical model will be investigated. This model
implies a reduction in the Gibbs free energy of activation of mechanochemical
reactions in comparison with reactions driven only by thermal activation, by
incorporating a phenomenological work term resulting of an external force
applied to the reactants along the reaction coordinate. This effect is coupled
with the excitation of vibrational modes by the mechanical treatment,
synergistically reducing the mechanochemical activation barriers. Three types of
mechanochemical reactions will be investigated: (1) The mechanosynthesis of
ZIF-6, a metal-organic framework; (2) two Diels-Alder cycloadditions (covalent
mechanochemistry); (3) the mechanochemical organic co-crystallization of
tetrathiafulvalene and chloranilic acid, and the chemical mechanisms leading to
ionic and neutral polymorphs. Isothermal kinetic data will be measured in situ
from a ball mill using Raman spectroscopy, supported by ex situ X-ray powder
diffraction. The activation barriers will be calculated from Arrhenius and
Eyring graphs. The variation of the Gibbs free energy of activation values will
be analyzed for several combinations of milling parameters, leading to a
systematic increase of the overall mechanical energy
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.