* 2154792
* Novel Methods for the Synthesis of Nitrogen Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joshua Pierce, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Joshua G. Pierce of North Carolina State University at Raleigh is studying new
methods for the preparation of an important class of natural product scaffolds
featuring nitrogen heterocycles. Specifically, the targets of interest contain
five-membered nitrogen-containing rings and the varied range of methods being
developed to access them all share a common theme of constructing the ring by
adding a two-atom component to a three-atom component. Beyond the fundamental
advances to the field of organic synthesis that the research promises, it will
also provide new ways to access complex molecules of value to medicine,
agriculture, and materials science. The broader impacts of the funded project
will extend to the benefits accrued to society as the Pierce research team
engages in various public outreach activities, including events for adults at
the Natural Sciences Museum in Raleigh, NC, and for children at a local
elementary school. These activities, in addition to immersive laboratory
experiences that will be offered via the agency of Project SEED, will promote
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education in the
community while also helping to broaden the participation of individuals from
underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
aims to leverage formal [3+2]-cycloaddition logic to prepare densely
functionalized heterocyclic scaffolds in a stereoselective fashion and to expand
the substrate scope and mechanistic understanding of processes conforming to
this paradigm. Three areas of focus are under investigation: (1) an allene (or
alkene) / 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition with novel dipoles to construct spirocyclic
pyrrolidines and/or lactams; (2) a photoredox-enabled synthesis of
3-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane derivatives; and, (3) enantioselective approaches to
pyrrol-2-one scaffolds via a three component, formal [3+2]-cycloaddition process
and their subsequent conversion to value added products. The subprojects being
pursued are united by a retrosynthetic disconnection that envisions the relevant
heterocyclic target emerging from a three- and a two-atom synthon and each is
enabled by a unique reactivity strategy. All three of the approaches being
pursued are designed to overcome an existing limitation in the synthesis of
azacycles and it is anticipated that this work with lead to an improved
understanding of fundamental reactivity and to findings that are more broadly
applicable to the elaboration of other types of
heterocycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.