* 2154377
* Broadening Access to Cyclic Polymers through Better Catalyst Design and Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 308,537.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Adam S. Veige of University of Florida is developing new catalysts for
the synthesis of cyclic polymers. Catalysts can be designed to perform many
functions. In the case of polymer synthesis, the metal ion gathers the monomeric
building blocks and stitches them together to create large oligomeric molecules
(polymers). Synthetic polymers are used in almost every aspect of our lives and
are present in the materials we use daily. The polymers are almost exclusively
long molecular chains containing chain ends. The properties of polymers are
dictated by both the monomeric repeating unit (i.e. the chain links) and by the
chain ends. Cyclic polymers do not have chain ends. Many advantageous properties
can result from the lack of chain ends. For example, these cyclic polymers
generally have improved optical properties, higher melting temperature, lower
friction, reduced viscosity, and smaller size. The challenge is to build
polymers without chain ends. This project involves the synthesis and design of
several new tungsten- and molybdenum-based catalysts that can stitch together
monomers to create cyclic polymers on a large scale. Another aspect of the
research focuses broadening access to these highly specialized catalysts so
other researchers can expand the scope of cyclic polymer and catalyst research
rapidly. The research activities associated with this award are expected to
increase broadening participation and enable training of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in catalysis chemistry. The longstanding
public outreach event “Halloween Molecular Mania”, hosted by the Dr. Veige and
the Center for Catalysis at the University of Florida, involves presenting
science in an interactive forum to the local community. The current project aims
to create new methods of communicating scientific concepts though this outreach
mechanism to participating local teachers, high school students, and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award from the Chemical Catalysis
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Adam S. Veige of University of
Florida is developing new catalysts for the synthesis of cyclic polymers. In the
first goal, a unique alkylidyne will be synthesized that has the capacity to
polymerize alkynes to give new cyclic polymer materials. New ligand designs and
new metalation strategies will be explored that have the potential to broaden
catalyst design principles in organometallic chemistry. A second goal focuses on
new strategies to build catalysts more efficiently. Existing W- and Mo-based
cyclic polymer catalysts require numerous steps in their syntheses. This project
aims to reduce the number of synthetic steps to three or four, thereby making
such catalysts more synthetically accessible, and in this way, more readily
available to other researchers working in the fields of catalysis polymer
chemistry. Another catalyst project centers on building tethered alkylidene
catalysts from commercial sources using a novel ligand design invented at the
University of Florida. The catalyst takes advantage of a new concept in
metathesis chemistry that employs a double tethered metallacyclobutane
functionality. More efficient, more accessible, more selective catalysts and
higher catalyst activities may well be forthcoming from this work. Students
participating in this research project will gain skills and knowledge important
in catalyst design, polymer synthesis, and molecular
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.