* 2154170
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Mercurial Signatures and Applications to Privacy-Preserving Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Anna Lysyanskaya, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,930.00

Anonymous credentials allow individuals to prove that they have a set of
credentials, issued by some trusted issuer, or a set of issuers, without
revealing any other information. Thus, for example, using anonymous credentials,
an access provider can make sure that only authorized individuals get to
participate in transactions and gain access to various resources, without
invading the individuals' privacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In spite of decades of
research, the existence of several implementations and some examples of
adoption, practitioners have yet to adopt this technology en masse. One reason
that practitioners are having a tough time wrapping their minds around anonymous
credentials is that the underlying concepts are complex and have yet to enter
the popular lexicon. Another issue is that traditional anonymous credentials do
not in fact protect users' privacy as much as we want them to. Efficiency,
bandwidth and other practical considerations play a role too.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses these gaps by studying mercurial signatures.
Conceptually, mercurial signatures are easier to explain to software engineers
and decision makers than traditional anonymous credentials, because unlike the
latter they do not require familiarity with cryptographic commitments and zero-
knowledge proof systems. Instead, they build off intuition that, by now, many
practitioners have from standard digital signatures when it comes to
unforgeability, and probabilistic encryption when it comes to unlinkability.
They immediately lend themselves to privacy-preserving certification chains and
delegatable anonymous credentials. And their efficient realization translates to
efficient privacy-preserving authentication with strong composition
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.