* 2154223
* Cokernels of Random Matrices and the Geometry of Error-Correcting Codes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nathan Kaplan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 329,094.00

This research project will investigate several questions about how objects from
combinatorics and number theory vary in families. The kinds of objects that are
the focus of this research play important roles in modern cryptography and
coding theory. These questions lie at the boundary of several mathematical
areas, and the principal investigator will use ideas from algebraic geometry and
number theory to answer combinatorial questions and enhance our understanding of
error-correcting codes, lattices, and sandpile groups of graphs. In many
situations, these counting problems can be understood in terms of families of
random matrices. A major idea is to study error-correcting codes from an
algebraic perspective, focusing on the interplay between codes, polynomials over
finite fields, and the algebraic varieties that they define. The principal
investigator has extensive experience as a mentor for research by undergraduates
and high school students and will lead student research projects in these areas.
These projects will be supported by graduate student mentors will be who will
gain valuable professional development experience. The research projects here
combine ideas from multiple areas of pure and applied mathematics and are ideal
for promoting collaboration across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sandpile group of a connected graph is a finite abelian group whose order is
equal to the number of spanning trees of the graph. The PI will study how these
groups vary within certain families of graphs. These questions are motivated by
connections to the Cohen-Lenstra heuristics from number theory. The PI will
consider problems about families of random lattices, focusing on lattices with
algebraic structure. An important tool here comes from the theory of zeta
functions of groups and rings. In certain cases this additional algebraic
structure will lead to very different behavior. Reed-Muller codes are
multivariable analogues of Reed-Solomon codes and are some of the most
fundamental examples in coding theory. A key idea is to use results from the
theory of interpolation problems in algebraic geometry to prove new results
about codes. The principal investigator will combine expertise in algebraic and
arithmetic geometry, as well as in coding theory, to further our understanding
of these important objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.