* 2154632
* Ketone Alkylation Using Simple Olefins: A Sustainable Chemistry Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Guangbin Dong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Guangbin Dong of the University of Chicago is studying new catalyst-
based strategies to achieve the byproduct-free generation of value-added
products from simple precursors of the ketone and olefin compound classes.
Ketones are a widespread class of organic molecules that have many applications
in chemical manufacturing; however, established methods to derivatize these
materials typically require expensive and/or corrosive reagents and lead to the
generation of significant waste streams. To overcome such issues, the Dong
Research Group is developing environmentally sustainable approaches for the
derivatization of ketones that enable direct access to a range of useful
products using a combination of specially designed catalysts and simple olefins
(inexpensive commodity chemicals). The broader impacts of the funded project
extend to societal benefits accrued by the participation of Professor Dong and
his coworkers in outreach activities, such as the "ChiS&amp;E" program which
provides early chemistry education to Chicago public middle-school students, and
the Collegiate Scholars Program which allows for high school students to become
involved in laboratory research. These activities will encourage a
demographically diverse pool of young people, many of whom belong to groups
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields, to explore careers in science and engineering while learning and/or
actively contributing to research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the funded
research is to develop both alpha- and beta-selective ketone-olefin coupling
reactions via transition metal-catalyzed C-H functionalization. To achieve the
first process, Lewis acid/transition metal cooperative catalysis will be
utilized to enable direct alpha-alkylation of the ketone substrates with simple
olefins as coupling partners. To realize the second process, beta-alkylation of
ketones, again by olefins, will be explored via a transition metal-catalyzed
desaturation-based hydride-transfer strategy. An analogous process employing
alkynes will likewise be pursued to achieve beta-alkenylation. The merits of
these approaches are significant from both fundamental and practical
standpoints, thus: (1) stoichiometric byproducts are potentially avoided; (2)
the reaction conditions are generally pH- and redox-neutral, thereby tolerating
a broad range of functional groups; and, (3) olefins are typically less
expensive and more readily available feedstocks than the corresponding alkyl
halides or organometallic species. Ultimately, it is anticipated that a suite of
operationally convenient and environmentally sustainable carbonyl alkylation
methods will emerge from these studies and that the findings will represent
important advances to the fields of bifunctional and tandem
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.