* 2154822
* RUI: CAS: Development of New Octahedral Ruthenium(II) Olefin Hydroarylation Catalysts Supported by a Single Bidentate Support Ligand
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Brandon Quillian, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 208,608.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Brandon Quillian of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Georgia Southern University-Armstrong Campus will pursue a project in
fundamental research to develop transition metal-based catalysts capable of
converting fairly inert petroleum resources into value-added products by a
“greener” method as compared to contemporary methods, which often suffer from
multiple deficiencies such as high reaction temperatures, non-selectivity, large
waste streams and the inability to recover catalysts. The targeted, highly
valued, industrially important products are currently produced yearly on multi-
ton scales for the manufacture of plastics, medicines and detergents. Borrowing
from previous advances in this vein of research, the investigator aims to
provide new knowledge to the chemistry community to further improve our
understanding of these types of systems that may lead to more efficient
processes, thereby preserving petroleum resources. This project will support the
research activities of two undergraduate students who will benefit from direct
supervision from the experienced investigator. These students will be trained in
the state-of-art methods, techniques, and instrumentation, as well as build soft
skills required to be successful in their future employment. This training is
integral to developing these students into research scientists to support the
increasing need for qualified science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) graduates. Moreover, this project is expected to have an immediate impact
on underrepresented minorities due to the rich diversity of Georgia Southern
University and the investigator’s ardent commitment to mentoring these students
to prepare them for careers in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
deals with fundamental research aimed at developing well-defined, homogenous,
ruthenium(II) olefin hydroarylation catalysts supported by a bidentate donor
ligand (bipyridine derivatives) and other support ligands (labile and ancillary
ligands). These catalysts are expected to couple non-activated olefins and
arenes using metal-mediated C-H activation and subsequent functionalization
through olefin insertion to facilitate the addition of aryl C-H bonds across
olefin C=C bonds to produce alkylarenes. The proposed catalysts are highly
modular and easy to prepare, allowing for systematic alteration of the system to
optimize catalysis. A catalytic olefin hydroarylation structural-activity
relationship study will be performed as a function of sterics and electronics on
several catalyst variants to gain a better understanding of the system. The
substrate scope of the reaction will be gauged using various arenes with both
electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups, and cyclic and highly
substituted olefins. The products and intermediates of these studies will be
characterized using modern spectroscopic methods such as nuclear magnetic
resonance and infrared spectroscopy as well as mass spectrometry, gas and liquid
chromatography, cyclic voltammetry, and single crystal X-ray diffraction. It is
expected that the outcomes of this study will increase understanding on how to
best synthesize these types of systems and what constitutes the necessary
features for viable catalysis, and by proxy, the steric and electronic limits of
the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.