* 2154314
* Collaborative Research: 2D Ambipolar Machine Learning &amp; Logical Computing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Joseph Friedman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2025
* USD 171,114.00

Emerging materials have novel behaviors that create new opportunities for
information processing, especially if the natural behavior of the new materials
can be leveraged, rather than trying to engineer them to behave like today’s
electronics. In particular, atomically thin materials, also known as two-
dimensional (2D) materials, can be naturally ambipolar, i.e. can conduct both
electrons and holes. 2D materials also have additional properties, such as
hysteresis and variability, that are usually suppressed when used for
microelectronics. This interdisciplinary team aims to exploit these unique
behaviors of 2D material-based field-effect transistors, and to show they can
lead to significant improvements in area, speed, and energy-efficiency for both
logical and machine learning (ML) applications. To do so, the team will develop
2D ambipolar materials and device structures, design ambipolar logic families
and ML architectures, and experimentally demonstrate small-scale and medium-
scale circuit prototypes that prove the utility of these materials as building
blocks for the next generation of computing systems. This research will lead to
a deeper understanding of the control of ambipolar devices, as well as
innovations in circuit and system design, that could be used in additional new
implementations of nanotechnology. The project will generate energy-efficient
technologies to accomplish computing tasks relevant to many sectors of society,
including cybersecurity, education, healthcare, and internet-of-things. The
three PIs have designed a concerted plan to integrate the outcomes of the
proposed work in education and outreach, including interdisciplinary training of
students for a strong and bright workforce; designing lectures to expose a
larger population of students to the subjects; and designing hands-on activities
to reach K-12 girls to increase diversity in science, technology, engineering,
and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging nanotechnologies exhibit novel switching
phenomena that create new opportunities for information processing. In
particular, two-dimensional (2D) dual-gate ambipolar field-effect transistors
(DG-A-FETs) can be switched between n-type and p-type FET operation, permitting
compact computing circuits that leverage the functionality of each individual
FET. This project aims to exploit the unique behaviors of DG-A-FETs in logical
and machine learning (ML) circuits and systems that provide significant
improvements in area, speed, and energy-efficiency. In addition to the dual-gate
functionality, the team aims to control and exploit behaviors of emerging 2D
materials such as hysteresis and variability to benefit computing. This project
will study 2D ambipolar materials and device structures to design several
ambipolar logic families and ML architectures, and it will experimentally
demonstrate small-scale and medium-scale circuit prototypes that prove the
utility of DG-A-FETs as a building block for the next generation of computing
systems. This research will lead to a deeper understanding of the dual-gate
control of ambipolar devices, as well as innovations in circuit and system
design, that could be used in additional new implementations of nanotechnology.
The project will generate energy-efficient technologies to accomplish computing
tasks relevant to many sectors of society, including cybersecurity, education,
healthcare, and internet-of-things. The three PIs have designed a concerted plan
to integrate the outcomes of the proposed work in education and outreach,
including interdisciplinary training of students for a strong and bright
workforce; designing lectures to expose a larger population of students to the
subjects; and designing hands-on activities to reach K-12 girls at STEM days on
multiple of the PIs’ campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.