* 2154283
* Selection experiments and sequencing to identify mechanisms of thermal adaptation in a splash pool copepod
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Brant Faircloth, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,304,159.00

Heat tolerance is an important trait, because it influences where a species can
live, and whether it will survive in a warming climate. Heat tolerance varies
among species, but little is understood about the genetic differences that make
some animals and plants more heat tolerant than others. This research will use
the small marine crustacean, Tigriopus californicus, as an experimental model to
investigate the genetic changes lead to increased heat tolerance. The
researchers will conduct a series of evolution experiments, where they will
artificially select for increased heat tolerance in Tigriopus in the laboratory.
At the end of the experiments they will sequence the genomes of the experimental
populations to examine which genetic changes led to greater heat tolerance. Then
they will compare these genetic changes to differences among northern and
southern populations of Tigriopus, which naturally differ in their heat
tolerance, to test whether the same changes are responsible for increased heat
tolerance in the lab and in nature. This research will contribute a greater
understanding of why some species are more heat tolerant than others, leading to
an improved ability to predict which species will be more vulnerable to climate
change. An understanding of the genetic changes that lead to greater heat
tolerance could also be used in aquaculture and in conservation breeding
programs, to identify which strains of a given species are the most likely to be
resilient to warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal tolerance traits govern the
abundance and distribution of organisms across environments and shape organismal
responses to climate change. However, mechanisms determining variation in
thermal tolerance are poorly understood for most species. The splash pool
copepod Tigriopus californicus exhibits divergent thermal tolerance traits
across populations, and is easily crossed and reared in the lab. As a result, it
is an excellent model for examining mechanisms of temperature adaptation. The
researchers will perform three selection experiments, each targeting a different
aspect of thermal performance that differs among Tigriopus populations: (A)
upper lethal limits, (B) plasticity of thermal limits, and (C) thermal optima.
They will combine these experiments with physiological measurements,
transcriptome profiling, and whole-genome resequencing to identify mechanisms
underlying each aspect of thermal adaptation. Finally, they will compare results
of laboratory experiments to population resequencing data for two Tigriopus
species distributed over parallel temperature gradients in North and South
America. Results of this project will provide a comprehensive map of the genetic
and physiological bases of temperature adaptation in this species, and shed
light on key questions, including the role of gene regulation vs. protein coding
changes in physiological divergence among populations, the proportion of the
genome involved in temperature adaptation, the costs and trade-offs imposed by
the evolution of increased thermal breadth, and the repeatability of adaptation
across parallel environmental gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.