* 2154613
* Geometry of Sets and Measures in Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Raanan Schul, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 369,910.00

The modern world is awash in data. The task of organizing large amounts of data
in useful and ordered ways can be formulated in mathematical terms. This project
investigates mathematical analogs of questions such as the following: How much
data can we expect to organize in a useful way? What type of geometric
structures arise in the process of such organization? Do these answers change if
we allow ourselves to disregard a certain amount of information, and can the
impact of such a choice be quantified? Finally, are there practical algorithms
to implement such data organization? In geometric language, data naturally
resides in a high dimensional space or a space where the notion of distance is
quite different from the Euclidean one. This project aims at transferring well
studied and efficient tools for analysis from low-dimensional Euclidean spaces
to higher-dimensional and more general settings, allowing high-dimensional data
to be "visualized" in a lower-dimensional, structured environment. The project
will involve the training and mentoring of graduate students and postdocs and
aims to develop tools which can lead to engagement between pure mathematicians
and the data science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many applications one is
given a large data set, represented as a subset of a high-dimensional space, and
one seeks to faithfully represent a large portion of this data set in a space of
substantially lower dimension. "Faithfully" here means that essential geometric
features are either preserved or mildly distorted. The Lipschitz condition for a
geometric transformation quantifies the distortion of distances between data
points. To date, the preceding task has received attention from computer
scientists and applied mathematicians using a range of approaches. This project
investigates mathematical approaches rooted in analysis and geometry. A key
point is that often the given data has additional geometric structure, for
example, it may have small Hausdorff dimension or be close to a union of low
dimensional manifolds. Such added structure allows for the use of tools from
harmonic analysis and geometric measure theory, especially, the theory of
rectifiability. A quantitative version of this theory, known as uniform
rectifiability, will be explored in novel metric settings. Other topics to be
considered include quantitative improvements of low rank factorization theorems,
Lipschitz decompositions of metric measure spaces, low-distortion factorization
of bi-Lipschitz mappings, and Lipschitz parameterizations of high-dimensional
spaces with parameterizing dimension greater than one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.