* 2154486
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Dynamics of Solvate Ionic Liquids: A Mixed Experimental and Computational Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Revati Kumar, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2025
* USD 339,418.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Daniel Kuroda and Revati Kumar
of Louisiana State University and Professor Ryan Jorn of Villanova University
are studying solvate ionic liquids using a combination of sophisticated laser
experiments and computer simulations. As a result of the strong attraction
between the positive and negative charges, most ionic compounds (like table
salt) are solids at room temperature. This is not always the case, however. In
some cases, the positive and negative ions can exist as a liquid at room
temperature, despite the strong forces. These ionic liquids have unique
properties that can be harnessed for a variety of applications. Unfortunately,
there are only a few examples, which makes it difficult to adjust their
properties for specific needs. In solvate ionic liquids (SILs), solvent-like
molecules are stuck to the positive ions, resulting in a novel mixture that has
ionic liquid-like properties, but which can be chemically tuned. Professors
Kuroda, Kumar and Jorn are combining computer simulation with experimental
measurement to determine how the molecular packing of the ions in the liquid
influences their properties. Their discoveries could have impact on many
technologies, including next generation batteries needed for clean energy
storage. The project is also providing research opportunities for students who
will become the next generation of scientists and engineers. In addition, this
work impacts the general community through a simple educational outreach project
entitled "The Poâ€™boy Battery" (named after the famous Louisiana sandwich), in
which middle and high school students build a functional battery from common
household materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is advancing the
field of solvate ionic liquids via the development of an integrated
computational - experimental formalism spanning multiple length scales. The
synergy connects the nanoscale molecular environments of candidate SILs to
emergent behavior at the mesoscale and their stability at metal surfaces. These
connections are achieved by combining molecular based experiments (such as
conventional and time resolved infrared spectroscopy) with atomistic
simulations, electrochemical experiments, and coarse-grained modeling. The
framework developed in this proposal is elucidating a greater understanding of
solvate ionic liquids, thereby directly impacting rapidly growing areas such as
the development of new solvents for organic synthesis and next-generation energy
storage electrolytes. The students involved in this project gain expertise in
laser spectroscopic methods as well as computer simulation
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.