* 2154963
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Steering Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer Processes for Energy Conversion at the Metal Electrode/Porous 3D Material Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Matthias Waegele, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 507,952.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Matthias Waegele and Junwei (Lucas) Bao of Boston College, and
Professor Mariam Ismail of the University of Massachusetts, Boston are studying
how to precisely modify electrodes to control electrocatalytic reactions for
energy storage. Electrocatalytic processes can store electrical energy from
renewable energy sources in the form of liquid or gaseous fuels from abundant,
renewable feedstocks such as carbon dioxide or biomass. A principal hurdle for
the adoption of this technology is the poor product selectivity of these
reactions. These reactions are complex and occur at an interface involving a
liquid (the electrolyte) and a solid (the electrode). In this work, the project
team will modify this interface, and thus the electrocatalytic activity, by
coating the electrodes with a special class of porous material known as metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs). The project team will use spectroscopy and advanced
computer simulations to gain molecular-level insights into the effects of the
MOF overlayers on three model reactions that are central for renewable fuel
synthesis: The conversion of water to hydrogen, the conversion of carbon dioxide
to carbon monoxide, and conversion of biomass to valuable chemicals and fuels.
The results of this research will provide insight into the control of
selectivity of electrocatalytic reaction. Further, the team will engage in
synergistic activities aimed at promoting the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups in STEM. Specifically, the team will involve female
high-school students and underrepresented undergraduate minority students in
this research as part of a summer program, which will expose the participants to
state-of-the-art renewable energy research in the areas of synthesis, analytical
chemistry, and simulation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On this project,
Matthias Waegele and Junwei (Lucas) Bao of Boston College and Mariam Ismail of
the University of Massachusetts, Boston are studying and designing 3D active
sites at the metal electrode/porous 3D material interface to facilitate
desirable reaction pathways of proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes
for energy storage and conversion. To this end, the team will coat metal
electrodes (Pt and Au) with crystalline metal-organic framework (MOF) overlayers
and investigate the effects of the MOF overlayers on PCET processes. Through
systematic variation of the inorganic nodes and organic linkers of the MOFs, the
team will aim to understand the effect of the MOF’s chemical and physical
properties on PCET. The project will focus on the hydrogen evolution reaction
(HER) and the reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide. Vibrational and
Raman spectroscopies will be used to characterize the metal electrode/MOF
interface under catalytic conditions. Key properties to be extracted from these
measurements will include the interfacial pH, electric double layer charging,
MOF-intermediate interactions, interfacial water structure, and local structure
of the MOF at the metal surface. Computer simulations will map minimum-energy
reaction pathways. On the basis of these investigations, the project aims to
establish robust interfacial property-reactivity relationships. Such design
rules would serve to guide the choice of synergistic 3D material, electrolyte,
and reaction conditions to steer PCET reactions in aqueous electrolytes, and
thereby also support the discovery of efficient and selective pathways for
renewable fuels formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.