* 2154386
* CAREER: Dual Function Materials for Capture and Conversion of CO2 into Methanol and Higher Alcohols
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Ana Alba-Rubio, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 387,371.00

The project will synthesize, characterize, and evaluate materials capable of
both capturing carbon dioxide (CO2) and catalyzing its conversion to more
valuable chemicals. Specifically, capture and conversion at the exhaust of
combustion sources (e.g., flue gas at power plants) is an attractive option for
CO2 valorization due to its simultaneous economic and environmental benefits. To
achieve more efficient CO2 conversion, the project will design novel materials
that locate the sorbent and catalytic components in close proximity at the
nanoscale. This dual-function approach can potentially replace existing multi-
step processes that are more energy intensive and require corrosive CO2 capture
and storage technologies. The project also links the research with educational
and outreach efforts to raise awareness of environmental consequences of CO2
emissions while encouraging interest in STEM activities amongst young women and
underrepresented groups in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will employ controlled synthesis and characterization methods to: (1)
develop metal-metal oxide composite nanoparticles containing a high density of
interfacial sites, (2) synthesize dual-function materials able to capture and
convert CO2 to methanol and higher alcohols, (3) generate CO2 microenvironments
around sorbent and catalytic sites for more efficient CO2 capture, and (4)
mitigate catalyst deactivation by using a novel wet chemical method. Successful
completion of this project will advance the understanding of mechanisms involved
in one-pot concentration, capture, and catalytic conversion of CO2 to methanol
and other value-added products, a strategic goal for sustainable reduction of
CO2 release to the atmosphere. This research will be performed by a diverse team
and will be integrated with educational activities. As a Hispanic woman, the
investigator has a strong interest in increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, and to this goal, the project will provide
hands-on experiences to migrant students in Ohio's rural communities and other
underrepresented students through the WISDOM, Latino Youth Summit, and EXCEL
programs that The University of Toledo offers to Toledo Public Schools. Students
will be introduced to chemical reactions and catalysis, and will learn about
connections between CO2 emissions and global warming. The investigator will also
create a coloring book entitled "Women Scientists Near You," to be distributed
at primary schools in Northwest Ohio with the aim to encourage the participation
of girls in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.