* 2154878
* CAS: Catalytic Carbonylation and C-H functionalization Reactions with Rhenium Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Elon Ison, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and the Chemical Synthesis
(SYN) Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Elon Ison of North
Carolina State University will study the direct carbonylation of C–H bonds by
transition metal catalysts and the direct double carbonylation of C–H bonds.
Catalysis is widely recognized as an important tool in the continued effort to
minimize waste and in the effort to utilize chemical feedstocks more
efficiently. The proposed experimental approach will be complemented and guided
by computational chemistry to assist in identifying the limitations of
elementary steps in the proposed catalytic cycles and to inform synthetic
choices for the preparation of improved catalysts using rhenium as the central
metal. The program integrates the concepts of sustainable chemistry and
catalysis into the training and teaching of graduate and undergraduate students,
postdoctoral associates, and high school students. The research program
incorporates important elements of mechanistic chemistry including the
integration of computational methods at the high school and undergraduate
levels, and the incorporation of catalysis and sustainable chemistry into
undergraduate teaching laboratory programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
research goals of the project, Professor Ison and his team will pursue the
following specific aims: (i) examination of the activation of C–H bonds by
rhenium (III) acetate complexes, (ii) understanding mono- and double
carbonylation reactions with rhenium complexes, and (iii) development of a
rhenium catalyst for double and mono-carbonylation reactions and other C–H
functionalization reactions. These studies will probe whether a concerted
metalation-deprotonation reaction mechanism provides a viable pathway for the
rhenium-mediated C–H activation reaction. The pursuit of rhenium-catalyzed
double carbonylation reactions is of particular interest to these studies as
this transformation is relatively uncommon, but potentially of high impact, if
better understood. The target products are expected to be important chemical
building blocks present in many natural products and pharmaceuticals that
display important biological activity. The viability of the Re-mediated
reactions will be investigated computationally and experimentally. Given the
unusual reaction pathways described and the longstanding interest in carbonyl
insertion into metal-acyl bonds, this research is expected to be of broad
interest to the inorganic and organometallic chemistry communities and will
likely offer insight into the design of new catalytic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.