* 2154502
* CAS: Developing New Physical Organic Descriptors for Flexible, Large Catalyst Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Sigman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 355,184.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Matthew S. Sigman of the University of Utah is developing
computational workflows that integrate machine learning and data-science with
organic reaction optimization. The Sigman group has the broad goal of
fundamentally understanding the relationship between catalyst structure and
function. Many modern catalysts are structurally complex and have high degrees
of freedom, which presents a significant challenge in representing the
structures using numerical measures. The goal of this program is to develop a
general workflow using computational and data science tools to parameterize
flexible catalysts and ultimately build predictive models that describe their
reaction performance. New descriptors generated from this strategy will be
evaluated in the context of C‒H bond functionalization reactions, which are at
the foundation of a vast range of reactions used industrially and in academic
settings. The molecular descriptors and workflows the Sigman group will develop
are also envisioned to be broadly applicable to biomimetic catalysis and
supramolecular chemistry. The ability to computationally describe complex
reactions in tandem with machine learning not only provides mechanistic insight,
but it also enables prediction of reaction outcomes and catalyst/substrate
performance. Success in these endeavors would provide the community with a tool
to streamline the synthesis of important compounds for society. Additionally,
the Sigman group will continue diverse collaborations at the organic chemistry/
data science interface. Sigman and his team will begin a Science Research
Initiative (SRI) stream on integration of data science with chemical reaction
development with the University of Utah’s SRI program, a program recently
established and devoted to facilitating research opportunities to incoming
college freshman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching assertion driving the
proposed activities is that advances in data science methods to accurately
describe molecular structure will deliver more precise interpretation and
predictive application of complex reaction correlations. Therefore, a central
goal of this proposal is to develop computational workflows capable of
describing highly flexible and complex catalyst architectures that are
commonplace in supramolecular and modern catalytic chemistry. The specific
parameters to be developed have been labeled “Spatial Molding for Approachable
Rigid Targets”, or SMART descriptors. This approach treats the reactive site of
each relevant catalyst conformation as an “approachable rigid target” to which a
probe molecule can be docked. The spatial constraints of the reactive site are
then directly captured by assessing what space the probe molecule can occupy in
a constrained conformational search where the catalyst atoms are frozen. This
proposed workflow has the potential for far reaching impact as it allows for
visualization and quantification of all possible cartesian space that the probe
molecule can occupy, given spatial constraints of the catalyst pocket. The
Sigman group plans to evaluate these descriptors in the context of C–H
functionalization reactions involving carbenes, oxenes, and nitrenes which are
based on the Rh2L4 structure developed by the Davies and Du Bois groups. These
are large, complex architectures. A fundamental understanding of these flexible
and complex catalysts would provide mechanistic insight to synthetically
pervasive C‒H functionalization reactions while the use of machine learning and
data science have the potential to enable viable predictive tools for reaction
outcomes. It is anticipated that this work will have broad, long term relevance
to biomimetic catalysis and supramolecular chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.