* 2154151
* Hydrodynamic Quantum Analogs: Classical Insight into Quantum Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Bush, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2025
* USD 651,511.00

In 2005, Yves Couder discovered that a milimetric droplet may self-propel along
the surface of a vibrating bath through a resonant interaction with its own
guiding or ‘pilot’ wave field. Notably, the walking droplet system bears a
strong resemblance to the quantum pilot-wave theory researched in the 1920s by
Louis de Broglie, who envisaged microscopic particles as oscillators that
generate a propulsive pilot-wave field. Remarkably, the walking droplets exhibit
many features previously thought to be exclusive to the microscopic, quantum
realm. Thus, they have provided the basis for the burgeoning field of
hydrodynamic quantum analogs, the goal of which is to demarcate clearly the line
between those features of quantum mechanics that can and cannot be understood
from a classical perspective. The approach is progressive: the establishment of
each new hydrodynamic quantum analog moves this line. Specifically, the walking-
droplet system has suggested classical reinterpretations of a number of the most
beguiling quantum notions, including wave-particle duality, wave function
collapse, superposition of states, orbital quantization, single-particle
diffraction and interference, uncertainty and nonlocality. The award supports
the PI's integrated experimental and theoretical investigation of hydrodynamic
quantum analogs, as will naturally inform the viability of classical pilot-wave
dynamics as the basis for a realist quantum theory. The intellectual merit of
this research is that it will thus both question and inform the philosophical
foundations of modern physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
supports the PI's investigations of hydrodynamic quantum analogs, that include
the discovery of new analog systems in the laboratory, the theoretical modeling
thereof, and critical comparison with the quantum analog of interest.
Experimental studies will explore a new class of hydrodynamic quantum analogs on
the frontiers of the subject, including superradiant photon emission, particle
creation and annihilation, and the Aharanov-Bohm effect. Theoretical
developments will be directed towards advancing and exploring a generalized
classical pilot-wave framework that captures the key common features of the
walking-droplet system and de Broglie’s pilot-wave theory. In addition to
providing a platform for exploring a remarkably rich new dynamical system, this
classical theoretical framework might ultimately provide a mathematical bridge
between models of wave-particle interactions on the macroscopic and microscopic
scales. Both experimental and theoretical components of the research will give
particular attention to elucidating the manner in which apparently non-local
features may arise through local, pilot-wave interactions, with focus on the
possibility of achieving non-separable states and entanglement with classical
pilot-wave dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.