* 2154884
* FW-HTF-RL: Neurodiversity in Tech: Using Interactive Decision Theory and Augmented Reality to Enable Employment for Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Leanne Chukoskie, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2024
* USD 995,972.00

According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 1 in 59 children
in the United States has been identified with autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
This disorder occurs in all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups, with an
estimated cost of $137 billion per year in the US. ASD results in an
unemployment rate as high as 80% in young adults who have the cognitive skill to
contribute substantially to the economy. This research project seeks to
capitalize on the unique strengths of neurodiverse populations. These
populations, which have previously been marginalized in the workforce, have
unique talents that can be leveraged with the right support for the future of
technical work. There is growing evidence that technical talent exists in ASD
and other neurodiverse communities. This project aims to help the nation tap
this talent by providing appropriate training for neurodiverse groups and
correcting assumptions embedded in the technical industry hiring practices. If
successful, this project will develop and test a unique array of new technology-
based tools to support facile communication of neurodiverse employees. In
addition, this work will evaluate and expand a program that prepares young
highly-functioning adults on the autism spectrum and other neurodiverse young
adults for technical employment. The long-term goal of the project is to
increase the proportion of neurodiverse individuals participating in the
technical workforce nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together several disciplines, including cognitive and behavioral sciences,
computer vision, electrical engineering, economics, ethics, and education. The
investigator team is structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. First it
will develop the intelligent system with multi-modal user activity perception in
virtual reality and augmented reality settings that understands speech and
facial clues in highly-functioning individuals with ASD; it will also examine
potential educational barriers that currently inhibit successful technical
employment, as well as the potential economic impact of available internship
models and training tools. In addition, the research team will examine potential
ethical issues emerging from the development of augmented training tools and
innovative hiring practices. These augmented reality systems for remote and
automated coaching of workers-in-training will provide feedback on verbal and
non-verbal behavior in two- and three-person workplace social encounters. This
project also seeks to develop additional tools to assist with written workplace
communication. Finally, this research uniquely leverages the investigators'
connections with technical industry partners to provide feedback on the work
training program, and to innovate hiring practices so that this program and
others modeled after it can successfully move trainees into the increasing
number of technical positions available both locally and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.