* 2154797
* (4+3) Cycloadditions of Oxidopyridinium and Oxidopyrylium Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michael Harmata, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2024
* USD 221,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Michael Harmata of the University of Missouri-Columbia is
studying a family of chemical reactions that generate seven-membered rings of
carbon atoms. The transformations being investigated involve so-called
[4+3]-cycloadditions, wherein a domain spanning three atoms within a reactive
species containing either a nitrogen atom (oxidopyridinium ion) or an oxygen
atom (oxidopyrylium ion), adds in an organized fashion to a four atom-spanning
component (a diene). This research is important because it will facilitate the
generation of seven-membered ring cyclic substructures that occur commonly in
biologically active molecules, including natural products and pharmaceutical
agents. In addition, fundamental new insights concerning issues such as
molecular reactivity and bonding are likely to emerge from these studies. The
broader impacts will include a high school outreach program that includes
students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields and provides advanced chemistry
experiences through laboratory-based summer internships. Professor Harmata will
also organize an event called “Saturday Morning Science,” at which faculty from
across the University of Missouri-Columbia will present their research to the
general public in a manner that will excite and cultivate an interest in science
among members of the community of all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded
research focuses on significant further development of the [4+3]-cycloaddition
chemistry of the title species with an emphasis on the identification of viable
strategies to effect high levels of regio- and stereocontrol. In addition,
tailoring processes to convert the complex bicyclic cycloadducts into targets of
ultimate interest, including bioactive alkaloids, are likewise under
investigation. In a major aim of the research, kinetic and thermodynamic effects
in the cycloadditions of conjugated dienes bearing sulfur or silicon
substituents will be studied for the purpose of achieving regiocontrol. In other
work, functionalization of the bridgehead positions of the cycloadducts will be
explored to further extend the utility of the chemistry being pursued. Finally,
the conversion of the cycloadducts to cyclohepta[b]-pyrroles and
cyclohepta[b]indoles will be developed. Such heterocycles are considered
privileged structures as they appear in many alkaloids of biological and
pharmaceutical interest. These studies build upon a substantial body of work in
the PI's laboratory to define the potential for complex cyclic ring structure
construction through [4+3]-cycloaddition chemistry and, as such, are expected to
define more completely this interesting dimension of synthetic organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.