* 2154121
* Advancing Our Knowledge of the Transition Metal-Carbon Bond:  Integrating Spectroscopy and Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 520,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Lucy Ziurys of the University of Arizona
and Nathan DeYonker of University of Memphis, respectively, are combining
experimental and computational methods to explore the ground electronic states
of small molecules containing transition metals. Transition metals play a
prominent role in catalysis and biochemistry, but the fundamental properties of
chemical bonds between transition metals and carbon remains elusive. Even with
modern-day, high-level computer modeling methods, it is difficult to predict the
chemical bonding properties of the even simplest metal-carbon bonds. The Ziurys
and DeYonker team will work to advance the understanding of transition metal
chemistry through the development of sophisticated quantum computational
techniques to accurately predict molecular properties of metal-containing
species, while using high-resolution spectroscopic measurements to validate the
theoretical results. Their discoveries could lead to a better understanding of
catalysts used in future clean energy generation and storage applications, as
well as the development of new materials with special polymeric or magnetic
properties. A diverse group of students at the graduate and undergraduate levels
will participate in the project. They will receive valuable training in modern
experimental and computational methods and fully participate in the scientific
discovery process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution, gas-phase rotational
spectroscopy techniques will be employed in the 4 GHz-850 GHz range to
investigate chemical bonding in metal carbide and acetylide species. Metals of
interest include Ni, Co, Ti, and Fe. Both millimeter/sub-mm direct-absorption
and Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) methods will be used, coupled with well-
developed gas-phase synthetic techniques aimed at creating novel, reactive
species. The experimental work will be carried out in tandem with ab initio
calculations that involve higher-order, single reference coupled cluster and
multireference configuration interaction theories. This combined approach will
establish the composition of molecular orbitals, bond types, the ground state
and the complex manifold of low-lying excited states, spin-orbit effects, and
static electron correlations. Many of the targeted species are open-shell and
involve spin-orbit and spin-spin couplings, as well as nuclear spin
interactions, and thus are challenging both experimentally and computationally.
A major goal is to provide predictive theoretical electronic and spectroscopic
properties applicable to larger metal-carbon containing molecules relevant to
many fields of chemistry, including catalysis, synthesis, materials chemistry,
and chemical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.