* 2154526
* Effective Computational Strategies for Transition Metal and Heavy Element Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Angela Wilson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Angela K. Wilson of Michigan State
University will develop strategies for ab initio composite methods for
transition metal and heavy element chemistry. Dr. Wilson is developing computer-
based methods to better understand properties of molecules that have important
uses such as in lighting, cell phones, hybrid vehicles, and computer display
devices. Greater understanding of the properties of these molecules – such as
energy and structure – can help in the computer-aided design of the next
generation of these devices, and can provide insight into replacing, recycling,
or reusing the rare elements that are used in many of these devices. Some of
these elements and the molecules they comprise are extraordinarily difficult or
impossible to characterize, and the work by Wilson’s group aims to provide
routes to alleviate present challenges and enable the study of such important
molecules with significant efficiency and accuracy. The Wilson research group
will work to increase the participation of underrepresented populations in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) through a variety of outreach
events and research opportunities. The research will enable students to gain
experience in computational method development and applications, preparing these
early career computational chemists to thrive in their future scientific
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From molecular design to the chemical
understanding of complex physical phenomena, energetic data is key, and is often
the most critical information needed. Yet, for transition metals and heavy
elements, where the electronic structure can become quite complex and
computational requirements (computer time, memory, and disk space) can soar, the
viability of achieving chemically accurate energetics is a longstanding
challenge. And, for the heavy elements, practical, high accuracy approaches have
been much less developed. Dr. Wilson and her research group are working to
develop accurate and easily usable quantum mechanical approaches for transition
metals and heavy elements. This work endeavors to provide the field with
accessible ways to approach these complex domains of the periodic table. The
methodologies and strategies developed are being implemented in computational
chemistry packages enabling broad dissemination to the chemistry community.
Early career scientist training is a high priority in the Wilson group;
providing these computational chemists with exposure to the complex and
intriguing chemistry of the lower periodic table, and helping to build the
future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.