* 2154082
* Extremal Combinatorics: Problems and Algorithmic Aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Noga Alon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 324,867.00

Extremal Combinatorics is one of the most active areas in modern Combinatorics
and has developed spectacularly over the last decades. It deals with the problem
of determining or estimating the maximum or minimum possible value of an
invariant of a combinatorial structure that satisfies certain requirements as
well as with the investigation of inequalities between combinatorial invariants,
and questions dealing with relations among them. The Principal Investigator
intends to investigate several questions in the area, including ones that are
motivated by algorithmic applications. The specific topics to be studied include
old and new problems in Graph Theory and Combinatorics, as well as the
algorithmic aspects of questions about fair representations of necklaces and
graphs. The non-constructive solutions of some of these questions combine
algebraic and topological tools, leaving the fascinating problem of finding
algorithmic solutions open.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses several
fundamental old and new combinatorial problems. Besides their intrinsic
interest, many of these problems are motivated by related questions in other
areas. In particular, the study of splitting random necklaces has a surprising
connection to questions about random walks in Euclidean spaces and about
matchings in nearly regular uniform hypergraphs. The algorithmic aspects of the
necklace theorem are intriguing in view of the recent results about the hardness
of the problem. The related study of the algorithmic aspects of some of the
other fair partitioning problems described in the project is also challenging.
The investigation of Graph Codes, which is interesting in its own right, is also
motivated by questions about Ramsey type results in Additive Combinatorics. The
methods the Principal Investigator intends to apply combine combinatorial,
probabilistic, algebraic and geometric tools with ideas from Coding Theory. It
is expected that progress on the problems mentioned here will be interesting and
significant, will hopefully lead to the development of novel fruitful
techniques, and will yield interesting applications and insights in related
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.