* 2154606
* SaTC: EDU: Building a Cyber Security Enhanced Education Laboratory for Hands-on Experience Oriented Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Hong Jin, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

To enhance the Nation’s cybersecurity, it is imperative to enlarge the workforce
pipeline of domestic talent entering the field and broaden its diversity. Unlike
many existing cybersecurity courses that mainly offer conceptual overviews and
theoretical analysis, this project aims to integrate theories with well-
structured hands-on practice activities. This project will develop the New
Hampshire Cyber Security Enhanced Education Laboratory (NHCyberSEE Lab) to
achieve this integration of theory and hands-on experience. The NHCyberSEE Lab
will directly benefit a large population of college students and employees in
small businesses. This education project plays a critical role in the University
of New Hampshire’s Center for Cybersecurity Leadership, Education and Outreach
(CCLEO), accredited by the Department of Homeland Security. The project builds a
strong connection between cybersecurity education and outreach. By promoting the
education of students who have to date been underrepresented in their
participation in cybersecurity courses of study, this objective holds potential
to increase the diversity of the cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four goals guide this project. First is to
develop a comprehensive evaluation kit for attack analysis and defense strategy
assessment. Second is to advance the existing ad-hoc cybersecurity courses by
supplementing the curriculum with training in practical skills, such as attack
detection and mitigation. Third is to establish a cybersecurity minor, two
certificate programs, and an internship pipeline to enrich the University of New
Hampshire (UNH) teaching infrastructure and to build strong ties between UNH and
community colleges and businesses in New Hampshire. The fourth and final goal
aims to enhance existing outreach programs to attract K-12 students to STEM and
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in cybersecurity education
and research. The facilities available in the NHCyberSEE Lab reinforce students’
skill sets in hardware/software/system/network-level attack injection,
detection, and mitigation. This project supports the development of a series of
cybersecurity courses, from discovery courses for STEM and non-STEM students,
undergraduate-level core curriculum and professional electives, graduate-level
courses, to certificate completion internship courses. Outcomes of this project
include hands-on projects, experience-oriented courses, and four outreach
programs. This project will facilitate the transfer of research outcomes from
previous NSF-funded projects into education materials to benefit a large pool of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.