* 2154976
* Collaborative Research: Porous Molecules as a Platform for Solid-State Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2024
* David Powers, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 95,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Eric Bloch of the University of Delaware and David Powers of Texas A&amp;M
University will study new methods for the preparation of porous catalysts.
Porous materials are widely used around the world for a wide variety of
applications, including water filtration and/or softening, as desiccants, and in
medicine. A subset of porous materials is used on a large scale in catalytic
applications, including in the cracking of hydrocarbons. A key challenge in
using porous materials as catalysts, however, is controlling and optimizing
their reactivity where total surface area, structure type, and stability can
play a role in determining their activity. The Bloch/Powers team is building on
promising preliminary results to develop a new method for the synthesis of
active porous catalysts by creating reactive salts. In this method, a charged
nonporous reactive organometallic species will be combined with an oppositely-
charged porous non-reactive ion to afford a new class of porous solids. It is
envisioned that for porous materials so constructed catalytic activity will be
finely tunable across a range of useful transformations including carbon-
hydrogen bond functionalization and cross-coupling reactions. In addition to
this, these studies will aid in the characterization of reactive species during
catalytic transformations using the tools of in situ crystallography and
spectroscopy. Drs. Bloch and Powers will continue to work to increase diversity
in science by bringing excitement of synthetic chemistry research to a broad
audience through local and regional educational experiences, including the
development of an annual online school on X-ray powder diffraction for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project is targeting the development of new porous materials for site-isolated
and solid-state organometallic chemistry. While designer porous solids such as
zeolites and metal-organic frameworks have shown incredible promise as
heterogeneous catalysts, general platforms for the development of solid-state
organometallic chemistry within confined spaces remain elusive. This work seeks
to combine charged, permanently porous coordination cages with complementary-
charged reactive organometallic fragments for the preparation of a new class of
reactive catalysts, porous salts. During this funding period, Bloch and Powers
will elucidate the general structure-function properties of porous salts where
cage charge, geometry, and functional group presentation will be leveraged to
tune salt structure and porosity. Subsequently, Bloch and Powers will use these
salts as platforms to incorporate designer reactive ions into porous solids
where small molecule binding and activation will be studied to assess salt
activity. Reactions to be studied will include C-H bond functionalization and
cross-coupling catalysis. Finally, the Bloch/Powers team will utilize
straightforward layer-by-layer growth to prepare optically transparent,
chemically addressable films which will be used for solid-state photochemical
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.