* 2154829
* Molecules in Classical and Quantized Fields: Developing Time-dependent Density Functional and Exact Factorization Methods for Electrons, Ions, and Photons
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Neepa Maitra, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 460,884.00

Professor Neepa Maitra of Rutgers University at Newark is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the
Division of Chemistry. Maitra and her research group will address some of the
fundamental challenges in computational simulations of molecules in classical
and quantized light fields by developing new methods for the correlated dynamics
of electrons, ions, and photons from first-principles. The projects involve
three areas, within which she will develop approximations that should increase
the reliability of calculations today: electron dynamics via time-dependent
density functional theory, correlated electron-ion dynamics via the exact
factorization approach, and their extensions to quantized light-matter
interactions for applications to hybrid light-matter states (polaritons). The
developments impact applications where knowledge and understanding beyond
equilibrium electronic structure are necessary: from photovoltaic design to
quantum control of electronic and nuclear dynamics by attosecond and femtosecond
laser fields, or by tuning cavity parameters. This project will have a broad
educational impact through the training of undergraduate and graduate students
in cutting-edge research, co-organizing and participating in summer schools in
her research field as well as continuing a Zoom PhD Student Seminar series, and
establishing a high school outreach tutoring program to the underserved Newark
Public School District to mitigate our society's uneven access to educational
resources and promote the development of underrepresented minority
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-dependent density functional theory for
fully non-perturbative processes will be re-cast to require the exchange-
correlation functionals only in the linear and quadratic response regimes, where
the adiabatic approximations in use today are best suited. Improved
approximations derived from exact expressions will be developed. This moves
TDDFT towards being as confidently used for real-time non-perturbative processes
as it is used for spectra and ground-state properties. Practical exact-
factorization-based mixed quantum-classical schemes for correlated electron-ion
dynamics after photo-excitation or in the presence of laser fields will be
constructed, that include electronic decoherence and wavepacket branching from
first-principles. Extension of these methods to polaritonic systems will lead to
a fundamental understanding of how field quantization can alter chemical
reactions, and to practical mixed quantum-classical methods for the dynamics and
control of molecules confined in optical cavities. The research is providing new
computational tools and impacts our fundamental understanding of chemical
physics, atomic and molecular physics, materials science, and light-matter
interactions. Maitra continues to organize summer schools and tutorials. This
project will expand student research network connections globally through the
Zoom PhD Student Seminars her group initiated last summer. She will establish a
high school tutoring program in the Newark Public School district. Mentoring
within the group helps guide postdoctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate
students towards scientifically-oriented futures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.