* 2154934
* PIPP Phase I: Advancing Environmental Surveillance for Pandemic Prediction in Remote and Resource Poor Settings
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Scott Berry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Pathogens with pandemic potential such as Ebola, HIV, and avian influenza
frequently emerge in low-resources or remote settings with limited healthcare
infrastructure. Unfortunately, economic, logistical, behavioral, and
technological barriers limit comprehensive clinical testing in these settings.
Thus, disease may spread unchecked before a threat to public health is
identified. Environmental surveillance has emerged as a versatile and
complementary platform to existing clinical tools for monitoring and tracking
the spread and transmission of infectious diseases. The basic premise of
environmental surveillance is that the detection and quantification of microbial
and virial biomarkers extracted from air, soil, water, and wastewater samples
can be used to monitor the onset, spread and community transmission of
infectious diseases. While environmental surveillance strategies can overcome
some of the cost and logistical barriers associated with comprehensive clinical
testing, technological hurdles related to environmental sampling and data
analysis in low-resource settings and challenges in communicating results to the
right people at the right time have limited its implementation in “hotspot”
settings where emerging pathogens are likely to occur. The overarching goal of
this Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) Phase I: Development
Grants project is to address the challenges associated with the development and
deployment of “universal” environmental surveillance strategies for pathogens of
pandemic potential. To advance this goal, the project team will leverage funding
for this PIPP Phase I planning grant to lay the foundation for the establishment
of a Center with globally linked network of environmental surveillance tools
that would be deployed in emerging infectious disease hot spots to detect
pathogens of concern with timely notification of local, regional, and national
health system leaders and stakeholders. The Center activities will include
targeted research projects, workshops, and workforce development including the
training and mentoring of two post-doctoral fellows and a graduate student at
the University of Kentucky and Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish the Center for the
Discovery of Emerging Environmental Pathogens (C-DEEP) with a mission to advance
the science of environmental surveillance and metagenomics, especially in low-
resources or remote settings where pandemics are likely to emerge and where
current disease surveillance processes are inadequate. In collaboration with
longstanding partners in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, the project team
plans to extend existing expertise in environmental surveillance of emerging
pathogens by building transdisciplinary collaborations, critically defining
knowledge and technology gaps, and conducting preliminary research designed to
enrich the capabilities of the C-DEEP. The specific objectives of the project
are to: 1) Identify setting-specific obstacles for obtaining and analyzing
environmental samples; 2) Efficiently translate “big data” readouts (e.g.,
metagenomic data) into actionable public health policy changes; 3) Build and
grow a diverse alliance of stakeholders who are committed to this challenge; and
4) Conduct targeted pilot experiments to demonstrate concept feasibility and de-
risk critical analytic processes. The development of more effective
environmental surveillance tools has the potential to identify emerging
pathogens, support surveillance of established and sporadic pathogens, such as
seasonal influenza and SARS-CoV-2 and monitor antimicrobial resistance markers.
The development and deployment of environmental metagenomics technologies and
tools through international partnerships could also bolster local disease
surveillance capacity and create global networks for pandemic preparedness in
low-resource and remote settings thereby enabling surveillance in communities
where it is often most needed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by
the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I
(PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological
Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering
(ENG), and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.