* 2154321
* Collaborative Research: Non-homogeneous Harmonic Analysis, Spectral Theory, and Weighted Norm Estimates
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Serguei Treil, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 432,460.00

Singular integrals are mathematical objects that feature heavily in the study of
partial differential equations, with applications ranging from physics to
engineering to quantum computing. The mathematical theory of singular integrals
has traditionally been formulated in smooth geometric settings. However, demand
for an understanding of singular integrals in rougher settings has grown
recently with a more refined understanding of mathematical models for physical
phenomena in irregular or non-smooth environments. Emerging applications of
singular integrals in quantum computing further buttress the need for such
extensions of the classical theory. Notably, the relationship between singular
integrals and the geometry of sets and measures facilitates a new understanding
of dimension reduction for high-dimensional point sets, that is, mechanisms to
detect whether large collections of points in a high-dimensional space in fact
lie on a smooth lower-dimensional manifold. Results of this nature are important
for data science applications, and the project has the potential to bring the
toolkit of singular integral theory to bear on this important application
domain. By coupling pure harmonic analysis methods with tools from combinatorics
and probability, and through its noticeable interface with questions of
relevance in data science, the project will also provide opportunities for the
training of junior mathematicians, including graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers a variety of questions in
the study of singular integrals in non-smooth or rough settings, using both
existing and newly developed tools. The principal investigators have been at the
forefront of the past development of such a theory, and the current project will
crystallize new applications to other areas of geometry and analysis. Questions
under consideration in this project include: (a) a sharp characterization of
bounded singular integrals with matrix weight, which is important in the
regularity theory of vector stationary stochastic processes, (b) a
characterization of weighted boundedness for para-product singular operators on
graphs with cycles (multi-trees, Hamming cubes, etc.), and (c) the David-Semmes
regularity problem in codimensions larger than one. The latter topic ties the
project to questions in geometric measure theory and to the study of dimension
reduction, with concomitant implications for the geometry of large data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.