* 2154465
* Transport Coefficients, Electroelasticity, and Conductivity of Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Dmitry Matyushov, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Dmitry Matyushov of Arizona State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theoretical models of Mobility, Electroelasticity, and
Conductivity of proteins. Electrons move through proteins in biological
respiratory energy chains and in bacterial photosynthesis to store energy for
biological function. Speeding up this charge transport is critical for
biological performance and efficiency. How proteins achieve sufficiently fast
electron transport is still puzzling. Matyushov and his research group will
perform high performance computer simulations and modeling to develop
understanding of high efficiency of charge transport in proteins. A new and
surprising development in this field is the realization that proteins are also
high-efficiency conductors, despite long-held view of these materials as
insulators. This property provides biological protection from oxidative damage,
but also opens the door to new technologies of single-molecule monitoring of
biological activity through changes in protein conductivity. Matyushov with
experimental colleagues will pursue theoretical modeling of mechanisms of
protein conductivity in single-molecule junctions. He will also develop models
of separation of proteins from solutions by means of dielectrophoresis. A new
theory recently developed in his group predicts high sensitivity of proteins in
solution to electric field gradients, which offers new technologies for protein
separation in pharmaceutical and biomedical applications. The results of this
work will be available to the community in the form of predictive computational
algorithms to calculate conductivity of proteins and their sensitivity to the
electric field in microfluidic devices. Theoretical results will be disseminated
through books and review articles targeting broad audience of engineers and
biochemists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is to develop formal
theories and computational algorithms to address the general problem of
nonequilibrium (nonergodic) sampling in proteins and to establish direct links
to laboratory experiments. The following research goals will be pursued: (1)
Analytical theories of nonergodic sampling and violation of fluctuation-
dissipation relations in proteins will address the problem of vectorial charge
transport from a slow to a fast medium and the effect of charge fluctuations in
proteins on protein redox reactions. (2) Theories of protein translational and
rotational diffusivity will be developed in terms of competing forces producing
stochastic translations and rotations. Our current effort to develop models of
protein dielectrophoresis will be extended to establish practical approaches to
capture proteins at nanopores. (3) The development of a theory of single-
molecule conductivity of proteins based on the idea of nonergodic sampling of
the configuration space by intraprotein charge carriers. (4) A theory of protein
viscoelectroelasticity will be developed in terms of frequency-dependent
viscoelastic moduli and solvation of ionizable surface residues. The theory will
provide memory functions to describe complex dynamics of protein diffusivity and
to build a general framework for addressing nonequilibrium fluctuations of
forces responsible for protein mobility. Strong connection of the proposed
activities to experiment will help graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to
gain a broader view of the discipline and learn the culture of collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.