* 2154375
* Functionalization of Metal Chalcogenide Frameworks for Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 473,251.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Pingyun Feng of the University of California, Riverside is studying
the development of new electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER).
This process is a critical electrochemical reaction in green energy
applications, including water-splitting, to produce clean fuels. The OER also
plays an important role in applications such as rechargeable zinc-air batteries.
Professor Feng and her team are studying the fundamental interactions in metal
chalcogenide frameworks that support sustainable earth-abundant OER catalysts
and can tune their reactivity. This work is contributing to the development of
next-generation technologies for sustainable and renewable energy by replacing
precious metal catalysts and determining how to achieve OER at low potential and
high efficiency. Simultaneously, Professor Feng is supporting undergraduate
research opportunities and undergraduate education in chemical careers, as well
as developing a new course in solid state inorganic materials
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Professor Feng and her
research group will develop host-guest inclusion chemistry in metal chalcogenide
materials that integrate uniform porosity, high surface area, and
semiconductivity to support transition metal (oxy)hydroxide nanoparticles that
function as efficient electrocatalysts for OER. Incorporated nanoparticles will
be prepared with controllable sizes using the confinement effect of the metal
chalcogenide nanoporous host. The diverse chemical composition, structural
flexibility and morphology of the nano-structured host-guest materials provide a
platform for the fundamental systematic study of their electrocatalytic
properties for OER. The research program integrates synthetic design and
execution with characterization of the physical and chemical nature of the new
materials, and their testing for electrocatalytic performance. These activities
also support the cross-disciplinary training of both undergraduate and graduate
students with diverse backgrounds to prepare them for challenging and rewarding
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.