* 2154603
* Chemical Reactivity and Redox Behavior of Heme-HNOx Derivatives
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ann West, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 567,900.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor George Richter-Addo of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oklahoma and
Professor Michael Shaw, of the Department of Chemistry at Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville will study the role of iron in the metabolism of various
nitrogen oxides of relevance to the environment and human health, such as the
greenhouse gas nitrous oxide and the blood pressure control agent nitric oxide.
Many enzymes contain iron, and the metal plays a major role in determining how
nitrogen oxides species are chemically transformed. However, the exact role of
protein-encapsulated iron in directing the mechanisms of nitrogen oxides
metabolism remains relatively unexplored. This collaborative project will
utilize a combination of synthesis, electrochemistry, and computational
chemistry as guides for the isolation and characterization of unstable iron
nitrogen oxide intermediates along biological reaction pathways, and to allow
for a better understanding of the chemical role of iron in enabling the
interconversions of biologically relevant nitrogen oxides. The collaborative
team combines a Ph.D. environment and a primarily undergraduate environment to
provide high-level research training to a diverse group of students. Educational
and outreach activities will involve the incorporation of modern
electrochemistry and computational chemistry in undergraduate freshman chemistry
courses, active participation in an summer program for inner city high school
kids at risk for failure in academic programs, and production of online lecture
educational videos in a multiplayer environment suitable for individuals with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen oxides (NOx) are key components of
the global nitrogen cycle. Gaseous nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas that is
generated by heme proteins in fungi using a mono-Fe heme protein active site,
and in bacteria using a heme/non-heme di-Fe active site. The interconversion of
inorganic-NOx compounds to organo-NOx species of relevance to agriculture and
biology is also mediated by some heme proteins. In this project, the factors
that lead to heme-mediated interconversions of nitric oxide (NO), nitrous oxide,
nitroxyl (HNO), and (alkyl)hydroxylamines (RNHOH) will be studied. The research
team will utilize a combination of synthesis, spectro-electrochemistry, and
computational chemistry to determine experimental conditions that will allow for
the isolation and characterization of unstable intermediates, to help elucidate
the mechanisms of (i) the critical N–N bond forming step involved in NO coupling
to form the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide, and (ii) the N–C bond forming steps in
inorganic-NOx to organo-NOx conversions. Particular emphasis will be placed on
the role of non-metal and metal-containing Lewis acids in activating bound-NO
groups towards such N–N and N–C bond-forming reactions. Extensions to other
biologically relevant NOx reactions will also be made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.