* 2154903
* Noncommutative Analysis with Applications to Quantum Information Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Li Gao, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2025
* USD 229,775.00

Quantum information theory is a rapidly growing area studying how information is
stored, processed and communicated under the laws of quantum mechanics. It aims
to utilize quantum phenomena such as entanglement and coherence to gain
substantial advantages in cryptography, communication, and computational power.
To this end, developing mathematical tools to study the capability and
limitations of quantum information processing is very much desired. Due to the
nature of quantum mechanics, the mathematical theory of quantum information
processing is often noncommutative. Commutative mathematical objects are numbers
and functions, where the multiplication order does not matter. Quantum physics
is largely modeled by matrices and operators whose multiplication is
noncommutative. Such inherent non-commutativity decides the essential connection
between the theory of operator algebras and quantum information theory. Based on
this connection, the Principal Investigator will use mathematical tools from
operator algebras to study entropic quantities in quantum information and
quantum stochastic processes, which has theoretical relevance as well as
applications in quantum information and quantum physics. This project will
enhance the participation of graduate and undergraduate students, especially
those from underrepresented group in the mathematical sciences, in the fast-
growing area of quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of the project is to use functional analytic approaches to study important
quantum phenomena such as entanglement and coherence. The theory of operator
algebras provides many powerful tools, such as noncommutative Lp spaces and
operator spaces, for the study of analysis of noncommutative objects. One goal
of the project is to investigate the functional inequalities of quantum Markov
semigroups, which are powerful tools in deriving convergence property of open
quantum systems. Another topic is to study the quantum asymptotic equipartition
properties on general von Neumann algebras, which can be used to develop
resource theories and other information tasks in general infinite dimensional
quantum systems. The proposed research is expected to inspire new interactions
between noncommutative analysis/probability, noncommutative geometry, and
noncommutative optimal transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.