* 2154267
* Investigating changes in cerebral blood flow response to local neural stimulation in Alzheimer disease retina as a potential mechanism for early diagnosis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ramin Pashaie, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2025
* USD 658,002.00

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a brain disorder and is the sixth leading cause of
death in the United States. AD cannot be slowed or cured should the disease
proceed to cognitive decline. Early detection would favor timely intervention to
avoid brain cell loss and improve life quality of patients. The main goal of
this project is to establish a viable and cost-effective strategy for early
detection of AD through a set of relatively simple eye imaging procedures. New
optical technologies will be developed to measure changes in eye and brain blood
flow associated with AD. Machine learning tools will be deployed to predict the
trajectory of the disease. In addition, this project will provide a training
opportunity for engineering students to learn about AD and use their engineering
skills to contribute to the collective effort of combating this devastating
condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural degeneration and loss of connectivity in
AD leads to morphological and metabolic changes in the brain that can be
visualized in magnetic resonance or positron emission tomography images.
However, these brain imaging methods, as diagnostic tools, are neither cost
effective nor readily available to large populations. Since the eye is
accessible for noninvasive imaging, several procedures have been proposed for
detection of AD via ophthalmological examinations and retinal imaging.
Unfortunately, none of these tests have proven to be effective indicators of AD
at early stages of the disease. This project seeks to explore a promising
alternative by studying changes in retinal hemodynamics for early AD detection.
There is experimental evidence suggesting that AD-associated changes in specific
features of retinal hemodynamics appear in the pre-symptomatic phase of AD
making these features superior indicators for early diagnosis. In this project,
advanced technologies including multi-photon microscopy, optical coherence
tomography, and optogenetic neural stimulation will be developed and employed
with biochemical and immunohistochemistry lab techniques, to study the
correlation between the state and progression of AD in the brain and retina.
Specifically, the relationship between changes in the resting-state cerebral and
retinal blood flow and disruption of functional hyperemia under AD will be
explored. In this project, the research team will test the analytical validity
and potential clinical viability of these features for noninvasive early
detection of AD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.