* 2154363
* Elucidating Structures and Order-Determined Energy Transport Dynamics of Solid-Supported Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ding-Shyue Yang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program and partial support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Ding-Shyue Yang of the University of
Houston is using advanced electron-imaging methods to watch the changes in
structure that occur when a molecular film is struck by light. Collecting images
of molecules, or capturing their motion in a movie, is a significant challenge
given molecular dimensions and the short time domain for molecular motion. Dr.
Yang and his group will use time-resolved electron diffraction in an effort to
record the dynamics of fast structural changes in liquids deposited on solid
substrates with molecular-level resolution. Their discoveries could provide a
deeper understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of energy flow and enable the
rational design of solid–liquid interfaces used in clean energy generation and
storage technologies. The project will also provide research opportunities for
graduate students, undergraduate students, and postdoctoral scholars in the Yang
research group. In addition, the Yang group will host Chemistry Olympiad
competitions for high school students in the Greater Houston
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast electron diffraction (UED), with
simultaneous spatiotemporal resolution and high surface sensitivity, will be
employed as a time-resolved, direct structure-probing technique to visualize
laser-induced motions at the sub-Angstrom scale. For solid-molecule interfacial
systems, small differences in thin-film structure can dramatically change the
time scale and the underlying mechanism of energy transport. To elucidate
structure-behavior relations, the research team will examine the influence of
different assembly orders on the structure and energy transport dynamics of
nanoscale molecular thin films supported on solid substrates. Molecules with
varied strengths of intermolecular forces and self-assembled monolayers with
different packing orders have been chosen for systematic studies in this area.
The project has direct relevance to energy and thermal management at the
nanoscale, and a clear understanding of structure-determined behavioral
differences found in molecular thin films could have far-reaching implications
for materials systems of related structural types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.