* 2154593
* Applications of Chalcogen-based Oxidation State Alternating Organocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Patrick Walsh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 555,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Patrick J. Walsh of the University of Pennsylvania is studying a new
principle for catalysis based on the use of sulfur- and selenium-containing
compounds that change their oxidation state reversibly during a reaction cycle
that results in the formation of value-added products from inexpensive and
widely available starting materials. Significantly, the products of the
processes under investigation are typically useful in their own right, sometime
displaying biological activity, and they may also serve as building blocks from
which other more elaborate molecules can be prepared. As such, the research will
facilitate the manufacture of materials of importance to society including fine
chemicals. Development of the catalysts and processes of interest will be aided
by extensive mechanistic studies and the use of modern high throughput
experimental (HTE) methods. The broader impacts of the funded project extend to
the education and training of the graduate students conducting the research and
societal benefits accrued as Professor Walsh and his coworkers engage in
outreach activities at high schools and other venues. Of note, this award will
enable Professor Walsh to continue to participate in an international outreach
program with Mexican scientists that fosters cross-border collaborations and
that promotes science and technical education broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funded research leverages the reversible redox chemistry of chalcogen-based
organocatalysts in the +2 and +4 oxidation states, to enable new reaction
manifolds that may offer solutions to contemporary problems in synthetic organic
chemistry. Two objectives, one focused on the synthesis of aziridines and the
other on cyclopropanes, will be pursued and in each case, enantioselective
variants will be explored once the basic premise of the reaction chemistry has
been established. Objective 1 is to develop a base mediated sulfenate anion-
catalyzed aziridination reaction between imines and benzylic chlorides that
proceeds via in situ sulfoxide formation (alkylation of sulfenate anion on
S-atom) followed by a Darzens-like process that regenerates the sulfenate
catalyst. This method gives high diastereoselectivity for the formation of
trans-aziridines and potential applications of it for the synthesis of
trans-2,3-diaryl, 2-aryl-3-alkyl and even 2,3-dialkyl aziridines will be
examined. In Objective 2, a related sulfenate/selenoate anion catalysis
principle will be applied to the cyclopropanation of styrene derivatives.
Significantly, the approaches being explored achieve atom transfer chemistry
without the use of the hazardous 'enoid' reagents traditionally used for this
purpose (e.g., azides and diazoalkanes) and without recourse to expensive and
scarce transition metal catalysts. Throughout, the scope and limitations of the
methods developed will be explored and extensive parameter screening and
mechanistic investigations conducted. In addition to the aforementioned societal
benefits, it is anticipated that the fundamental advances made by the Walsh
research group during their pursuit of the above endeavors will stimulate
further research into the hitherto little investigated area of oxidation state
alternating organocatalysis and which promises opportunities beyond the
processes of interest herein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.