* 2154972
* Synthesis, Reactivity, and Photochemistry of Late Transition Metal Complexes Featuring Carbenium-based Ambiphilic Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Francois Gabbai, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor François Gabbaï of the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M
University will investigate a new family of ligands containing a positively
charged carbon unit positioned next to a metal-binding site. Ligands are
molecular compounds designed to hold metal atoms and influence their ability to
carry out and accelerate chemical reactions. These are essential to a broad
range of chemical industries. Designing new ligands that can purposefully
ameliorate the reactivity of metals is thus an important line of inquiry. The
new ligands prepared in this research are designed to allow for a positively
charged carbon unit to approach or combine with a metal atom, enhancing its
reactivity. Next, the ligand-metal complexes are to be developed into platforms
for the generation of solar fuels, thus impacting research on new energy storage
strategies. In addition, the project will provide mentorship to diverse high
school students and and present chemical knowledge to K-6 grade students in two-
way dual language programs integrating native English and native
Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project from the Gabbaï team at Texas A &amp;
M will investigate the synthesis and coordination chemistry of ambiphilic
ligands featuring a carbenium ion positioned next to a phosphine- or carbene-
based metal-binding site. Coordination of these ligands to late transition
metals such as nickel, palladium, platinum, and gold affords a family of
complexes in which the late transition metal is electronically impoverished via
the formation of a charge transfer or electrostatic interaction between the
metal and the carbenium unit. These atypical interactions will be characterized
using structural, spectroscopic, and computational tools. The knowledge derived
from these investigations is expected to provide a framework for the fine-tuning
of metal-ligand interactions and provide organometallic chemists with new ways
to influence the reactivity of late transition metal centers. If successful,
these studies will lead to new opportunities in halogen photoreductive
elimination chemistry and in carbophilic catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.