* 2154727
* CAS: Synthesis and Reactivity of Oxygen-atom Vacancies in Molecular Vanadium Oxide Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ellen Matson, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 498,946.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Ellen Matson of the University of Rochester will study the synthesis and
reactivity of oxygen-atom vacancies at the surface of vanadium oxide clusters.
In considering the global challenges society faces today, the issue of securing
future energy resources is particularly conspicuous. As fossil fuels are
depleted, chemists have turned their focus to investigating synthetic methods
for the conversion of abundant greenhouse gases into energy-rich chemical fuels.
A central challenge to developing sustainable and renewable fuel production
strategies is the activation of these small molecules. Industrially, solid-state
metal oxide catalysts have been shown effective for the mediation of small
molecule activation reactions (e.g., the reduction of CO2 to methanol). Reactive
metal ions, accessed through the loss of an oxygen atom from the surface of the
material, have been proposed to participate in small molecule activation
reactions. To elucidate properties of multimetallic systems that inform the
surface reactivity of these materials, the Matson Laboratory will study how the
elemental composition of vanadium oxide clusters translates to the propensity of
oxygen-atoms to be removed from the assembly. These studies will aid in the
elucidation of design criteria of superior catalysts for the production of
chemical fuels. Dr. Matson will continue to provide leadership in a campus-wide
effort to improve diversity, equity, and inclusion in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) departments, and in organizing the Western
New York Symposium in inorganic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop and study the synthesis and reactivity of oxygen-atom vacancies
at the surface of vanadium oxide clusters. Oxygen-atom vacancies at the surface
of heterogeneous, reducible metal oxides play a critical role in the conversion
of inert, energy-poor substrates to energy-rich chemical fuels. Understanding
the mechanism(s) by which these defect sites form, and the structure-function
relationships that define the generation and reactivity of O-atom vacancies,
will provide a template for the strategic design of materials with enhanced
activity. During the funding period, Matson will study new schemes for the
formation of oxygen-atom defects at the surface of polyoxovanadate-alkoxide
clusters. Subsequently, Matson will investigate the role cation- and anion-
dopants, as well as surface ligands, play in modulating the formation of oxygen-
atom vacancies at the surface of the assembly. Characterization of all complexes
will be performed via 1H NMR, infrared, and electronic absorption spectroscopy,
as well as electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and single crystal X-ray
diffraction. Additional kinetic analysis will provide insight into mechanisms
and activation parameters associated with oxygen-atom vacancy formation at the
surface of the cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.