* 2154323
* Steady-State and Transient Properties of Strongly Correlated Single Molecule Junctions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Galperin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Michael Galperin of the University of California, San Diego is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop a numerically efficient computational approach
for simulation of strongly correlated open systems far from equilibrium.
Functioning of modern quantum materials relies on performance of their
elementary building blocks: single molecules and atoms interacting with their
surroundings. Strongly correlated systems attract growing interest as a
challenging experimental and theoretical problem providing new insights into
fundamental behavior of materials and because of their potential application as
building blocks in quantum technologies. Recently, combination of STM single-
molecule junction with terahertz (THz) optical probe yields unprecedented
possibilities of atom scale control and spatiotemporal imaging in single-
molecule junctions. Application of the THz-STM to strongly correlated single-
molecule junctions is only question of time. At the moment, there is no
theoretical approach available for first principle modeling of such experiments:
currently available theoretical approaches are either effectively non-
interacting, or limited in their rigor and/or accessible parameter range, or
restricted to strictly one-dimensional systems, or numerically heavy. Galperin
will develop numerically inexpensive yet highly accurate methods suitable for
realistic simulations in open nonequilibrium strongly correlated systems in
steady-state and transient regimes and applies them in modeling spectroscopy of
strongly correlated single-molecule junctions. The cross-disciplinary character
of the project will be invaluable in developing academic curriculum for postdocs
and graduate students, as well as in attracting undergraduates into
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to development
of many-body Green’s function methods and formulation of the impurity solvers
and their implementation in areas where more sophisticated (compared to
traditional) treatment is a necessity. Practical impurity solvers for open
systems usually employ diagrammatic expansions in a small parameter (e.g., weak
intra-system interaction or weak system-bath coupling). Corresponding methods of
choice are the standard and pseudoparticle nonequilibrium Green’s function
(NEGF) techniques, respectively. In many experimentally relevant situations (in
particular, in strongly correlated materials) there is no small parameter to use
in formulation of a diagrammatic expansion. At the same time, numerically exact
methods, which do not require existence of a small parameter, are too heavy to
be used in realistic simulations. Michael Galperin will develop auxiliary
quantum master equation - dual fermion (aux-DF) and dual boson (aux-DB) methods
as a viable alternative. The methods capitalize on strong sides of dual
methodology and auxiliary quantum master equation technique (lack of necessity
ion small parameter and ability to solve exactly reference problem ,
respectively) in formulation of a new impurity solver. Structure of the theory
allows implementation of the developed NEGF methods for time-dependent processes
in much more complicated strongly-correlated systems. With high accuracy, exact
limiting behavior, and relative numerical affordability aux-DF and aux-DB have
potential of becoming a computational tool of choice for studies of steady-state
and transient (ultrafast) processes in strongly correlated systems far from
equilibrium. This direction of research is conceptually new and the one which
never was employed in studies of open nonequilibrium
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.