* 2154564
* Random Structures and Dynamics Arising from Questions in Social, Biological, and Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Shirshendu Chatterjee, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 249,814.00

Analysis of random structures and stochastic dynamics has been a topic of
interest across many disciplines. Study of various spatial and non-spatial
random graph models, stochastic spatial models, and stochastic processes taking
place on random graphs, and network-based algorithms are key to these efforts.
Although these problems have received significant attention in the literature,
rigorous analysis and foundational work is needed in many areas to have reliable
results and to cope with upcoming challenges and the complexity of real-world
data. This research addresses several theoretical and some empirical challenges
involving a wide class of questions arising in physics, social sciences, and
biosciences. Specific research areas that would benefit from this research
include determining functional connectivity within neural networks in brains,
pandemic management, pest control strategies, and the evolution of social
interactions. This research will provide new insights into the mechanistic
underpinning of the underlying complex structures and associated covariates on
different social and biological phenomena which are the central objective of
research in many disciplines. This analysis will help scientists to understand
experimental and observational data in biosciences and social sciences and
develop suitable control strategies. Community detection for temporal networks
would enhance the understanding of brain function across multiple spatial and
temporal scales. The proposed work also has significant potential to increase
our capacity to develop efficient and cost-effective intervention strategies to
mitigate some of the most potentially damaging and fastest-spreading invasive
epidemics of humans, livestock, and plants (including wheat, soybean, citrus,
and hop). To guarantee that the results are relevant to scientists, parts of the
project will be carried out in collaboration with scientists of different
fields. Presentations on the relevant research will be given in stakeholder
meetings and community outreach events. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be involved in the research activities at the intersection of mathematics and
other disciplines. Opportunities to learn theoretical and empirical analysis of
various probabilistic models, and interactions with scientists will enhance
their ability to work at the interface between mathematics and various related
areas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the primary goals of this project is to
understand and analyze different structural properties and limiting behavior of
various spatial and non-spatial random graph models, and several stochastic
dynamics taking place on graphs. The random graph models include open clusters
of percolation and related models, multi-layer, and temporal network models.
Percolation models originated in the physics literature as a model for a porous
medium. There are many useful tools and a well-developed theory for studying the
percolation models on two-dimensional lattices. However, for higher dimensional
lattices, several key aspects, including the near-critical regime and the
behavior of the model in subgraphs such as sectors, are poorly understood. This
project will address some of these issues. Multi-layer networks are natural
models for numerous datasets arising in various scientific fields, including
genomics, biomedical sciences, neuroscience, economics, sociology, ecology,
epidemiology, and technological networks. Depending on the context, various
parametric probabilistic models have been used for the formation of multi-layer,
multiplex, and temporal networks. For the estimation of those parameters from
data, and for model selection purposes, it is very important to understand the
behavior of some key functionals (e.g., subgraph counts or the concentration of
aggregated adjacency matrices). These functionals will be analyzed for a wide
variety of temporal network models, particularly where the snapshots have some
correlation structure. The stochastic dynamics include some important variants
of the standard models for infection spreading and opinion evolution in presence
of additional restrictions (e.g., temporary isolation). The project also
includes studying several theoretical and empirical aspects (e.g., bounds for
detectability threshold, efficient detection algorithms) of various detection
problems, which includes detection of anomalous structures, community detection
from a correlated sequence of networks, detection of the source of the epidemic.
The rigorous analyses of the models discussed above will require the development
of novel mathematical techniques and research tools. These techniques and tools
would be instrumental to obtain a deeper understanding of a broader class of
random structures and dynamics arising in multiple scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.