* 2154430
* Utility and Application of Unsaturated Acylammonium Salts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Romo, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2025
* USD 535,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Daniel Romo of Baylor University is studying the
development of reaction processes that generate carbon-carbon and carbon-
heteroatom bonds in a single operation. These methods will significantly
increase the efficiency of bioactive natural product and pharmaceutical
synthesis. In the proposed research, the development of complex cascade or
domino reactions are targeted that build up structurally complexity very
rapidly. Organocatalysis involves the use of small, chiral organic molecules to
activate substrates and initiate various bond constructions. Despite recent
advances in covalent organocatalysts, there is a paucity of general substrate
activation modes, with only limited types revealing multiple reactive sites in a
single catalytic cycle. This research, in collaboration with a computational
chemist, will continue exploration of a novel activation mode that is already
proving broadly useful for the development of novel organo-cascade reactions
that greatly impacts efficiency in organic synthesis. In addition, the methods
being developed are expected to enable biological studies of complex naturally-
occurring compounds with potential activity as anticancer and antibiotic agents.
Undergraduate students, in particular those associated with the Baylor
Undergraduate MiniPharma Program, working on these projects are gaining teamwork
and leadership experience, a taste of various aspects of pharmaceutical
research, new specialized research skills, and experience with state-of-the-art
equipment. In addition, the Baylor University Advanced Instrumentation workshop
provides an opportunity for faculty and students from local primarily
undergraduate institutions to visit Baylor University to gain hands-on
experience with these advanced synthetic methods and state-of-the-art
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, Professor Daniel Romo from
Baylor University is pursuing a novel and broad design principle based on
readily generated chiral unsaturated acylammonium ions, adding an important
foray into the growing field of scalable, asymmetric organocatalysis. The
organo-cascade processes to be studied include the development of (i) a dynamic
kinetic resolution involving a previously described Diels-Alder-lactonization
cascade and (ii) a Giese-type radical-initiated cyclization. These approaches
have the potential to provide new, practical, enantioselective synthetic routes
into both carbocycles and heterocycles commonly found in bioactive natural
products. Mechanistic studies of the reactions of the chiral unsaturated
acylammonium salts will be undertaken in collaboration with Professor Dean
Tantillo (UC Davis). It is anticipated that these collaborative studies will
provide insight into mechanistic pathways and problematic substrates and provide
a greater understanding of the mode of activation and of enantioselection
observed in these reactions. The methods being developed will be applied to the
stereocontrolled synthesis of natural products including beta-lactone natural
products with great potential for structure-activity relationship studies. In
particular, several of these are being targeted as proteomic probes in a
chemical biology collaboration with Professor Stephan Sieber of the Technical
University of Munich, Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.