* 2154840
* Probing the Origins of Intrinsic Chiroptical Response and the Roles of Extrinsic Perturbations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Patrick Vaccaro, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Patrick Vaccaro of Yale
University is exploring spectroscopic signatures of molecular chirality to
understand their fundamental origins and facilitate their practical
applications. Molecules are chiral when their chemical structure is not
identical to their mirror image, much in the same way that one's left and right
hands are not superimposable. When chiral molecules interact with light, they
can rotate its polarization, with molecules of opposite handedness rotating the
polarization in opposite directions. However, using this polarization rotation
to characterize chirality is challenging, as samples are often a mixture of
left- and right-handed molecules, and the degree of rotation can be affected by
the vibration of atoms in the molecule and interaction with surrounding solvent
molecules. Professor Vaccaro and his group will address this challenge by
combining experimental measurements with theoretical analyses to study how the
atomic motions and surrounding solvent affect chiroptical properties of
molecules. Their discoveries could have relevance to the study of chiral systems
in biology as well as advance approaches to asymmetric catalysis. The project
will also provide multidisciplinary research opportunities for individuals
destined to become our next generation of scientists and educators, as well as
engage pupils and teachers from regional K-12 schools in various aspects of
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic circular birefringence
(ECB) of species possessing diverse structural and electronic motifs will be
probed under solvated and isolated conditions, with the latter work relying on
variants of ultrasensitive cavity ring-down polarimetry (CRDP). Aside from
generating solvent-free benchmarks for validating theoretical predictions of
dispersive optical activity, the putative roles played by nuclear degrees of
freedom will be dissected systematically through temperature-dependent and
optical-pumping probes of vibrational dynamics, as well as by the unique
spectral signatures arising from isotopically engendered chirality (IEC). In
additional to unraveling the intimate coupling among achiral-electronic and
chiral-nuclear degrees of freedom that must be responsible for IEC optical
activity, vibronic paradigms will be elaborated to engineer isotopic circular-
differential response properties. The crucial link between isolated and solvated
chiroptical response will be forged by conducting studies in tunable
supercritical fluids that allow the physicochemical properties of a medium to be
varied without altering the basic nature of intermolecular forces. Guided by
parallel quantum-chemical analyses and molecular-dynamics simulations, such
efforts will describe optical activity in solitary species while simultaneously
exploring complex chiral solvation phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.