* 2154438
* Mechanism-driven Development of Mo catalysts for Z-selective Isomerization of Terminal Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Graham Dobereiner, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 383,284.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Graham Dobereiner of Temple University is studying how to rearrange specific
chemical bonds in organic molecules using catalysts. The rearranged molecules
are potentially useful for making pharmaceuticals and other fine chemicals.
Besides seeking greater control of the phenomenon of catalysis, the project team
is working to replace rare platinum-group metals typically used as catalysts
with more earth abundant alternatives. The project will strengthen interactions
between academic chemistry and industry and help train students for careers in
medicinal chemistry via collaboration between investigators at Temple University
and GlaxoSmithKline. The PI will bolster STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) participation in the Philadelphia region by involving students
in a regular, regional meeting for inorganic chemists. The PI will also support
secondary STEM education through interactive activities with students from
School District of Philadelphia (SPD) high schools.

This project at Temple University is building organomolybdenum catalysts for the
Z-selective isomerization of terminal alkenes - to date a rare synthetic
transformation. The hypothesis is that molybdenum complexes with sterically
demanding hemilabile ligands can be used to control stereochemical outcomes more
effectively than state-of-the-art catalysts. To test the hypothesis, complexes
with varying ligand steric properties will be compared in their isomerization
selectivity, scope, and activity. Catalytic mechanisms will be probed
experimentally and computationally to refine the working model of Z-selectivity.
New catalysts under development will be employed in tandem transformations,
targeting high-value organic compounds with industrial relevance. The blending
of stoichiometric studies, computational design and kinetic analysis will inform
models for isomerization selectivity to advance a rational design concept for
homogeneous catalysis. The development of these models will serve as a framework
for controlling stereochemical outcomes of alkene-focused reactions, an area of
critical importance to synthetic organic chemistry. Besides having a significant
impact on catalyst design, the methods developed will be valuable in the
production of cis-alkenes and their derivatives, with potentially important
applications in drug development to be exploited via a previously established
collaboration with GlaxoSmithKline.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.