* 2154832
* Collaborative Research: Multi-configurational Methods for Charge Transport in Nanoscale Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Erik Hoy, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 222,559.00

Professors Erik Hoy of Rowan University and Andrew Sand of Butler University are
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
(CTMC) program in the Division of Chemistry to characterize novel charge
transport processes at the quantum level. Understanding charge transport is
vital to pursuing new developments in areas considered critically important to
long-term national economic success including electronics, solar energy, and
materials development. Nanoscale organic electronic devices display unique
charge transport properties that can be used to design improved electronic
devices (ex. transistors, resistors), but it is challenging to describe charge
transport in many of these devices using existing computational methods. The
joint Rowan and Butler team will develop new computational tools for generating
the charge transport data needed to design the next generation of electronic
devices based on non-classical charge transport effects. The developed
computational tools will be incorporated into the OpenMolcas software package,
which is widely used in both educational and research efforts. Both Butler
University and Rowan University have strong commitments to undergraduate
education, and a core educational outcome of this project is the development of
computationally-engaged undergraduate students fit for either academic or
industry positions. Through student recruitment partnerships with mentorship
programs and local community colleges, this project provides a pathway into
research for students from non-traditional backgrounds and underrepresented
groups in the computational sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale organic
electronic devices that operate at the single-molecule level are a key
experimental platform for enhancing the scientific community’s understanding of
charge transport at the quantum level. Created by combining single organic
molecules with metal or carbon-based electrodes, single-molecule devices hold
the potential to be the foundation for the next generation of transistors,
resistors, and switches for nanoscale electronics. Large gaps remain in our
theoretical understanding of non-classical charge transport effects in nanoscale
electronics such as the reversal of the expected electrical conductance decay
with increasing molecular length. A key reason for this is the limited treatment
of electron-electron interactions (electron correlation) by existing transport
methods particularly strong/multireference correlation. To resolve this, the
Hoy/Sand research team will develop a fully-quantum family of
multiconfigurational charge transport methods based on multiconfiguration pair
density functional theory (MC-PDFT) combined with the non-equilibrium Green’s
function formalism (NEGF). Key objectives include the development of new MC-
PDFT-based effective Hamiltonians and self-consistent optimization schemes for
multiconfigurational Green’s function transport theories. The integration of
these developments within an open-source modular Python framework allows for the
characterization of multireference correlation effects in quantum transport
phenomena. Using these NEGF-MCPDFT methodologies, the team will investigate
including reversed conductance decay, Coulomb blockades, and Kondo Resonances to
enhance the scientific community’s understanding of quantum charge transport
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.