* 2154901
* Advancing Underwater Robots in Complex Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Chengzhi Yuan, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 483,386.00

Complex underwater environments, such as underwater caves, flooded mines,
offshore wind farms, and under-ice waters have significant societal and
scientific impacts. For example, surveying underwater cities and exploring
underwater caves provide evidence about our history, and the health of
underwater infrastructure is extremely important for reliable energy and the
blue economy. While these complex environments are challenging and risky for
human divers to perform repeated surveys, underwater robots must be considered
as viable candidates. This award supports fundamental research in robot design,
control, and perception to overcome the challenges faced in complex underwater
environments. A highly maneuverable underwater robot will be designed,
fabricated, and tested for moving in tight complex spaces as proof of concept.
The robot will be made accessible and customizable with the aim to grow and
broaden the underwater robotics research community. Additionally, an outreach
effort to non-STEM students from the School of Design will be conducted for
convergent education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project
is to increase the functionality and reliability of underwater robots in complex
environments. To this end, the project will make contributions to the
fundamental research in robotics in three aspects. First, a novel hydrobatic (a
term derived from hydro and acrobatic) robot capable of performing challenging
maneuvers, such as turn-in-place, hovering, and vertical descent, will be
designed. Second, a novel adaptive neural-network learning control scheme will
be developed to enable the robot to efficiently track a desired trajectory
precisely under dynamic uncertainty and time-varying environmental disturbances.
Meanwhile, it will accurately identify/learn the nonlinear uncertain robot
dynamics through online closed-loop control with provable guarantees in both
control and learning performances. Finally, a learning-based terrain
reconstruction algorithm will be created for wide aperture sonars. This new
algorithm would overcome the elevation ambiguity problem which causes errors
when reconstructing underwater environments from a single sonar image. The
improved terrain reconstruction result is expected to advance other fundamental
aspects in robot localization, navigation, and path
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.