* 2154291
* Quantum Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Reactive Species in Heterogeneous Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Thomas Markland, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Thomas Markland of Stanford University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop theoretical and computational methods to treat
reactive chemical processes that occur in disordered materials such as those
found at electrochemical interfaces, in nanojunctions, and biological proton
channels. Describing these processes requires the ability to accurately capture
the quantum mechanics of both the electrons and nuclei in these disordered
systems and to connect them to experimental approaches, such as ultrafast
spectroscopies, that are now providing new hints into the mechanisms underlying
these processes. Marklandâ€™s research will provide new theoretical methods and
algorithms that can be used by the chemistry, biochemistry, and materials
science communities and will be implemented in widely used software
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Thomas Markland and his research team
are developing methods to accurately simulate and elucidate the quantum
mechanics of both the electrons and nuclei in disordered molecular systems and
link them to experimental approaches, such as ultrafast spectroscopies. They are
achieving this by: (i.) introducing approaches to accurately obtain diabatic
electronic surfaces and electronic couplings for electron transfer processes
between molecules in solution and solid (metal or semiconductor) interfaces,
(ii.) developing quantum dynamics approaches to treat systems coupled to
molecular environments such as electrode surfaces, (iii.) devising schemes to
improve the accuracy of machine-learned potential energy surfaces trained to
model reactive defects, and (iv.) providing the theory to efficiently construct
the signals obtained from multidimensional spectroscopies. Together these
advances will improve our ability to capture the quantum dynamics and electronic
structure of processes involving proton defect and electron transport that are
essential to elucidate cutting edge experiments and design more efficient
materials for interfacial catalysis and mesoscopic
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.