* 2154787
* The Role of Non-covalent Interactions in the Excited State Dynamics of Heterocyclic Compounds.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mattanjah de Vries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor de Vries at the University
of California Santa Barbara will study how heterocyclic compounds respond to
exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Such compounds form the basic structure
of DNA bases as well as many other important molecules and their response to
light plays a role in many practical processes. For example, the photochemistry
following UV absorption constitutes a fundamental step in radiation-induced DNA
damage. UV photo-selection may have played a key role in prebiotic chemistry on
an early earth. These same processes also find applications in a variety of
modern materials. These topics, in combination with cutting-edge laser and
computational techniques, lend themselves to outreach activities that will be
based on this work. Both undergraduate and graduate students will receive
training in the design and construction of advanced experimental
instrumentation, complex computer simulation, and conducting fundamental
research. This work will be carried out in collaboration with scientists at
Jackson State University, an HBCU. Professor De Vries and members of his group
will serve as mentors in various programs aimed at broadening participation of
members of underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The precise
effects of UV radiation depend critically on molecular structure and the
fundamental photochemistry is affected by interactions with other molecules. The
laboratory of Professor de Vries at UCSB will study fundamental photoproperties
of heterocyclic compounds and clusters containing them experimentally by gas
phase spectroscopy and collaborate with computational chemists to compare the
results with quantum chemical modeling. The experiments will investigate how pi-
stacking and hydrogen bonding affect the excited state potential energy
landscape of heterocyclic compounds and how that changes the photochemical
outcomes. The project will study these molecular systems in the picosecond and
nanosecond time domains and model the results with high level quantum
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.