* 2154556
* Conference on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics (FACM-2022): New Perspectives in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Amitabha Bose, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2023
* USD 32,182.00

This award supports participation of graduate and undergraduate students, junior
faculty and postdoctoral fellows in the Conference on Frontiers in Applied and
Computational Mathematics (FACM-2022): New Perspectives in Mathematical Biology
conference, held May 20-21, 2022, at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT)
in Newark, New Jersey. This conference will bring together researchers applying
advanced mathematical modeling tools to diverse problems in the life sciences
ranging from cell biology to collective behavior of biological populations,
allowing them to share ideas and form new connections across disciplines to
tackle challenging problems of broad scientific and societal importance. The
conference will host approximately 100 participants, with at least 70% of
attendees comprising students, postdocs, and early-career faculty. Travel
support will be specifically targeted to support the participation of junior
researchers, particularly those from groups under-represented in mathematics and
the life sciences, helping in the advancement of their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is part of the series of annual
conferences â€œFrontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics'' (FACM) held
annually at NJIT. In the years since the first FACM meeting, held in 2004. This
year the conference will focus on several specific but sufficiently broad areas
of mathematical and computational modeling in the life sciences, spanning
multiple levels of organization: (1) emergent collective behavior in large
biological populations, (2) machine learning and data-science approaches in the
study of biofluids, (3) learning paradigms in biological and artificial neuronal
networks, and (4) stochastic modeling in biology at different scales. The
conference will also highlight the most cutting-edge modeling approaches in the
life sciences that combine data science techniques with the tools of applied and
computational mathematics. Bringing together researchers working in these
diverse fields will lead to important cross-pollination of ideas and new
collaborations that may not otherwise be possible. Further, the conference would
expose junior researchers (graduate and undergraduates students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career faculty) to these fundamental questions and the
advanced inter-disciplinary tools for addressing these challenges, which they
will use in their studies and future careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web site:
https://sites.google.com/njit.edu/facm2022/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.