* 2154371
* Aiming for Chemical Accuracy in Ground-state Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Kieron Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kieron Burke of the University of
California, Irvine will endeavor to improve ground state density functional
theory (DFT). Each year, more than 50,000 scientific papers use DFT to predict
the properties of molecules and solids, and to design new pharmaceutical drugs
and materials. About 1/3 of US supercomputer use is devoted to this task. But
such calculations are limited due to poor performance of approximations. The aim
of this work is to develop a new mathematical framework that has the promise of
breakthroughs in both accuracy and speed of DFT calculations. Improvements in
speed or accuracy of DFT calculations on the scale of this proposal would
transform both the nature and capabilities of most DFT applications. Contrbuting
to education and outreach, graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
project will be trained to acquire high level knowledge of DFT, in a diverse and
multi-national research group. A self-guided online course in Machine Learning
in the Physical Sciences, developed by the Burke group and already available to
all UC-Irvine students and faculty, will be made available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal combines semiclassical methods
(expansions in powers of h, Planck's constant), density­-corrected DFT for
separating energy errors from density-driven errors, and machine learning for
finding approximate functionals from data. The aim is to go from proof-of-
principle to approximate density functionals that can be applied to routine
calculations. If successful, the research being undertaken under this award has
the potential (a) to transform the basic starting point (generalized gradient
approximations) of all DFT calculations into a new form; (b) to unite the
functionals used in materials with those in chemistry; (c) to produce chemical
accuracy for strong bonds at equilibrium, and (d) to apply to the non-
interacting kinetic energy, and so impact orbital-free DFT. In short, success
here would likely contribute to all fields currently using DFT calculations, and
thus, the potential to achieve far-reaching broader scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.