* 2154996
* Developing Machine Learning Potential to Unravel Quantum Effect on Ionic Hydration and Transport in Nanoscale Confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Qing Shao, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 287,009.00

Nanoporous materials such as carbon nanotubes have served as the foundation for
creating advanced separation technologies that sustainably support human
society; for example, by producing clean water or recovering critical materials
such as lithium. A unique structure-related property of nanoporous materials
arises from their nanoscale pores, which exert quantum mechanical effects on the
ions and molecules within the pores resulting in properties vastly differing
from those observed in everyday bulk quantities. A complete understanding of the
nanoscale confinement-induced effects is crucial for rational design of
separation technologies using nanoporous membranes. However, fundamental
knowledge of the nanoscale confinement-induced quantum effects on the properties
of ions and molecules is limited, hampering the development of separation
technologies. This project aims to develop computational models to elucidate the
quantum effects on the structural and dynamic properties of ions and molecules
confined in carbon nanotubes. The proposed research and education activities are
closely integrated in this project through undergraduate research opportunities
that focus on promoting diversity within the STEM field and the development of
course content to train the future STEM workforce in advanced computational
analysis techniques. This project is jointly funded by the Interfacial
Engineering program of ENG/CBET and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of
nanoconfined fluids have been topics for science and engineering investigation
because of their importance in developing advanced separation and reaction
technologies. This research has demonstrated that the key to understanding
nanoconfined fluid behavior lies in the fluidâ€™s non-bulk properties. Nanoscale
confinement can incite quantum effects due to the physically constraining and
anisotropic environment. Quantum effects play an essential role in determining
the non-bulk features of nanoconfined fluids. However, a knowledge gap remains
in understanding the quantum effect on the non-bulk features of ions and
molecules due to the lack of efficient computational tools. This research group
hypothesizes that a well-trained machine learning potential can predict the
hydration of ions in bulk and within carbon nanotubes as accurately as quantum
mechanical calculations. Driven by this hypothesis, this project will develop a
machine learning-based force field and investigate the quantum effect on ionic
hydration and transport in carbon nanotubes (CNT) over a range of diameters and
chiralities. The project includes three research tasks: (1) develop a machine
learning force field to investigate the hydration structure, dynamics, and
thermodynamics of selected cations (Li+, Na+, K+, Mg2+ and H+) and anions (F-,
and Cl-) in the bulk phase; (2) develop a machine learning force field to
investigate the non-bulk properties of water molecules inside carbon nanotubes;
and (3) extend the machine learning force field and investigate ionic hydration
and transport effects in carbon nanotubes. The proposed research will be
conducted using molecular dynamics (MD), ab initio MD, enhanced sampling, and
machine learning methods. The most significant outcomes will include (a) a
deeper understanding of the quantum effect on ionic hydration and transport in
the nanoscale confinement and (b) an extensible machine learning force field for
ions and water molecules in the bulk phase and inside CNTs. The outcomes will
provide the knowledge and cyber-infrastructure for model-based design of
nanoporous separation membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.