* 2154399
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Tailoring the Distribution of Transient vs. Dynamic Active Sites in Solid-Acid Catalysts and Their Impacts on Chemical Conversions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bin Wang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2025
* USD 565,639.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Jeffrey White of Oklahoma State University and Steven Crossley, Daniel Resasco
and Bin Wang of University of Oklahoma will carry out an interdisciplinary study
of new zeolite catalysts. The need for robust but sustainable catalysts that can
convert molecules derived from a variety of sources, including traditional
hydrocarbons, waste streams, and plant-based feedstocks into energy carriers and
building blocks for consumable and durable goods requires fundamental
understanding of catalyst design variables, resulting function, and
environmental impacts. Solid-acid catalysts, including the important class of
materials known as zeolites, are attractive for the processing of new feedstocks
as well as reducing harmful byproducts in conversion of traditional
hydrocarbons, due to the variety of designable structures and topologies. These
catalysts are environmentally benign and do not require use of precious metals.
The team will be engaged in a research collaboration to identify new catalyst
materials that meet the challenges posed by unconventional and water-rich feeds,
as well as reduce environmental footprints. The collaborative team will train
students at all college levels, including undergraduate, graduate, and under-
represented groups, to be active contributors to the national STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) infrastructure. Through publication
outlets and local, state, national, and international meetings, the team will
increase awareness of how fundamental catalysis research impacts economically
important industries, both present and future, and will attract attention from
industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team will use an
interdisciplinary synthesis, characterization, simulation, and reaction analysis
approach to create and characterize new zeolite catalysts where the distribution
of isolated, paired, proximate, and synergistic active sites are controlled.
Drs. White, Resasco, Wang and Crossley will be engaged in tailored synthesis of
zeolites, post-synthetic modifications of zeolites, in-situ spectroscopic NMR
measurements, and reactor studies at varying temperature and pressure to
determine how catalyst active site placement, distribution, and temporal
behavior respond in key reactions involving both traditional and non-traditional
feedstocks. Goals include reduction of unwanted chemical byproducts, which
ultimately lead to increased CO2 emissions, and control of reversible vs.
irreversible active site degradation pathways. The team will endeavor to advance
inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines through programs on
each campus, and increase public awareness of the benefit of catalysis through
public media outlets at the university and state
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.