* 2154049
* Excellence in Research: Value Added Leadership for Strengthening the Capacity of College Students
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Henry Findlay, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 361,000.00

In this project, a model leadership training program is established to inculcate
leadership skills into college students. Leadership and leadership development
skills have garnered the interest of scholars and non- scholars alike. Yet many,
if not most, college students do not formally go through leadership training
while they are in college. It is not uncommon to hear employers, for example,
complaining about the lack of leadership skills in new hires when they enter
organizations. In this study, college students, in particular Generation Z, are
recruited into a leadership training program to acquire pre-emptive leadership
skills. The study advances the science and literature on leadership development
and enhances the leadership knowledge and skills capacity of participants.
Students’ participation in the project has an impact on their communities
through the students’ engagements in advocacy and community improvement. This
project is jointly funded by Sociology, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Excellence in Research Program (HBCU-
EIR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the study is to strengthen the capacity
of college students in leadership skills. Two sets of students are recruited
each year for at least three years, comprising a total of one hundred eighty
participants. Two sets of training models deliver the program. Data are
collected via survey questionnaires, including pre-and post-tests and semi-
structured instruments, and are analyzed statistically to provide insights into
leadership development. Key research questions concern the impact of training on
knowledge and skills in leadership development, the impact of socioeconomic
factors on leadership styles, the impact of incentives on perceptions on
leadership skills, and the impact of leadership training on
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.