* 2154061
* CAS: Dialing-In Sonochemical Synthesis of Transition Metal Precatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Titel Jurca, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2025
* USD 321,767.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Titel Jurca of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Central Florida is developing sustainable ways to synthesize metal compounds
that are used as catalysts by the chemical industry. Catalysts are species that
can accelerate chemical reactions and are critical for reducing consumption and
waste formation during many important processes. However, the catalysts
themselves are often prepared in an environmentally unfriendly fashion. This
project focuses on utilizing ultrasonic irradiation to generate catalysts in a
single-step process using a fraction of the solvent, time, and energy input
required for the conventional preparations. Students trained under this program
will gain expertise in state-of-the-art chemical techniques. In addition, they
will be trained in green and sustainable technologies, where they will develop
expertise in the assessment and design of sustainable chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop protocols for the
ultrasonic-assisted synthesis of broadly utilized Schiff-base ligands, and their
coordination complexes. The project has five key aims: (i) to delineate the
effects of temperature, acoustic intensity, concentration, and cover gas for the
one-pot sonochemical synthesis of bis(imino)pyridine ligands, -diimine, and
their respective transition metal compounds; (ii) to extend the reaction
protocols towards the sonochemical synthesis of non-symmetric bis(imino)pyridine
ligands, -diimine and their respective transition metal compounds; (iii) to
develop one-pot sonochemical routes for tethered, multi-dentate ligands and
bimetallic transition metal complexes; (iv) to optimize the sonochemical
conditions for catalytic hydroboration utilizing the precatalysts synthesized in
the previous tasks and (iv) to assess the green chemistry metrics for
sonochemical vs. conventional solution-based synthesis. In parallel to the
research goals, the PI will work to develop a training and outreach program for
the next generation of catalysis scientists, with a focus on providing
opportunities to members of underserved minority
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.