* 2154678
* Design of Lewis-Acid Appended Catalysts for Cooperative Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nathaniel Szymczak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Nathaniel Szymczak of the University of Michigan will study new
strategies to construct multifunctional catalysts that have the potential to
make/break bonds to carbon, a central goal of organic synthesis, encompassing
many industrial sectors, including petrochemical, materials development, and
pharmaceutical production. In this project, Szymczak and his team are developing
a molecular toolkit to prepare transition metal compounds that contain multiple
reactive sites. These catalysts will be studied within the context of converting
readily accessible chemical precursors into value-added products, with the
current approach being distinct from conventional methods and potentially
advantageous. This approach aims to advance the basic science needed to develop
molecular catalysts for sustainable chemical production through rational design
principles. The broader impacts of this work include societal benefits from the
discovery of low-energy chemical conversion strategies to make fuels, platform
chemicals, and complex pharmaceutical agents. In addition, undergraduate and
graduate students working on this project will receive interdisciplinary
scientific training to prepare them for careers in state-of-the-art science
research. Professor Szymczak is developing a nationwide meeting series across
multiple institutional levels to engage students in aspects of scientific
research and data interpretation. To further improve scientific literacy among
younger students, he and his graduate and undergraduate students at Michigan are
engaging with students at numerous local events and
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Nathaniel Szymczak and
his research team at the University of Michigan will study synthetic strategies
to prepare new transition metal complexes capable of multi-point binding to
metal-coordinated substrates, which will ultimately be used to control substrate
activation and functionalization reactions. This approach diverges from typical
strategies used to prepare homogeneous catalysts, by focusing on multiple Lewis
acid/base interactions as a primary design tool. This project aims to identify
synthetic principles that can be broadly used to prepare ligand scaffolds
containing appended Lewis acidic groups at variable distance and acidity. These
efforts could enable access to ligand platforms wherein a Lewis acidic unit is
maintained across a wide set of primary sphere donors, leading to compounds that
have been previously inaccessible. The design efforts are being pursued to
provide structure/function guidelines into Lewis-acid assisted binding,
activation, and functionalization of C-C and C-X chemical bonds, including
regiochemical control of organonitrile functionalization: challenging C-C bond
(de)construction reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.