* 2154047
* Rectifiability and Fine Geometry of Sets, Radon Measures, Harmonic Functions, and Temperatures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matthew Badger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 278,485.00

Geometric measure theory provides an analytical toolkit to detect hidden
structure in high-dimensional data sets and to describe non-smooth phenomena
such as the formation of corners and singularities in soap bubble clusters. The
term ‘measure’ refers to an abstract generalization of length, area, and volume,
which assigns a notion of size to each mathematical set. The pervasiveness of
measures within contemporary mathematics notwithstanding, there are presently
only a few tools available to analyze measures in regimes with low regularity.
The proposed investigation seeks to develop novel and robust quantitative
methods to study the geometry of general sets and measures in the absence of
traditional simplifying hypotheses. The project will explore applications of
these tools and methods to the analysis of harmonic functions and temperatures
(solutions to the heat equation) in domains with rough boundary, both in ideal
settings and inside non-homogenous media. The project will also provide training
to graduate research assistants at the University of Connecticut and to visiting
Ph.D. students working in geometric measure theory, harmonic analysis, and
partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
four interrelated threads of research on the fine geometry of sets, the
structure and regularity of measures, and the solutions of partial differential
equations. The first line of inquiry pursues questions about subsets of
rectifiable curves in infinite dimensional Banach spaces, with a concrete goal
of solving the Analyst's Traveling Salesman Problem in a non-Hilbert setting. A
second line of inquiry concerns the parameterization problem for Lipschitz
images of the plane and the classification of 2-rectifiable Radon measures.
Additional work will focus on the structure of measures supported on the graphs
of Hölder continuous functions. A third direction of study will involve improved
upper bounds on the Hausdorff dimension of harmonic and caloric measures on
general domains, along with the relationship between the static and time-
dependent cases. The final strand of the research program will confront
contemporary challenges and initiate new inquiries in the theory of non-
variational free boundary problems for harmonic and elliptic measures with two
or more phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.