* 2154590
* Community Facility Support: The UCLA National Ion Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Elizabeth Bell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2025
* USD 972,371.00

This award will provide funding for the continued support of the UCLA ion
microprobe facility. The award permits the laboratory to maintain a world-
leading facility for in situ microscale isotopic analyses of geologic materials
and to provide access to its capabilities to the broader community to address
important problems in Earth and planetary science. Over the course of NSF EAR
Instrumentation and Facilities support, the facility has hosted many hundreds of
scientists and students whose research, along with our own, has had a
significant impact in the Earth sciences. While operating an open facility, the
team strives to be a leader in scientific innovation and in pioneering
applications in cognate disciplines, and one that has a broad impact in science
education. The scientific expertise and instrumental infrastructure capabilities
of this laboratory remain at the leading edge of isotopic geoscience
investigations and support of this grant will permit the laboratory to continue
to operate as a national ion microprobe facility to promote progress in
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal role of this facility within
the national geoscience infrastructure has been in providing leadership in
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) accessory mineral dating. As scientific
investigations have evolved towards probing ever smaller spatial scales, new
complexities in the behavior of minerals hosting geochronometric systems have
emerged, placing special emphasis on the high lateral resolution capabilities of
the ims1290 instrument. High-resolution analyses of correlated isotopic,
elemental, and mineralogical properties are also required to investigate and
interpret proxy ‘environmental’ records, whether they are encoded in samples
originating on the early Earth, in the biosphere, or on other planetary bodies.
In this funding period, the facility will shift most applications to the state-
of-the-art ims1290 with its ultra-high spatial resolution and capacity for high
precision analyses and begin to emphasize remote operation. The now 30 year old
ims1270 instrument will be limited to niche analyses and begin to be phased out.
The research staff will further develop mineral inclusion petrology, high
resolution ion imaging of accessory minerals, and accessory mineral
geochemistry, investigate tin in zircon as a potential thermometer/oxybarometer,
analyze returned extraterrestrial sample (asteroids Ryugu and Bennu), and refine
high precision analyses of ∆36S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.