* 2154572
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of exocytic membrane trafficking required for cytokinesis and polarized cell expansion
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Sebastian Bednarek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2026
* USD 850,000.00

The plasma membrane is the outer membrane of all cells that regulates the entry
and exit of material between the inside of the cell and its environment. In
plants, the plasma membrane is surrounded by a cell wall that provides
additional mechanical strength and protection. Production of large amounts of
new plasma membrane and cell wall material is essential for plant cell division
and expansion. In addition, regulation of the activity, distribution, and
abundance of proteins located at the plasma membrane is highly critical for
numerous cellular processes essential for growth and health of plants, including
nutrient uptake, hormone signaling, pathogen perception, stress responses, and
construction of the cell wall. This project will focus on understanding how the
delivery of material required for plasma membrane formation and maintenance is
controlled in dividing and expanding cells. Broader Impact activities include
the intrinsic merit of the research as it is expected that the information
gained in these studies will lead to the development of new tools and strategies
for enhancing yield and quality of crop plants necessary for food security and
energy independence through the improved production of biofuels and other
agronomically important products. In addition to its economic and scientific
benefits, this project will also provide important research training for young
scientists at the undergraduate and graduate level. Students involved in this
project will receive advanced training in the areas of biochemistry, genetics,
and microscopy fundamental to modern cell biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants, the multisubunit SCD complex is
essential for the delivery of membrane, proteins, and cell wall material to the
plasma membrane by a process known as exocytosis. Major subunits of the SCD
complex include the DENN domain-containing protein, SCD1 (stomatal cytokinesis
defective1) and the coiled-coil protein, SCD2, which have previously been shown
to be necessary for membrane trafficking required for cytokinesis and cell
growth in Arabidopsis thaliana. Additionally, biochemical studies have
identified another subunit of the SCD complex, MyTH1, which is related to the
membrane-binding domain of metazoan class I myosins. Homologs of SCD complex
subunits are present in land plants and green algae as well as other eukaryotes
but were lost in yeast and metazoans, suggesting that the SCD complex is of
ancient evolutionary origin. The specific aims of this project are to 1) define
the biochemical activity and regulation of the SCD complex, 2) delineate the
network of protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions that govern SCD
complex assembly and membrane association required for exocytic membrane
trafficking and 3) perform comparative studies of SCD1, SCD2, and MyTH1 homologs
in the model systems Arabidopsis and Physcomitrium (Physcomitrella) patens.
These combined approaches will provide insights into critical conserved and
divergent functions of SCD complex subunits, necessary for exocytic trafficking,
extending across the evolutionary distance between angiosperms and bryophytes.
In addition, as the mechanisms of exocytosis have to date been primarily studied
in yeast and metazoan model systems lacking the SCD complex, this project will
generate fundamental knowledge of the exocytic molecular machinery of other
plants and eukaryotes, which are important for the diversity and health of
marine, freshwater, and terrestrial ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.