* 2154345
* CAREER: SusChEM: Renewable Biocatalysts for Degradation of Persistent Organic Contaminants Using Synthetic Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Na Wei, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 365,486.00

PI: Wei&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653679&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on renewable biocatalysts for the efficient degradation of
persistent organic contaminants in water. Surface-display enzyme biocatalysts
are a new class of biocatalysts that have recently been shown to have high
catalytic efficiency and high stability. With surface display technology,
functional enzymes are expressed and displayed on the outer surface of microbial
host cells by fusion with a cell wall using molecular biology techniques.
Research efforts will be integrated with an education plan that impacts
education at multiple levels, ranging from middle school to graduate school. The
success of the proposed research will enable development of more effective tools
to implement biocatalysis using synthetic biology for addressing pressing
challenges of water sustainability. In future work use of other target enzymes
in the cell surface-display system will be used to create new biocatalysts to
address challenges relevant to other components at the food-water-energy
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this project is to
develop a new class of engineered biocatalysts with surface display technology
for the effective degradation of persistent organic contaminants. Initially,
fungal enzymes will be used in the investigation of cell surface-display systems
to harness enzyme activities with a focus on degradation of endocrine disrupting
compounds. Renewability is assured by the ability to generate and automatically
localize the target enzyme on the surface of cells through engineered biological
machinery, making production and regeneration of the biocatalyst efficient and
scalable. The research plan will address fundamental aspects: i) molecular
design of surface display machinery for high catalytic efficiency, ii) a
strategy for improving robustness under conditions relevant to advanced
wastewater treatment, iii) creation of multi-enzyme surface displays for
efficient cascade reactions. Renewable biocatalysts with different functions
will be created and applied to biotransformations beyond contaminant
degradation. Research efforts will be integrated with an education plan that
aims to i) increase the motivation and participation of female and other
underrepresented students in pursuing careers in environmental engineering and
science, ii) educate the next generation of engineers regarding synthetic
biology for environmental sustainability, and iii) enhance interdisciplinary
thinking and communication skills in graduate training. These goals will be
addressed in synergy with the research by leading undergraduates in both
research and outreach, 6-12 grade outreach, new course development, and
organization of an interdisciplinary graduate symposium.