* 2154352
* The Gan-Gross-Prasad Conjecture: Archimedean Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Hang Xue, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,960.00

This award supports the principal investigator's research on Number Theory and
Representation Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of
natural numbers. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics. Within the last
half century it has become an indispensable tool, with diverse applications in
areas such as data transmission and processing, communication systems, and
internet security. Representation Theory emerges from people’s attempt to solve
algebraic equations. The subject matured in the 20th century and is still fast
developing. It studies the symmetries of objects and has applications to almost
all branches of mathematics, physics, cosmology and material science. This
project will explore some major conjectures in these two areas. Additionally,
this award will support graduate students in the PI's institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the 1960s Langlands formulated a series of profound
conjectures relating representation theory and number theory, and these
conjectures have become guiding principles for number theorists and
representation theorists since then. In the 1990s, Gross and Prasad formulated
several conjectures on representation theory of the orthogonal groups, guided by
the philosophy of Langlands. Together with Gan, they extended these conjectures
to include all classical groups. These conjectures and their refinement and
arithmetic counterparts stand at the crossroads of number theory, representation
theory, and arithmetic geometry. The goal of the project is to study these
conjectures. In more detail, we study the following two problems (1) the local
Gan--Gross--Prasad conjecture for real orthogonal groups; (2) the archimedean
counterpart of the arithmetic fundamental lemma arising from an arithmetic
version of the Gan--Gross—Prasad conjecture. For the first problem we apply the
method of theta correspondences, and a relative version of Shahidi’s local
coefficients which is our main point of innovation. This method also gives an
inductive construction of L-packets for orthogonal groups, which are themselves
important objects of study in the conjectures of Langlands. For the second
problem, we make use of an inductive structure of the relevant orbital integrals
and spherical characters. It reduces the problem to explicit calculations using
the theory of doubling zeta integrals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.