* 2154452
* Periodic Coupled Cluster Methods for Optical Activity in Chiral Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Marco Caricato, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 462,483.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Marco Caricato of the University of Kansas will
work to develop accurate quantum mechanical methods to simulate the electronic
response of solids to external fields, with a direct application to optical
activity. These methods are expected to provide highly accurate data for this
important electronic property of chiral materials, with a twofold goal: to
understand the elusive effect of intermolecular interactions on this property,
and to benchmark and improve approximate but computationally efficient methods.
Caricato will also develop interpretative tools for structure-property relations
that may help define design principles for materials with desired features.
These tools will be used to develop reduced-scaling strategies to increase
computational efficiency. The broader impact of this proposal hinges on the use
of computational chemistry to benefit society both in terms of technological
advances and educational opportunities. A deeper understanding of the chiral
response of a material may lead to design principles for the rational design of
materials with desired properties for targeted applications in growing research
fields such as chiral sensing and electronics. Caricato will also develop an
outreach initiative to exploit the enormous potential of quantum chemistry
simulations for high school education. In collaboration with local high school
teachers, Caricato will develop educational modules where the students actively
run the simulations and analyze the results. This initiative will hopefully
stimulate the enthusiasm for science of high school students in rural and
economically disadvantaged areas of the state of Kansas, and inspire them to
pursue further training in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the Caricato
team will develop linear response-periodic coupled cluster (LR-PCC) methods for
crystalline solids, and a tensor decomposition analysis useful for data
interpretation as well as computational cost reduction. Although density
functional theory (DFT) methods still represent a great compromise between cost
and accuracy for solid state calculations, they still suffer from the same
drawbacks as for molecules: the quality of the results is system-dependent and
individual functionals are not systematically improvable. Particularly
problematic is the description of intermolecular interactions, which are
fundamental for the overall optical response of a chiral system in the condensed
phase. The proposed LR-PCC methods will provide accurate data on the role of
intermolecular interactions on the optical activity of solids as well as
benchmarking data for the development of functionals and basis sets tailored for
this property. At the same time, new approaches for qualitative analysis of the
relevant tensors will be developed that may help unravel the elusive structure-
property relations in optically active materials. These approaches will be also
used to devise reduced-scaling techniques to increase the computational
efficiency of the algorithms. These efforts have the potential to lead to
general methodologies that can be applied to other electronic properties of
solids beyond optical activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.