* 2154149
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Theoretical Foundations of Block Ciphers
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Block ciphers, such as the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), are fundamental
cryptographic algorithms which act as basic building blocks in most secure
systems in use today. AES alone is used to protect the confidentiality of a
large fraction of Internet traffic as a component of secure-communication
protocols like Transport Layer Security (TLS). It is therefore imperative to
assess the security of existing and new block cipher designs as far as possible.
Following a well-established paradigm developed by cryptographers over the last
four decades, the gold standard for security validation would be a proof of
security based on the conjectured hardness of some well-studied computational
problems. However, due to extreme efficiency demands, practical block ciphers
evade this classical paradigm of provable security. Instead, confidence relies
on decades of cryptanalysis and an inability to find concrete
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this project is to narrow the
existing gap between provable security and cryptanalysis, developing in
particular security proofs against limited classes of attacks, and eventually
designing new algorithms and paradigms based on the new findings of this
project. The initial focus will be on proofs of security against classes of
statistical attacks which attempt to uncover non-random properties in a small
number of block-cipher outputs. A second thrust will then develop techniques to
prove security against algebraic attacks. Finally, this project will initiate
the study of important components of block ciphers which have not been studied
rigorously so far, introducing in particular a new theory of key schedules. The
treatment will cover both classical designs such as substitution-permutation
networks, as well as less studied ones such as Add-Rotate-XOR (ARX) ciphers. The
broader impacts of this project will include a workshop aimed at bridging the
gap between theoretical cryptography and cryptanalysis, as well as an
undergraduate research component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.