* 2154820
* Catalytic Synthesis for Saturated Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Karl Scheidt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2023
* USD 221,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Karl Scheidt of Northwestern University is developing new
catalytic transformations. The discovery and development of catalytic
transformations to access saturated heterocycles described in the research plan
is a crucial enterprise with broad potential impact on a wide range of
scientific endeavors with material, biological and pharmacological endpoints.
The proposed studies aim to facilitate access to chiral heterocyclic compounds
through new bond-forming reactions. These new catalytic reactions will enable
the efficient and sustainable construction of high value-added molecules and
materials with broad impact on pharmaceutical research, material science, and
biomedical research. By investigating these new approaches to heterocycles,
early career scientists, including those with diverse backgrounds, will be
trained and supported throughout their research experiences. To further the
goals of this award, strong efforts will be made to increase the awareness of
the role of modern science in our society with an emphasis on chemical science
and catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on the continued
development of new methods for synthesizing enantio-enriched saturated
heterocycles. By merging new photocatalytic strategies with established
catalysis platforms, the Scheidt group seeks to expand the compatibility and
applicability of transformations developed earlier in the group. The integrated
synthesis and cooperative catalysis approach taken in the group is a
distinguishing feature of these studies. The discovery of new oxidative
catalytic reactions driving innovative synthetic strategies is a crucial
enterprise that enables synthesis to have a broad impact on a wide range of
scientific endeavors. Throughout the proposed work, the Scheidt team will rely
upon high throughput experimentation and catalytic reaction development to guide
investigations. The results from this work will likely facilitate the improved
design and rapid synthesis of target compounds via catalysis. The knowledge
obtained from this research plan is expected to expand the number and classes of
heterocycles accessible using oxidative, photocatalytic Prins
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.