* 2154897
* Collaborative Research: Inferring the impacts of closely-related species on phenotypic evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Julio Rivera, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2025
* USD 887,162.00

In a classic example of natural selection on islands, the remarkable differences
among the bills of Darwin’s finches allow these species to co-exist because they
eat very different types of food. The same processes may also be important in
shaping evolution in many other organisms, but their effects can be difficult to
detect without the clear geographic boundaries of islands and the strikingly
different body forms of Darwin’s finches. This project focuses on Sceloporus
lizards, a large group of species that often co-exist, and that are abundant
throughout Mexico and the southwestern United States. The researchers will
gather detailed measurements of body shape and environmental features, and
develop new statistical approaches to identify body and habitat types distinct
from generalist, mainland species. They will then test whether species that co-
exist in the same geographic areas differ from each other in body form and
ecology, and reconstruct the ancient history of co-existing species with
geographic precision. The project emphasizes international collaboration (US and
Mexico) and community science practices. It will also embed the research in
formal courses taught at three institutions, and disseminate results through
museum exhibits and other forms of public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Closely related taxa that live in geographic proximity
(i.e., sympatric congeners) impose a potentially widespread and under-recognized
evolutionary phenomenon. This project will gather new data from CT scans and
from geometric morphometric analyses of museum specimens, conduct lizard field
surveys of 500 sites in Mexico and the southwestern United States, and develop
new phylogeographic tests of whether Sceloporus lizards tend to co-exist with
closely related taxa. In addition, the researchers will combine phylogenetic,
climate, and fossil information to reconstruct the detailed evolutionary and
geographic history of Sceloporus species assemblages and their morphologies,
testing hypotheses about the processes by which interspecies interactions lead
to species turnover and diversification. These analyses will test hypotheses
about the importance of foraging, habitat use, and parity as drivers of
interspecific interactions, ask whether sympatric congeners have imposed similar
selective pressures in repeated evolutionary episodes, and test for links
between the biodiversity of sympatric species assemblages (e.g., species
richness, phylogenetic diversity) and landscape characteristics (e.g., habitat
heterogeneity). The project will also contribute to future studies by adding new
data and R scripts for those who want to conduct similar analyses with other
taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.