* 2154697
* CAS: Chiral Epoxidation and Oxaziridination Catalysis with First-row Transition Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Jenkins, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
the collaborative team of David Jenkins and Konstantinos Vogiatzis of the
University of Tennessee will study catalytic reactions for the formation of
epoxides and oxaziridines. Epoxides and oxaziridines are strained three-membered
rings that are widely employed in synthetic chemistry. The catalysts will be
based on iron or other first-row transition metals since these are inexpensive
and earth abundant. The metals will have chiral ligands (i.e. possessing
handedness) so that only one enantiomer (mirror-image form) of the product is
formed during the reaction. Selectively forming a single enantiomer of the
epoxide or oxaziridine target is critical for many biological and medicinal
applications. The synthesis of the ligands is modular, so many different sized
chiral pockets can be prepared. To accelerate the research, the team will use
computational chemistry to better understand reaction mechanism and assist in
improving catalytic turnover and potentially help guide chiral ligand design.
This project aims to develop among the most enantioselective iron catalysts for
such alkene epoxidation/aziridination reactions across a broad class of
reagents. If successful, such iron-based catalyst will be highly valuable for
the synthetic chemistry community. The team will also conduct summer programs
for graduate student training including in-person international exchange
programs and online graduate preparatory training for students beginning their
PhD studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team of David Jenkins and
Konstantinos Vogiatzis of the University of Tennessee will study catalytic
reactions for the formation of epoxides and oxaziridines. Their fundamental
aspiration of this project is to develop effective chiral catalytic epoxidation
and oxaziridination reactions that work with a wide variety of prochiral
substrates such as olefins and imines. In particular, they will develop
catalysts based upon iron and other first-row transition metals that react with
an oxidant and aliphatic alkenes to produce chiral epoxides. At present, there
are no enantioselective iron catalysts that react with this combination of
reagents to give enantio-enriched epoxide. To achieve these goals the Jenkins
group will develop new synthetic methodology to generate chiral NHC macrocycles
that are structurally analogous to the more well-known porphyrins. These
D2-symmetric macrocycles have modular chiral pockets that can potentially be
tuned through coordination with a class of chiral diimidazole ligands. The
Vogiatzis group will lead the computational research component with regard to a
virtual pre-screening of different NHC-ligand scaffolds for enantioselective
catalysis. The team will work to elucidate the the mechanism of the catalytic
reaction through this combined theoretical and experimental
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.