* 2154948
* Organometallic Functionalization of Colloidal Nanocrystal Surfaces for Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Emily Tsui, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Emily Tsui of the University of Notre Dame will study new ways of using light to
accelerate important chemical transformations. Nanomaterials with semiconductor
properties have long been studied for light-induced chemical transformations.
However, the precise measurement and control of the surface properties of these
materials for chemical reactivity are difficult to achieve experimentally. The
project will focus on using metal centers attached to light-absorbing
nanoparticles to provide information about the properties of the nanoparticles,
and to act as reaction centers for important catalytic transformations such as
carbon-carbon bond formation reactions. The results obtained from these studies
will guide the development of new light-promoted reactions. This grant will also
support the research training of graduate and undergraduate students in this
interdisciplinary field. Professor Tsui’s research team will actively
participate in outreach activities involving local elementary school students,
with a focus on developing educational modules on nanomaterials-based chemistry.
Educational videos on practical topics in electrochemistry and catalysis will
also be produced by the graduate students and Dr. Tsui, and will made freely
available online to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these studies
Emily Tsui and her team at the University of Notre Dame will study the use of
organometallic metal carbonyl fragments coordinated to the surfaces of
semiconductor nanocrystal quantum dots for photocatalytic reactions. Quantum
dots have been targeted as photosensitizers and photocatalysts for many
reactions due to their tunable light-absorbing properties, but many questions
remain regarding the effects of surface chemistry upon these transformations.
The Tsui group will explore the use of surface-bound metal carbonyl fragments to
act as spectroscopic reporters of quantum dot surface effects including the
surface dipole moment, which can correlate to photocatalytically-relevant
properties such as band edge potentials. The development of a quantitative model
of these spectroscopic features is expected to lead to a more detailed
understanding of how surface effects contribute to quantum dot reactivity during
photoredox transformations. Additionally, Dr. Tsui will study the use of the
surface-bound organometallic fragments to act as catalytic centers during
photocatalytic transformations. Graduate students will be trained in both
organometallic chemistry and materials characterization methods, providing them
interdisciplinary experience that will be professionally valuable. These
students will also be trained in scientific communication through participation
in outreach activities and in the preparation of a series of electrochemistry
videos that will be disseminated online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.