* 2154303
* I-Corps:  Connected Rapid Innovation Software System to meet Medtech Development Needs
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Fuchiang Tsui, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of artificial intelligence (AI)-driven technology aimed at enhancing
interdisciplinary collaboration, mentorship, and talent searching in order to
accelerate medical and biotechnological research and product development. A
current search for experts commonly depends on word-of-mouth or internet search,
which is often time consuming and may not be accurate. The proposed technology
may overcome obstacles by 1) facilitating matchmaking to identify collaborators
and mentors, and build teams in the context of a voluntary, technical workforce;
2) advancing the understanding of the factors leading to expert or mentor
recommendation; and 3) identifying successes/failures in the development of
device innovations. The goal of the proposed system is to create impactful,
sustained connections within and across institutions, and enable researchers to
conduct collaborative research and product deployment that will improve health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
software system using natural language processing, machine learning, and deep
learning to enhance interdisciplinary collaboration, mentorship, and talent
identification in order to accelerate medical and biotechnological research and
product development. It leverages narrative documents in the public domain and
private corporations and performs data fusion across multiple siloed data
sources. The proposed innovation may enable users to effectively identify ranked
collaborators, mentors, and similar medical products through the AI inference
engine based on user's input such as the keywords and abstract. The proposed AI
technology leverages distributed free-text databases for search performance and
redundancy. Additionally, the this implementation of robust product regulatory
pathways may meet the needs of early-stage med-tech developers regardless of
their local development ecosystem and connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.