* 2154627
* Photogenerated Multi-Spin Systems as Qubits for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Wasielewski, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 603,682.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Wasielewski of the
Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University is developing a fundamental
understanding of how to control charge and spin transport through organic
molecules that is critical to the future of quantum information science
applications for computation, sensing, and communications. The degree of control
over molecular structure and properties afforded by chemistry makes it possible
to develop molecules and materials that take advantage of electron spin dynamics
to implement new strategies for quantum information science. Molecular
architectures provide unmatched flexibility for tailoring quantum properties
using bottom-up synthetic strategies. The project lies at the interface of
organic, physical, and materials chemistry, and is therefore well suited to the
education of scientists at all levels. This group is also well-positioned to
provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students will
also be part of the funded project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address several goals essential for exploiting spin-correlated radical pairs
(SCRPs) as spin qubit pairs (SQPs) that target quantum information science
applications. Professor Michael Wasielewskiâ€™s group will 1) photogenerate SCRPs
to produce well-defined initial SQP quantum states that can be addressed and
manipulated to serve as targets for two-qubit quantum gates; 2) entangle the
electron spins of SQPs with one or two nuclear spins to extend spin coherence
lifetimes; 3) move (teleport) spin coherences between two sites, focusing on how
SQP coherence lifetimes and increasing the teleportation distance affect
teleportation fidelity; and 4) explore how chirality-induced spin selectivity
influences SQP coherence and polarization using chiral electron donor-acceptor
molecules. In topics 1, 3, and 4, they will extend the molecular architectures
to include DNA hairpins, which will provide a scalable platform for the rapid
synthesis of a wide variety of molecular quantum information science systems.
The spin dynamics of these systems will be probed using time-resolved electron
paramagnetic resonance experiments, which will be performed using a short laser
pulse to generate the SCRP following by probing the spins using constant or
pulsed microwaves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.