* 2154099
* Far apart: outliers, extremal eigenvalues, and spectral gaps in random graphs and random matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ioana Dumitriu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 225,000.00

Technological and scientific advances in the last few decades have completely
changed the way in which society operates. Massive amounts of data is produced
and collected. This creates the need for data to be classified and categorized
in order to extract meaningful and useful information. To model enormous
networks, whether social, biological, or electrical, mathematicians and computer
scientists have introduced the concepts of graphs and hypergraphs, with their
tensors, adjacency matrices, and spectra, and have connected properties of the
latter to properties of the former in order to better understand the structure
of the current technological world. The goal of this project is to advance basic
understanding of outliers in the spectra of random networks; such outliers have
been connected to applications from Machine Learning to Bioinformatics and
Coding Theory, as their presence or absence can be used to deduce various
network properties. The results of this project can be used to develop
algorithms, theoretical algorithmic guarantees, and benchmarks for a variety of
applications in science and technology. Through its educational component (which
includes research training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students), this project will contribute to creating and ensuring the success of
the next generation of mathematicians and data scientists. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study general network models with certain symmetry
properties (e.g., homogeneous and inhomogeneous bipartite random graphs, uniform
and non-uniform hypergraphs, and the Hypergraph Stochastic Block Model). One
part of the project involves creating and analyzing a randomized generalized
eigenvalue algorithm, based on finding tight bounds on the smallest singular
value for a random matrix model. Methods to be employed include concentration
techniques and the non-backtracking operator, in addition to other techniques
from combinatorics, probability, linear algebra, and statistics, to find sharp
thresholds for regimes in which outliers may or may not exist in the variety of
graph and hypergraph models. The PI will also study thresholds for community
recovery and detection problems in the Hypergraph Stochastic Block
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.