* 2154535
* US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Ga2O3: Understanding Growth, Interfaces and Defects to enable next generation Electronics (GUIDE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Wallace, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 439,603.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project aims to continue over a decade
of partnerships with Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland is to
investigate a relatively new semiconductor known as gallium oxide to transform
power electronics for systems and applications that go far beyond current state
of the art for these power transistors that can also function in extreme
environments. This will be determined by evaluating how this semiconductor can
be introduced into mainstream chip manufacturing while achieving gallium oxide’s
expected performance. The intellectual merits of this project include evaluation
of gallium oxide combined with insultating or magnetic materials to attempt to
realize the promise if this relatively new semiconducting material for
applications in power transistors and extreme environment memory. In addition,
the proposed research will explore what is happening when these materials join
together. The interface that forms between the materials is critical to
achieving the theoretically predicted device performance since this interface is
assumed to be ideal. Therefore, non-ideal interfaces can have adverse effects
that impede eventual chip performance. Therefore, this tri-lateral research team
will fundamentally investigate these materials and interfaces to determine
performance, and should the expected performance not be met, provide an
explanation for why devices are underperforming. Then, the team can either solve
what is causing the performance degradation or provide predictive models that
can project when the device degradation becomes sufficient enough to render the
device as having failed. The implications of these findings from the project
will enable a broad range of technological advances in clean energy, wireless
communications, optoelectronics, power grids, and defense by enabling
technologies inaccessible to current, mainstream power transistors. Furthermore,
advancing the understanding how to properly bring these proposed materials
together will help enable execution of a bipartisan plan through pending
legislation to reenergize computer chip manufacturing here in the United States
to ensure a global competitive advantage and further enhance national security.
In addition, student engagement between the 3 locations is planned for
scientific and cultural exchanges along with underrepresented groups, women, and
first generation student engagement on pursuing graduate education and research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposed GUIDE
program will continue a productive NSF US-Ireland partnership that has lasted
more than a decade between UT-Dallas (UTD), the Tyndall National Institute
(TNI), and Queen’s Univ. Belfast (QUB). The partnership will provide fundamental
understanding in the deposition and characterization of dielectric and
ferroelectric materials on gallium oxide (Ga2O3) for use in power transistors
and memory applications. The goal of this proposal is the methodical exploration
and fundamental understanding of interface and material properties that
influence the behavior of Ga2O3-based electron devices. We will incorporate
modeling and simulation to steer experimentation and to provide understanding
and correlation between material and electronic properties. Incorporating high-k
oxides increases the breakdown field strength of the transistor and improves
channel region modulation in vertical transistors. In addition, having a
ferroelectric material on Ga2O3 will enable extreme environment, non-volatile
memory that can withstand high temperatures (wide bandgap) and radiation
exposure (memory switching based on ferroelectricity rather dielectric charges).
Furthermore, exploring low-temperature deposited Ga2O3 with high-k oxides will
detail critical information for three-dimensional monolithic integration that
may require backend-of-line, low temperature fabrication. Fundamental device
understanding of the bulk dielectric and associated interface properties is
critical to realizing power transistors with faster switching frequencies,
better efficiency, and high temperature and electric field operation than
current power transistors. Providing an approach to effectively evaluate
electrically active defects within the device architecture will enable
methodology development and forecast performance and reliability for those
working in this field. Furthermore, advancing the understanding how to properly
bring these proposed materials together will help enable execution of a
bipartisan plan through pending legislation to reenergize computer chip
manufacturing here in the United States to ensure a global competitive advantage
and further enhance national security. In addition, student engagement between
the 3 locations is planned for scientific and cultural exchanges along with
underrepresented groups, women, and first-generation student engagement on
pursuing graduate education and research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.