* 2154369
* Platform-Supported Pairs of Lewis Acidic Metal Cations to Control and Catalyze Dinitrogen Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Polly Arnold, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2024
* USD 254,240.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Polly Arnold of the University of California–Berkeley, is
studying the structure, bonding, and reactivity of f-block molecules with the
long-term, ambitious goal of converting atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia and
amines. Nitrogen gas (N2) is the major component of the atmosphere and
potentially an inexpensive, chemically benign starting material for the
industrial preparation of a vast variety of important chemical products.
Currently, it is the feedstock for a single commercialized reaction, the Haber-
Bosch process, which converts nitrogen to ammonia. This process is used on an
enormous scale and provides the major source of nitrogen fertilizer worldwide.
However, it functions at high temperatures and pressures, both consuming much
energy and generating roughly 1% of global annual carbon dioxide emissions.
Consequently, the discovery of more efficient processes to convert nitrogen to
useful projects is extremely important. This project seeks to develop rare earth
compounds that will mediate the conversion of nitrogen into ammonia and related
compounds at low temperatures and pressures without generating carbon dioxide.
The fundamental research proposed herein is expected to make fundamental
contributions to important, unanswered questions about the chemical bonding in
compounds composed of some of the heaviest atoms in the periodic table. It will
also train members of the future workforce in the chemistry of the technology-
critical rare earth elements, and in sustainable catalysis, both of which are
high priority science areas for the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, the Arnold team will develop bimetallic rare earth and related Lewis
acidic metal complexes supported by rigid tetraphenolate ligands with important
and challenging goal of arriving at entries into the first catalytic conversion
of dinitrogen N2 to secondary silylamines by a non-radioactive complex. The
proposed program will work with specific lanthanides and co-reductants,
according to their size, redox potentials, and Lewis acidity, to define the role
of d- and f-orbitals in the stabilization of reduced intermediates and to enable
the synthesis of new functionalized amines. Because electrons can be stored and
transported through the ligand framework, the proposed program is also designed
to tease apart metal/ligand contributions and develop new, lower-energy ways to
deliver the reducing equivalents to the N2. The project will train students is
the handling and manipulation of sensitive rare earth compounds and in the
development of these into reagents for the reduction of small
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.