* 2154698
* Collaborative Research: Electrochemical Ni-Catalyzed Reductive Biaryl Coupling: Mechanistic Studies to Enable Chemical Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shannon Stahl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
a collaborative team including Daniel Weix and Shannon Stahl of the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Mohammad Rafiee of the University of Missouri-Kansas City,
and Robert Paton of Colorado State University are studying new approaches toward
the electrochemical synthesis of chemicals useful in polymers and agriculture.
This collaborative project will use analytical and computational tools to shed
light on how these reactions occur and what factors are important for success.
The lessons learned will enable lower-cost, greener synthesis of important
molecules using electricity in place of metal reductants. The research team will
also work to improve equal representation in chemistry via several established
Bridge and outreach programs. Finally, the team will teach the broader chemistry
community about the new tools of organic electrochemistry through courses and
short courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative team from the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, the University of Missouri-Kansas City, and Colorado State
University is studying electrochemistry-driven nickel catalyzed reductive biaryl
synthesis from a variety of aryl electrophiles. The research team will use a
combination of stoichiometric organonickel studies, theory, and
electroanalytical techniques to understand how each step in the biaryl synthesis
(oxidative addition, transmetalation, reduction, and reductive elimination) is
influenced by catalyst identity, conditions, and applied potential. This
understanding will be used to drive further studies to improve catalyst turnover
number, turnover frequency, and selectivity, including the development of cross-
selective reactions, to make electrochemical reductive biaryl synthesis suitable
for commercial scale-up in flow reactors. These studies will contribute to an
improved understanding of nickel catalysis and electrosynthesis and the
resulting reactions will be lower-cost, more green alternatives to the state-of-
the-art biaryl syntheses that utilize unselective oxidation reactions, expensive
precious metal catalysts, and reactive aryl
nucleophiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.