* 2154753
* Reduced-Scaling Coupled Cluster Theory in the Frequency and Time Domains
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Thomas Crawford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 510,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Daniel Crawford of Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University will develop methods and approaches that enable
the computational characterization of molecules, especially chiral molecules. A
chiral molecule displays handedness; thus, there are left-handed and right-
handed forms of the molecule and these forms rotate plane-polarized light waves
in opposite directions. Understanding chiral molecules is especially important
to the pharmaceutical industry as one chiral form may be of great medicinal
value, while the other form may be of no value or even toxic. The accurate
prediction of the optical properties of chiral molecules is a daunting task for
computational chemistry. While computer models of simple molecular properties
are well established, interactions of chiral molecules with light present unique
challenges even for state-of-the-art computational methods. In this research
project, Professor Crawford and coworkers are working to develop robust and
accurate computational techniques that are less time-intensive than current
methods. These computational tools have to potential to help researchers better
understand the relationship between chiral molecular structures and their
interactions with light. Further, this research program will the provide for the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the fundamental
theory and development of quantum chemical methods. Software developed during
this project will be included in PSI4, a widely used computational chemistry
package that is freely available to the community. Dr. Crawford is one of the
lead developers of PSI4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Professor Daniel
Crawford and coworkers at Virginia Tech will endeavor to advance the high-
accuracy modeling of chiroptical properties by streamlining coupled cluster
theory through complementary approaches. The Crawford group will be extending
their recent collaborative work on the development of a "diagrammatic"
stochastic coupled cluster approach that exhibits a hundred-fold reduction in
the memory costs for the solution of high-accuracy coupled cluster methods
(through quadruple excitations) to take advantage of their newly developed
methods for reducing the dimensionality of the underlying correlated wave
functions. In addition, following their demonstration that the introduction of a
time-dependent external electric field yields substantially greater wave
function sparsity than that of the field-perturbed wave function, the Crawford
team will develop a locally correlated real-time coupled cluster approach that
is designed to take advantage of existing linear-scaling frameworks. Finally,
they will develop and implement the first simulations of vibrational circular
dichroism spectroscopy using advanced correlated wavefunctions. Development of
these new models will involve close collaborations with both experimentalists
and theorists, a hallmark of studies in the Crawford
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.