* 2154391
* Determining Mechanisms and Energetics of Alkane Activation and Coupling by Transition Metal Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ricardo Metz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 535,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program-A of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Ricardo Metz of the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst will study how transition metal ions and metal cluster
ions react with methane and ethane and catalyze their conversion to more
industrially useful chemicals. Natural gas is mostly methane. At room
temperature methane remains a gas, even under pressure. This limits its
usefulness as a transportation fuel. These studies will look at the fundamental
reactions involved in converting methane to larger hydrocarbons that are liquids
at room temperature and thus are better fuels for vehicles. The broader impacts
of this work include potential benefits from improved catalysts as well as
training graduate and undergraduate students in techniques such as laser
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. Most fundamentally, students engaged in this
research will assimilate skills in problem solving, experimental design, the
collection and analysis of data, and in communicating their results. Professor
Metz will also help to introduce eighth-grade girls to science research through
the Eureka! program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies being conducted
under this award will use a variety of techniques to characterize the reactants,
intermediates and products of the reactions of transition metal ions and cluster
ions with one or more methane or ethane molecules. Kinetics studies are targeted
at measuring the rates of the reactions and correlating reactivity with
properties of the frontier molecular orbitals of the ions. Vibrational
spectroscopy will be employed to identify both reaction products and stable
intermediates. Taken together, these studies are expected to contribute to
enhanced fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of C-H bond activation and
C-C coupling by transition metals, with the ultimate goal of improving methods
for C-H/C-C bond activation in relatively unreactive principal components of
natural gas streams. Complementary ion photofragment imaging studies of metal-
alkyl ions will be utilized to determine precise covalent bond strengths,
measure photodissociation dynamics and to examine spin-forbidden
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.