* 2154629
* Non-Adiabatic Dynamics in Liquid Jets Studied by Time-Resolved XUV Photoelectronic Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Neumark, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,770.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Daniel Neumark and his research
group at the University of California-Berkeley are carrying out experiments that
probe the interaction of nucleic acid constituents with ultraviolet light. All
nucleic acids have strong absorption bands in the ultraviolet at photon energies
that are sufficient to dissociate these species into reactive free radicals, a
process that would have significant negative biological consequences. However,
electronic relaxation is known to compete with dissociation, rapidly channeling
the electronically excited nucleic acids to their ground electronic states and
releasing the excess energy harmlessly as heat. The team led by Prof. Neumark
will perform novel time-resolved experiments to map out the pathways for
electronic relaxation of nucleic acids in aqueous solution from the instant of
photoexcitation to the ultimate production of ground state molecules, thus
providing new insights into the electronic relaxation of these species. The
results of these studies are not only of interest in fundamental chemical
physics but also have potential impact in radiation chemistry and biology. The
broader impacts of the project also include advanced training opportunities for
students, including mentoring efforts that seek to enhance the advancement of
female scientists and the recruitment of research students from groups that are
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy (TRPES) in liquid water microjets will be carried out in which
solute molecules are excited with ultraviolet pump pulses and ionized using
femtosecond extreme ultraviolet (XUV) pulses at 22 eV. These experiments probe
the non-adiabatic relaxation dynamics of mono- and di-nucleotides subsequent to
photoexcitation of their pi-pi* transitions around 4.7 eV. The energy of the 22
eV probe photons is sufficiently high to ionize these species not only in the
initially excited states formed by UV excitation, but also in any electronic
states that serve as intermediates in the overall relaxation mechanism as well
as in the ground state. Hence, these experiments have the potential to provide a
complete dynamical mapping of the electronic states that play a role in the
relaxation of photoexcited mono- and di-nucleotides. Specifically, the research
team will examine whether photoexcited nucleobases relax through optically dark
states and also will probe the formation of transient exciplexes in photoexcited
dinucleotides. A secondary goal of this project is to generate femtosecond
pulses around 100 eV, a photon energy sufficient to eject core electrons from
halogens and transition metals. Initial steps toward this capability will be
undertaken during the current grant period toward the longer-term goal of
enabling transformative new measurements of the excited-state dynamics of
solvated molecules using core ionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.