* 2154650
* Matrix Decomposition for Scalable Conic Optimization with Applications to Distributed Control and Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Yang Zheng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Convex optimization has profound impacts on some fundamental problems in control
theory, discrete and nonlinear optimization, and theoretical computer science.
It is also a fundamental tool to ensure efficient, resilient, and safe
operations of many engineering systems, such as power grids, transportation
systems, and robotics. Optimization in these areas often takes the form of conic
optimization, especially semidefinite programs (SDPs). While SDPs can
theoretically be solved using interior-point algorithms with polynomial-time
complexity, the large-scale SDPs encountered in real-life applications often
require large computational resources in practice. Some recent progress on
sparse matrix decomposition has shown striking performance in improving
scalability, but all these methods require a common underlying assumption on
sufficiently sparse structures. The objective of this project is to develop
matrix decomposition methods that are applicable for both sparse and dense conic
optimization arising from real-world applications. The theory and algorithms in
this project will be applied to optimization problems in distributed control and
neural network verification. The project also has an educational and outreach
plan with the goal of developing a new interdisciplinary course on conic
optimization, involving undergraduate students in research, and outreach to K-12
students and local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central idea of this
project is to decompose a large positive semidefinite matrix as a sum of
structured ones for which it is easier to impose positive semidefiniteness. The
focus is then shifted from optimizing over a large matrix variable to optimizing
over a set of computationally simpler variables, thereby promising scalability.
The goals of this proposal are as follows: 1) developing block-based graph-
theoretic matrix decomposition strategies for sparse and dense conic
optimization and investigating their solution quality; 2) designing numerical
algorithms based on these matrix decomposition strategies to achieve
scalability; and 3) pursuing applications to large-scale problems in distributed
control and machine learning. Successful completion of this project will
systematically advance matrix decomposition strategies for solving large-scale
conic optimization problems. The results of this project will benefit the
broader control and optimization communities, with applications in power grids,
transportation, and robotics. It is expected that the research progress will
promote multidisciplinary collaborations including control theory, machine
learning, optimization, and graph theory, among many
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.