* 2154997
* Selective Catalysis with Macrocyclic Nitrogen Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 481,116.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Steven T. Diver of the University at Buffalo is studying the synthesis
and use of special macrocyclic ligands to enable metal-based catalysts to
perform selective chemical reactions. The combinations of metals and such
relatively unexplored macrocyclic ligands will be investigated with the aim of
achieving selectivity based upon molecular size. This selectivity principle is a
common facet of Nature's catalysts (enzymes), but it represents a challenging
frontier for artificial small-molecule catalysts. Success in the endeavors being
pursued, which involve earth abundant and low cost metals, will allow for the
manufacture of important commodities, such as fine chemicals, pharmaceutical
agents, agrochemicals, and other advanced materials of value to the US economy,
to be conducted in a more efficient and sustainable manner. The broader impacts
of the funded project will extend to the development of a certification program
aimed at improving the training of graduate students who are headed towards
careers in teaching. In such endeavors, the PI has an excellent record of
successfully mentoring a diverse group of mentees. A workshop focused on
fostering more effective faculty mentorship is also planned with the expectation
of enhancing the performance of teaching and research activities at SUNY
Buffalo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project focuses on further development
of the concept of size-selective catalysis using complexes of Fe, Co, or Ni, and
specially designed macrocyclic ligand families for various cross coupling and
hydrofunctionalization reactions. The work builds on previous studies by the
Diver research group in which macrocyclic N-heterocyclic carbene ligands were
demonstrated for size-selective Ru-catalyzed alkene metathesis. The ability of a
catalyst to distinguish between two of the same functional groups within a
molecule will allow organic synthesis to be planned and carried out in new ways,
potentially obviating (or at least minimizing) the need for extraneous
operations involving protecting group and other wasteful synthetic
manipulations. The research program is divided across several synergistic aims;
in each case, the size selectivity principles previously established will be
extended and adapted for catalysts based on earth abundant metals by using new
macrocyclic systems that feature bidentate or tridentate nitrogen-containing
ligands. For example, macrocyclic and bimacrocyclic phenanthroline ligands will
be synthesized and used in Ni- and Co-catalyzed cross coupling and in the Fe-
catalyzed hydrosilylation of alkenes. In other work, macrocycles will be
utilized for size-selective oxidation to differentiate secondary alcohols within
polyol substrates. The transformations being studied are industrially relevant
and the findings of this research are expected to highlight efficient and
economical alternatives to noble metals for chemical
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.