* 2154819
* Understanding the Mechanism of C-X hydrogenolysis Catalyzed by Supported Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Rachel Austin, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 05/31/2025
* USD 524,083.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Austin of Barnard College, Frederick and Schwartz of University of
Maine, and Grabow of University Houston will study how to catalytically reduce
off carbon-halogen bonds. The work is of relevance to the chemistry of the
environment. In particular, a number of modern pesticides contain such carbon-
halogen (iodine, bromine, chlorine, or fluorine) bonds. These molecules have
been designed in part because they are stable, but that stability can also
becomes a liability at the end of the projected product life cycle. This
collaborative team will use a range of approaches to learn how to selectively
reductively remove the halogens from these molecules. The team will also study
catalysts that can break these bonds to understand precisely how they carry out
this important chemistry, and build computational models to design new catalysts
of greater practicality. All of the members of the team are committed to
diversifying the scientific workforce. The PIs will work to recruit women into
science, and into this research team in particular, through a newly formed 4 + 1
program at Barnard College, that provides program participants with the
opportunity to complete a master's degree in chemical engineering at Columbia
University in just one year after completing their specialized undergraduate
degree at Barnard College. The selected students will spend time in a chemical
engineering lab at the University of Maine and a computational chemical
engineering lab at the University of Houston, in addition to time working at
Barnard College and in the materials characterization labs at Columbia
University, so that they will learn all of the facets of this multidisciplinary
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test several
mechanistic hypotheses about the nature of aromatic C-X bond hydrogenolysis
catalyzed by supported metal nanoparticles. Reaction rate data for C-X bond
hydrogenolysis in aromatic compounds shows a surprising lack of sensitivity to
the identity of X, implying that C-X bond breaking is not rate-determining. The
team hypothesizes that surface chemistry plays a critical role in dehalogenation
of halogenated aromatic compounds in ways that are very different from the
chemistry for the analogous alkyl-X species. The collaborative team will study
the detailed steps of C-X bond hydrogenolysis on systems of increasing
complexity and use data from those studies to inform density functional theory
(DFT) calculations and allow for the joint experimental/computational team to
build micro-kinetic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.