* 2154109
* Fast 2D Beam Steering Device Integrated Directly on High Power VCSEL arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Weidong Zhou, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Optical beam steering at high speed is of critical importance for many emerging
applications, including autonomous driving, augmented reality, free space
communications, 3D sensing and imaging systems. Most existing solutions rely on
mechanical movements to steer the light beam direction, which is slow and bulky.
The objective of this project is to investigate a fast 2D optical beam steering
devices based on the electrical tuning of coupled bi-layer photonic crystal
cavities directly integrated on high power vertical cavity surface-emitting
laser (VCSEL) arrays. High speed phase tuning can be accomplished with the
electrical control of refractive index of the semiconductor material. Leveraging
the advances in semiconductor laser technology, integrated photonics technology,
and nanophotonics, the proposed solution can result in very compact size, low
power consumption, and high reliability. Co-design of nanophotonic cavity with
high power VCSEL arrays can provide a disruptive technology for high performance
laser detection and ranging (LiDAR) systems. Additionally, the project offers a
platform for student education and training, help preparation of diversified
workforces in photonics and optics, sensing and imaging, nanotechnology, and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase control can be achieved in single and
bi-layer coupled photonic crystal slabs. High speed modulation/tuning is
feasible with electronic control. Both transmissive and reflective phase tuning
elements can be realized with the formation of arrays for high speed spatial
light modulators (SLMs) and optical phased arrays (OPAs). The objective here is
to investigate some fundamental challenges towards a high scanning speed beam
steering OPA structure integrated with high power VCSELs capable of full phase
control at 1 GHz speed and above. With this project, various challenges
associated with the integrated OPA/VCSEL will be addressed. The integrated
modular solution can result in simplified optical design and assembly for
compact and reliable LiDAR and beam steering applications. The proposed approach
has the following innovative features: (1) High speed: The structure can operate
at GHz regime, which will be 2-3 orders of magnitude faster than other
approaches based on mechanical scanning technique or conventional spatial light
modulator (SLM) technologies. (2) Reliable: The structure is based on co-design
and co-packaging of OPAs with VCSELs with simplified optical beam routing
schemes and mechanical integration structures. (3) Scalable: The proposed
structure architecture is planar, CMOS compatible, and scalable in 2D, which
ensures its manufacturing scalability and device pixel
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.