* 2154828
* Redox-Active Carborane Clusters for Metal-Free Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dmitry Peryshkov, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2025
* USD 456,907.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis program in the Chemistry Division,
Dmitry Peryshkov from the Department of Chemistry at the University of South
Carolina at Columbia, will investigate redox-active carborane clusters for
metal-free bond activation. The industrial preparation of many pharmaceuticals,
plastics, dyes and electronic materials involves the precise breaking and
forming of chemical bonds. Performing these bond activations is challenging and
a diverse range of catalysts have been developed to perform them. Many of these
catalysts require compounds of scarce, precious metals such as palladium,
rhodium, iridium, and gold. However, their use is becoming increasingly
problematic due to concerns around cost, abundance, and sustainability. Relevant
to this challenge, this project is directed toward developing reactive bond-
breaking and forming systems that do not contain metals. The project is focused
on metal-free systems featuring carborane clusters, which are compounds of less
toxic, earth-abundant, and inexpensive elements – boron, carbon, phosphorus, and
hydrogen. The project is directed toward expanding fundamental knowledge of main
group element chemistry and reactivity patterns involved in sustainable chemical
transformations. The project involves increased participation of pre-college and
undergraduate students in research and chemistry, especially those from
demographics typically underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields, including from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, such as Claflin University, the oldest HBCU in South
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this project is the synthesis
of metal-free carborane frameworks that have the ability to donate and accept
electrons through donor sites and to cycle through two-electron redox states.
The chemical properties of these redox-active carboranyl clusters are utilized
to enable bond activation reactions. The ability of the bis(phosphino)-closo-
carborane cage to accept two electrons and become a dianionic open nido-cluster
while breaking a bond in a substrate and the two phosphines converting to
phosphonium cations will be studied. The overall reactivity may be described as
the oxidative addition of a substrate to the whole carboranyl diphosphine
molecule. This work will endeavor to establish the design principles for
enhancing reactivity based on electrochemical data, structural and
spectroscopical parameters, and computation. In order to establish the
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for bond activation reactions promoted by
these cluster compounds, studies of the transfer of electrons and protons in the
metal-free reduction of unsaturated carbonyl compounds will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.