* 2154622
* Surface Science Studies of Ni-based Bimetallic Particles Supported on CeO2(111) for Dry Reforming of Methane
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jing Zhou, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2025
* USD 416,976.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Jing Zhou of the University of Wyoming is working to develop
economical, thermally stable, and active catalysts for the dry reforming of
methane (DRM) technology. DRM simultaneously utilizes two abundantly available
gases, methane and carbon dioxide, and provides a route to convert these into
industrially important synthesis gas (syngas, CO/H2). In this project, Dr. Zhou
will study the growth of Ni-based bimetallic particles supported over a ceria
support, and elucidate the effect of the second metal (Co and Rh) on the
activity and stability of Ni in DRM. Dr. Zhou will be actively engaged in
outreach efforts to recruit, teach, and mentor female undergraduate and high
school students. Through providing hands-on research experience and workshops in
nanoscience and catalysis, she encourages them to pursue their careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing economical, thermally stable, and active
catalysts that can show good resistance to deactivation is one of the grand
challenges for the development of the dry reforming of methane (DRM) technology.
Ceria is a promising support for Ni due to its unique redox properties, high
oxygen storage capacity, and strong metal-support interactions. Addition of a
second metal could provide the ability to tune the properties and chemistry of
Ni. This project will involve several steps including: the preparation of model
Ni-Co and Ni-Rh particles with controlled structures, compositions, and
coverages on well-defined CeOx(111) (1.5&lt;x&lt;2) with controlled degrees of
Ce reduction (Ce3+/Ce4+); the detailed characterization of their sizes, chemical
states, surface sites, metal-metal and metal-ceria interactions; as well as the
examination of activation of reactant gases and catalytic performance in DRM
ranging from ultrahigh vacuum to reaction conditions. The chemical state of the
catalysts and the nature of the active sites under relevant DRM conditions will
be investigated using ambient pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy in
collaboration with Dr. Senanayake at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Professor
Zhou will actively engage in efforts to recruit and mentor female students at
all levels and encourage their pursuit of career paths in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.