* 2154120
* EAGER: Unravelling the Origin of Electrocatalytic Activity of Metal Free Conjugated Polymers: Designing Carbon-Based Electrocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Siamak Nejati, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 138,571.00

The project explores the potential of designing electrocatalysts for sustainable
energy based on oxygen-related reactions, especially the oxygen reduction
reaction (ORR) essential to hydrogen fuel cells. While platinum-based cathode
catalysts remain the most effective catalysts for hydrogen fuel cell
applications, considerable progress has been made in the design and development
of lower-cost transition metal alternatives, as well as a variety of carbon-
based catalysts (such as carbon nanotubes). This Early-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project extends the capabilities of carbon-based
ORR catalysts through the design, synthesis, and performance evaluation of
conjugated polymers (CPs). The performance of CPs is currently limited by
challenges in synthesizing electroactive CPs, as well as by knowledge gaps
related to structure-function properties required to advance the technology to
levels rivaling platinum. Thus, the project focuses on connecting synthetic
parameters with materials properties (i.e. order and structure), while
modulating the charge and spin distributions of the resulting CPs. Two specific
aims will be pursued – 1) Synthesize electroactive polymers from heterocyclic
monomers, and 2) Establish structure-to-function relationships. The experimental
structure-function relationships thus obtained will provide valuable data needed
for future theoretical/computational efforts to guide knowledge-driven
optimization of non-metal carbon-based polymeric oxygen reduction
electrocatalysts, as well as other potential applications of this class of
electrochemical materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the
central hypothesis that the electrocatalytic activity of CPs is related to the
charge storage in these materials. Prior studies by the investigator and others
have related the charge transfer in CPs to their polaronic states. In this
system, the dopants define the extension of intramolecular conjugation lengths
by delocalizing pi electrons along the chain of macromolecules, thereby
facilitating the emergence of localized electronic levels in the forbidden
bandgap of the CPs. While CPs are widely known for their performance in solar
cells, and have also shown promising properties both as electroatalysts and
precursors to electrocatalysts, their utilization has been hampered due to two
main issues: a) their low solubilities, limiting their synthesis, and b)
knowledge gaps related to the correlation of performance with the state-of-
charge. The EAGER project will utilize a dry polymerization technique developed
in the investigator’s laboratory to synthesize various CPs having a range of
structural and chemical properties. The CPs are being synthesized and doped in
one step via oxidative chemical vapor deposition (oCVD). The dopant
concentration will be adjusted by controlling vapor phase composition in the
oCVD process. The synthesized materials will be evaluated for their
electrocatalytic properties in the ORR, thereby creating a platform for linking
structure-to-properties relationships beyond the current state of the art. The
project has the potential to establish a relationship between chemical structure
and electroactivity in CPs, thus providing a basis for enhancing the performance
and durability of carbon-based electrocatalysts. The project also provides a
path for expansion of the materials selection and synthesis methods into other
carbon-based materials such as conjugated microporous polymers and
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.