* 2154788
* Exploring Flow Enhancements of Hydrophobic Particles in Confined Fluid Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Yusong Li, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 418,120.00

Hydrophobic particles, which are specially coated to make the surface slippery,
play a crucial role in many applications in environmental engineering and energy
science. For example, hydrophobic particles have been used to mitigate
groundwater/wastewater contamination and improve enhanced oil recovery due to
their long-term transport stability. Therefore, a better understanding of the
transport and fate of such particles is an essential step towards sustainable
resources for human health, well-being, and societal benefits. Despite these
critical social and technological impacts, the physics of hydrophobic particles
have not yet been fully explained theoretically nor reproduced in simulations
and experiments due to their complex dynamics. This project is to provide a deep
understanding of the key transport mechanisms enhancing the transportability of
hydrophobic particles. The project will also promote extensive outreach
activities, such as mobile labs, to specifically target rural areas and bridge
the urban-rural divide in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to elucidate the dynamics and rheology of hydrophobic particles in a
confined suspension via computational modeling and simulations along with
microfluidic experimental validation. High-fidelity simulations based on the
Stokesian dynamics approach will be applied to study the effects of various
hydrophobicity, such as coating properties, on particle dynamics in a
suspension. The central hypothesis is that the presence of hydrophobicity on the
particle surface will enhance its transportability due to an enhanced particle
migration toward the center of the geometry, especially at high concentrations
under confinement. In pursuit of this goal, the specific objectives are: 1)
establish a mathematical model for hydrophobic particles in which slip velocity
can vary depending on local concentrations and flow strengths; 2) establish a
computational framework to efficiently simulate a suspension of hydrophobic
particles under confinement; 3) elucidate the dynamics and rheology of the
sheared suspension; and 4) validate the computational results using microfluidic
experiments to improve the model and underlying assumptions. The discovery that
particle migration can be enhanced at high concentrations naturally suggests the
existence of non-trivial rheological behaviors. In this regard, one broad theme
related to examining concentrated suspensions is shear-thickening. Thus, this
project is expected to provide a new understanding of shear-thickening that
could be tuned by surface hydrophobicity. This new knowledge has far-reaching
implications in a broad spectrum of applications because shear-thickening is
widely adopted in defense and environmental systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.