* 2154483
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Automated Dynamic Analysis for Smart Device Malware Hiding Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Zhiyong Shan, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2024
* USD 189,332.00

Smart devices range from smartphone to smart watch and tablets. While smart
devices bring new functions and possibilities to users, they also open a
“Pandora’s Box” of potential problems, from eavesdropping attacks to erasing
data on a user’s storage device. There has been a significant increase in the
number of malicious apps as our daily life increasingly relies on mobile
applications. The project's novelties are to develop automated techniques to
comprehensively uncover distinguishing behaviors of malicious apps. The
project's broader significance and importance are to help billions of users of
smart devices to recognize malicious apps and thereby prevent them from becoming
victims of cyber-attacks. Moreover, the project generates an empirical
experimental platform for the research community and includes educational
activities involving high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
technical efforts involve two steps. The first is developing a multimedia-based
automated testbot, which exploits multimedia (e.g., vision, audio, vibration)
recognition algorithms to mimic the user to automatically test applications and
find self-hiding behaviors on smart devices. With analysis results from the
testbot, the second step creates natural language processing and static program
analysis algorithms to find code snippets of unknown self-hiding behaviors of
smart device malware and generates technique descriptions based on these code
snippets, which in turn benefits the research and industry
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Secure
&amp; Trustworthy Cyberspace program (SaTC) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.