* 2154428
* Collaborative Research: A Data-driven Closed-loop Framework for De Novo Generation of Molecules with Targeted Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shih-Kang Chao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 360,835.00

Professors Jian Lin and Shih-Kang Chao of University of Missouri-Columbia and
Olexandr Isayev of Carnegie Mellon University are supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the Division
of Chemistry. They will develop and apply a novel data-driven architecture for
designing novel molecules with desired physical and chemical properties. The
project combines generative modeling, reinforcement learning and active learning
algorithms to afford a general methodology to solve a long-lasting scientific
challenge of property-objected inverse molecular design. The methodology will
improve understanding of molecular representations, provide a new route to
exploring novel chemical space inaccessible by simple optimization of existing
molecules, and provide understanding on how the generative model learns chemical
principles. The designed novel molecules with multiple optimized properties,
e.g. physicochemical, electronic, optical, redox properties, will transform a
variety of applications in medicine, photovoltaics, catalysis, thermal storage,
and organic redox flow batteries. In addition, the interdisciplinary nature of
this project will offer the research experience in chemistry, materials science,
statistics, and computer science to involved undergraduate and graduate
students. The project will also promote diversity in the STEM fields and future
workforce by increasing females in STEM disciplines as well as improving STEM
education in K12 school via outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors
Lin, Chao, and Isayev will demonstrate a data-driven closed-loop framework for
de novo generation of novel molecules with desired physicochemical properties in
the extreme range. The proposed research is motivated by three main challenges
inherited in molecule generation: (i) generation of novel molecules with
targeted and quantifiable properties; (ii) generation of molecules meeting
multiple property objectives; (iii) generated molecules having targeted
properties beyond the range in the training dataset. To tackle these challenges,
this collaborative team will develop an integrated data-driven methodology that
combines a reinforced learning and conditional generative adversarial network to
design novel molecules with targeted multiple properties. The research team will
combine the pipeline with active learning to enable an iterative close-loop
molecular development process, which will accelerate scientific progress in
molecular discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.