* 2154885
* Metalloradical Catalysis for Selective Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Peter Zhang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Peter Zhang of Boston College is studying metal-based catalytic
processes for the environmentally sustainable preparation of organic compounds
of utility to science and commerce. Most metal-catalyzed processes rely on so-
called "polar reactivity" wherein chemical reactions involve changes of two
electrons at a time. Guided by the emerging concept of "metalloradical
catalysis" in which changes instead happen one electron at a time, Professor
Zhang and his team of coworkers are developing new catalytic systems that take
advantage of the unique features of radical reactions. In comparison with the
typical need for rare and expensive metals to mediate two-electron polar
reactions, the one electron metalloradical reactions of interest are carried out
with catalysts based on earth-abundant and inexpensive transition metals such as
cobalt. As such, the funded research project addresses important issues of
sustainability in fine chemical manufacture and with potential long term
benefits for biology, medicine, and materials. The broader impacts of the funded
project extend to the promotion of science among the general public by
supporting the Zhang group as they provide educational resources for K-12
teachers and stimulate interest in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
medicine) conducting outreach activities. As part of these efforts, educational
web-based material entitled "The Colors of Life" will be created and made
available to the public, and opportunities will be provided for high school
students and teachers, as well as undergraduate students, to gain first-hand
research experiences in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the establishment of metalloradical catalysis as a fundamentally new
approach for controlling the reactivity and stereoselectivity of radical
reactions. Metalloradical systems based on cobalt(II) complexes of chiral
porphyrins will be developed to harness the full potential of homolytic radical
chemistry. These new catalytic radical processes, which are both mechanistically
distinctive and operationally straightforward, will serve as valuable synthetic
tools for the construction of organic compounds, including biologically
important natural products and pharmaceutically interesting small molecules. The
concept of metalloradical catalysis, which aims at the full exploration of
homolysis as a fundamental platform for bond-breaking and -making, will have a
far-reaching impact on organic synthesis and it is likely to stimulate the
development of further new synthetic methods based on radical chemistry. The
further exploration of cobalt-based metalloradical catalysis has the potential
to guide the development of new metalloradical catalyst systems based on
different combinations of open-shell metal ions and chiral ligands that can
catalyze a broad range of stereoselective radical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.