* 2154393
* Complexity-Driven Total Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* David Sarlah, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2025
* USD 514,006.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Chemistry
Division of NSF, David Sarlah of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) is studying innovative strategies for the
construction of complex, naturally occurring molecules. The salient feature of
the work is the identification of novel disconnections that lead to rapid and
controlled preparation of desired molecular structures in as few chemical steps
as possible. In pursuit of this goal, several underexplored chemical processes
are being evaluated and developed into general methods to improve the ability to
efficiently synthesize compounds with varying levels of structural complexity.
The results of these studies will have a positive impact across many different
fields of applied molecular sciences, including agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals,
and materials science. Moreover, the project is conceptually interesting and has
many potential applications, making it well suited for the education of
scientists at all levels. This grant will also enable wide-ranging science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)-focused outreach activities. The
broader impacts of this work include the research training of undergraduate and
graduate students at the forefront of synthesis. Moreover, the Sarlah group has
been leading an outreach program, Science in Action (SIA), that provides crucial
hands-on science education in the greater Champaign, IL area. Through the SIA
program, several research groups in the department, in collaboration with local
teachers, are bringing science experiences to children and younger
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is the
development of several strategies for the rapid and controlled construction of
different types of complex natural products. By exploring transition metal-
catalyzed cyclizations and cycloisomerizations, a range of terpenoid-based
structures the Sarlah group is working to streamline access to these natural
product core structures and do so in a highly stereodivergent manner. These
intermediates will serve as late-stage templates for final elaboration to a
diverse set of natural products, ranging from triterpenoids, merosesquiterpenes,
and indolosesquiterpenes, many of which have notable biological properties. As
part of these studies, the team is working to leverage an underutilized nickel-
catalyzed annulation to access a structurally unique class of norcembranoids.
Utilizing a convergent strategy, the cycloadduct can be rapidly converted
towards structurally distinct scabrolides or ineleganolide. Finally, a series of
strategies involving challenging macrocyclizations, sp3-sp2 etherifications, and
stereoselective C-C bond constructions is planned to drive the development of
noncanonical amino acid synthesis, as exemplified with the potent antibiotic
darobactin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.