* 2154414
* Complex dynamics: group actions, Migdal-Kadanoff renormalization, and ergodic theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Roland Roeder, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 287,622.00

Dynamical systems is the area of mathematics that studies how the state of a
system changes with time. Such systems are abundant in all areas of science
including biology, chemistry, and physics. They are also readily visible in our
everyday lives, ranging from describing the ways in which a disease epidemic is
likely to progress to predicting the weather. Given the initial state of the
system, one would like to know what the future state of the system will be, as
well as the long-term behavior of the system. The equations describing such
real-world phenomena are very complicated and are usually custom tailored to the
system at hand. They are typically far too difficult for rigorous study and
scientists must often use numerical simulations to analyze them. However, the
underlying dynamical phenomena can often be understood by studying simpler
systems whose states can be described in terms of one or two variables. This
project will support the study of dynamical systems consisting of iterating
rational mappings in two complex variables, a setting where the powerful tools
of complex analysis and algebraic geometry are available. The research is
designed around three principles: (1) exploring connections between two or more
different areas of mathematics can lead to surprising new results, (2) dynamical
systems having an additional context from another field can be studied
significantly more deeply, and (3) a study of concrete examples often leads to
more general theories. Among other things, this project will support Ph.D.
students from Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis to engage in
these research topics, thus training them in dynamical systems. The broader
impacts of this grant will be further achieved through the principal
investigator's mentoring of highly talented high-school students from the
Indianapolis area, and running the IUPUI High School Math Contest which engages
approximately 60 to 100 high-school students from Indiana each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is concerned with complex
dynamics in higher dimensions. The main goal is to study the iterates of
holomorphic (or rational) self-mappings of a complex manifold of dimension two
or larger, and, more generally, to study the actions of finitely generated
groups of biholomorphic (or birational) self-mappings. The topics to be
investigated, which draw connections with other areas of mathematics, include:
(1) holomorphic group actions on complex surfaces coming from the monodromy of
the Painleve 6 differential equation, (2) Migdal-Kadanoff renormalization
mappings associated to phenomena in statistical physics on hierarchical
lattices, and (3) ergodic theory of rational maps with transcendental first
dynamical degree. Understanding the underlying systems will lead to valuable
theoretical results in holomorphic dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.