* 2154552
* Collaborative Research: Ion Mobility in Aqueous Acids, Bases, and Salts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Steven Corcelli, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2025
* USD 375,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Professors Steven
Corcelli at the University of Notre Dame and Paul Cremer at Pennsylvania State
University is investigating the mobility of ions in water with a fully
integrated experimental and theoretical modeling approach. Solutions containing
salt, including acids and bases, are essential in many chemical, biological, and
environmental processes, and the rates of ion transport are especially relevant
to emerging battery technologies employing aqueous electrolytes. However, the
detailed molecular mechanism for ion transport, including the role of
counterions and ion-pairing, is not fully understood. Thus, the research
objective of this project is to explore ionic mobility in water at the molecular
level to achieve a unified understanding of the role of counterions and ion-
pairing on the structure, dynamics, and mechanisms of ion transport in aqueous
acids, bases, and salts. In addition to the broader scientific impacts of the
work, the project also includes advanced training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as the development of a related laboratory
experiment for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary findings
that counterions substantially impact hydroxide mobility suggest that ion-
pairing effects are central to acid, base, and salt mobility. This project
involves a systematic study of Hofmeister series ions in acid, base, and salt
solutions as a function of concentration. Experimentally, diffusion constants
are measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and a combination of
Raman and infrared spectroscopy elucidate information about ion structure,
hydration, and proton delocalization. Complementary nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy measurements yield proton transfer rates and information about the
mobility of individual ions. Theoretically, the acids and bases are simulated
with ab initio molecular dynamics and the salts with molecular dynamics.
Calculations based on the simulations provide the free energy of association
between respective ion pairs and aid the interpretation of the experimental
Raman and infrared spectra. The spectroscopic and simulation studies
synergistically combine to provide a molecular-level understanding of diffusion
constant measurements. The combined studies elucidate the impact of counterions
on the Grotthuss mechanism of proton hopping and the particular roles of
solvent-shared versus contact ion-pairing in aqueous electrolyte solutions. The
broader impacts of the work include the importance of better understanding ion
mobility for many technological applications, advanced student training
opportunities, and development and implementation of a high school laboratory
experiment that explores ion-pairing at hydrophobic
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.