* 2154079
* Aryloxenium Cations
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* John Nash, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Hilkka Kenttamaa and John
Nash of Purdue University will investigate aryloxenium cations, a broad class of
highly reactive compounds, whose chemistry is poorly understood. These cations
are the key intermediates in many important chemical and biological reactions,
such as the oxidation of phenols and alkanes, the generation of industrial
thermoplastics (plastics that do not soften on heating), and the oxidative
halophenol dehalogenation by dehaloperoxidase in biology. Oxenium cations have
also been implicated in astrochemical studies and are thought to persist in
interstellar space. Despite their importance, knowledge on their reactivity is
severely limited due to difficulties in generating and studying them in
solution. Therefore, although aryloxenium ions have been investigated for more
than 40 years, surprisingly little is known about their fundamental chemical
reactivity. The information obtained in this research will not only facilitate
the rational utilization of aryloxenium cations in organic synthesis and
industrial applications but will also enable the design of aryloxenium cations
with tailored properties for specific applications. Educational activities in
this project will include enhancing the scientific growth of graduate and
undergraduate students, including students belonging to underrepresented groups,
via a diverse research experience. Hence, this research helps to diversify the
STEM workforce. Graduate students involved in this project will participate in
industrial or government internships, which not only leads to intellectual
broadening but often also to enhanced employment opportunities. These
interactions are expected to lead to partnerships with industry and government
laboratories, facilitating technology transfer to these
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed kinetic gas-phase reactivity studies
on aryloxenium cations will be performed in order to improve the understanding
of their chemical properties. Aryloxenium cations are novel species which
contain a formally positively charged, monovalent oxygen atom with an incomplete
electron shell. In spite of broad fundamental and practical interests in these
compounds, relatively little is known about their reactivity. This project will
utilize gas-phase ion-molecule reactions performed in ion trap mass
spectrometers to explore their chemical properties. Action spectroscopy will be
used to verify their structures. Aryloxenium ion reaction products with a
variety of different reagents and not just solvents (not possible previously)
will be identified. Rates of the reactions of aryloxenium cations will provide
detailed kinetic reactivity information that is currently unavailable. The study
of the influence of structural changes on the reactivity of aryloxenium cations
and the examination of the reactivities of aryloxenium ions with different
electronic ground states will facilitate the development of novel reactivity
paradigms for aryloxenium cations. The experimental studies will be complemented
by high-level quantum chemical calculations in order to deepen our understanding
on the observed reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.