* 2154232
* On Problems in and Connections between Analysis, Geometry and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Alex Iosevich, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2025
* USD 322,800.00

This project concerns the interactions among a variety of ideas in harmonic
analysis, geometric measure, and combinatorics, with applications to data
science, centered around the concept of finite point configurations. The basic
question is, given a sufficiently large set of points (here ‘large’ is situation
dependent), does it contain an equilateral triangle, a chain, or another
configuration of a given type. The interplay of ideas from different areas of
mathematics, sometimes motivated by specific questions in the study of large
data, will be emphasized throughout. As was the case in the past, the resulting
symbiosis will continue creating a live network of concepts that leads to the
productive interplay among the techniques and ideas in the corresponding fields.
The ideas generated in this line of research will be used to run summer research
programs for undergraduate students. Graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers will be involved in all aspects of this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key underlying theme is the Falconer distance
conjecture which says that if a compact subset of Euclidean space has the
Hausdorff dimension at least half the ambient dimension, then the Lebesgue
measure of the distance set is positive. This work will be continued, aiming
towards the ultimate conjecture using a combination of methods arising from
decoupling and arithmetic considerations. Another goal is to establish a
complete picture of the configuration question the principal investigator has
previously studied with collaborators, in showing that a similar copy of
configuration of sufficiently high, but not too high, a level of complexity can
be found in a set of sufficiently large Hausdorff dimension in Euclidean space
and Riemannian manifolds. The techniques that have been developed while studying
these questions have proven extremely useful in the investigation of dimension
reduction in data science. This avenue will be explored
further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.