* 2154446
* Neural Network-Based Preconditioning of Adaptive Tabulation for Reactive Flow Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Pavel Popov, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2025
* USD 294,555.00

Combustion is the prevalent source of energy in today’s world, and is projected
to remain so until the year 2050. Moreover, it is the only viable option for
many engineering applications (for example, space launch vehicles). Therefore,
the continued study of combustion physics and development of new, more
efficient, and cleaner combustion devices is a high priority in today’s
engineering world. Over the past five decades, combustion simulations have been
invaluable to this effort, and yet they still pose a multitude of challenges.
This project aims to tackle one such challenge, specifically how to quickly
evaluate chemical properties. The approach proposed here is to combine machine
learning methods, which can give a rough estimate of the property of interest,
with previously developed tabulation methods that work by bridging the gaps
between a relatively small number of evaluations. This combined approach will
allow for combustion simulations that are faster, use more complex chemical
models, and are more accurate. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students and provide them with mentoring and experience that will
be valuable for their future careers in academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to improve the computational efficiency
of chemical property evaluations, which comprise most of the computational cost
in reactive flow simulations with detailed chemistry. The proposed approach is
to use a combination of neural networks (NN) and in situ adaptive tabulation
(ISAT), combining the strengths of both. Whereas NN can provide a function
approximation at low memory cost, their accuracy cannot be improved without
eventually overfitting the data. In contrast, ISAT can achieve any desired level
of accuracy, but the size of the resulting table, and hence the computational
cost, increases as the maximum allowable error is decreased. The ISAT table size
scales with the Hessian of the function being approximated, and so reduction of
this Hessian will also lead to a smaller table and lower computational cost.
Such reduction will be achieved by using ISAT to tabulate not the full function
of interest, but rather the difference between it and an NN function which
approximates its Hessian. Two approaches for Hessian approximation will be
developed and evaluated. In the first, a simple NN implementation will be
trained to approximate the chemical function itself, and will thus approximate
the Hessian only implicitly. For the second, an explicit Hessian approximation
will be implemented via custom NN loss definitions based on finite differences
between adjacent points. The effectiveness of the NN+ISAT combination will be
tested on both partially-stirred reactor (PaSR) test cases and complex geometry
reacting flow simulations. Success of the proposed methods can lead to
significant speedup in reactive flow simulations, enabling the use of larger and
more accurate chemical mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.