* 2154133
* Mechanistic Organic Photochemistry: Dark Processes and Toxicity Priming
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Alexander Greer, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Alexander Greer at the City
University of New York, Brooklyn College is analyzing photochemical reactions
involving oxygen gas and subsequent processes that arise in their downstream
reactions. These studies focus on deconvoluting primary from secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary photo-oxidation processes. The work is relevant to
topics in synthetic chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and photochemistry.
These studies also seek to improve the control of bacterial disinfection, and
deepen understanding of organic radical and oxidation chemistry, as well as
materials oxidation based on the use of novel artificial surfaces. The project
has potential broad impacts to society by providing insight into environmental
particulates, materials aging, and water disinfection. The project will support
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students to train them in the photo-
sciences and provide professional development. Furthermore, Professor Greer will
cultivate STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) talent to
engage a wider audience in the photo-sciences by developing the American Society
of Photobiologyâ€™s program of Online Resources for Educators &amp;
Students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Greer research group will
use phase separation of photosensitized oxidation reactions to sort out
particular reactive oxygen intermediates that are formed. Steps in sequential
light and post-illumination processes are expected to become mechanistically
accessible through the use of bi- and triphasic reactions. The research aims to
resolve sequential light and post-illumination processes and determine specific
primary through quaternary reaction mechanisms. The work will uncover downstream
photochemical reactions to deconvolute two-stage light-dark (L-D) and four-stage
L-D-L-D events to gain insight into multi-stage oxidative events. The reactive
oxygen intermediates formed in these events may be rationally manipulated and
their reactivity tuned, which is relevant to many topics. The research is
relevant to selective oxidation of natural and synthetic molecules with broader
implications for guiding efforts in oxidative anti-microbial targeting, while
minimizing damage to non-target sites and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.