* 2154711
* RI: Small: Towards Provably Efficient Representation Learning in Reinforcement Learning via Rich Function Approximation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Wen Sun, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 384,616.00

Reinforcement Learning enables artificial intelligence systems to learn by
themselves. While today’s reinforcement Learning systems can empirically
outperform humans on some tasks (such as chess), these systems often rely on an
extreme amount of data and computation resources. This makes them not suitable
for real-world applications where data are expensive. Also, reinforcement
learning algorithms used in these systems often do not have any performance
guarantees, such as how many data points the algorithm needs in order to solve
the task with high confidence, which also limits their usage in safety critical
applications. The main novelty of this project will be the development of new
reinforcement learning algorithms that can learn efficiently, using as few
training data points as possible. The development of efficient reinforcement
learning algorithms can expand the applications of these systems to real-world
applications where data are expensive to collect. For example, in autonomous
driving systems, the developed technologies would have the potential to enable
self-driving cars to adapt to new road conditions faster by making fewer
mistakes. In personalized navigation systems for visually impaired people,
systems trained with efficient reinforcement learning algorithms can engage with
users via high-quality interactions at an early stage of the learning process,
thus positively influence the user experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to bridge the gap between reinforcement learning theory and practice by
developing computationally and statistically efficient algorithms for large-
scale Markov Decision Processes where data are high-dimensional and complex. The
key innovation proposed in this project is to open the black box by
incorporating representation learning into the reinforcement learning framework.
The representation learning approach allows algorithms to extract compact
information from high dimensional and unstructured data, and perform reasoning
and decision making only using the compact representation — thus vastly
improving the sample and computation efficiency. Two main thrusts are: (1) how
to learn representations for counterfactual reinforcement learning where the
learner only has access to a static dataset and has no ability to further
interact with the environment; (2) how to integrate representation learning,
exploration, and exploitation in the online reinforcement learning setting where
the agent needs to actively interact with the environment for data acquisition.
In addition to the algorithms and reinforcement learning representation learning
theory development, this project proposes to design personalized voice
navigation systems that can adapt to end-users, where sample efficient offline
and online reinforcement learning plays an important role in fast and safe
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.