* 2154404
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Studying and Measuring the Consequence of Prototype Pollution Vulnerabilities Automatically via Joint Taintflow Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Prototype pollution is a relatively new type of vulnerability that was
discovered in 2018. State-of-the-art works all focus on prototype pollution
itself but not the follow-up influence, which we call further consequences in
this project. Although people understand that prototype pollution may lead to
some consequences such as overwriting critical variables, it remains unclear
what a list of possible consequences could be and more importantly how prevalent
they are in the real world. This greatly limits peopleâ€™s understanding of
prototype pollution: They often do not take prototype pollution seriously
because they think it is a "theoretical" vulnerability, which may not have a
severe consequence as other web vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, an automated framework on a novel joint taint-flow analysis is designed
to systematically study and measure further consequences of prototype pollution
vulnerabilities in the real world. Specifically, such an analysis connects
different taint-flows based on object lookup and assignment statements. The
project will answer three fundamental questions in prototype pollution, i.e.,
(i) where to inject/alter a property, (ii) what property to pollute, and (iii)
what value to inject. For example, a Cross-site Scripting (XSS) consequence
depends on the answer to the question (iii) and the corresponding joint taint-
flow: The taint goes into the value of a polluted property belonging to a
polluted object as an en-route stop, and then finally to a traditional XSS sink
like eval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.