* 2154941
* PIPP Phase I: Mobility Analysis for Pandemic Prevention Strategies (MAPPS)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Mark Lurie, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,211.00

Infectious diseases naturally follow the movement of people. Once a
transmissible disease emerges, human mobility and patterns of social mixing are
largely responsible for its spread. Therefore, understanding patterns of human
mobility and social interaction is essential for identifying the potential for
pandemic spread. This information is also critically important for developing
science-based targeted interventions aimed at stopping or slowing the spread of
a new pathogen. In addition, understanding how humans move across space and time
and interact with each other has broad implications beyond pandemic prevention.
This project will provide a framework to collect, capture, curate and analyze
complex, multi-scale human movement and social interaction data that can be
adapted to understand a wide variety of pressing problems including climate
change, tracking of wildlife, disaster relief, management and urban planning. A
fully functioning, accurate computational system for pandemic prediction could
save millions of lives and billions of dollars in health care costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the establishment of the Center for Mobility Analysis
for Pandemic Prevention Strategies (MAPPS) at Brown University, this project
aims to: categorize, organize and synthesize existing data on mobility and
social mixing; develop new and innovative tools for measuring mobility and
social mixing; and use that information to develop and populate mathematical
models aimed at predicting and preventing future pandemics. Existing data on
these issues will be systematically collected, catalogued and organized in a
federated, publicly available database, while new data will be generated through
targeted pilot projects. In addition, the project aims to develop a new device,
possibly wearable, that is capable of measuring human mobility, social mixing
and biometrics. The research team will develop a series of complex, flexible
mathematical models that use these data to predict the emergence of new
pandemics, describe epidemic dynamics, evaluate the effectiveness and impact of
different intervention strategies, and inform health policy decisions for
prevention and control. The work will be infused with a strong focus on ethics
and data privacy. Focused, thematic workshops will bring together national and
international experts with the aim of identifying innovative solutions to the
technical and ethical issues raised by this project. Finally, an integrative
activity across the Brown University campus will serve as a template for similar
data collection and analysis: the goals are to map the entire social network at
the University, to use this information to better understand patterns of social
mixing and to use that information to explore a variety of interventions that
could potentially mitigate or eliminate pathogenic spread.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG), and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.