* 2154275
* IRES Track II: US-Taiwan ASIs for Science, Technology, and Manufacture of Future Display Devices and Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Partha Banerjee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2024
* USD 293,950.00

As we move deeper into the era of personalized devices that perform with minimal
human active input and vast data from mutually interactive devices, the rapid
and intelligible display of relevant, sufficient, and precise data is critical.
Next-generation personal wearable electronics, such as smartwatches and
augmented-reality glasses, will have versatile, although miniature, display
panels for communications, social media, navigation, imaging, health monitoring,
eye tracking, gesture recognition, etc. The U.S. needs to regain leadership in
handling data in diverse and rapidly changing display formats, all the more so
because developments in numerous other technologies are affected and promoted by
display technology. A 16-graduate-student cohort from the U.S. will visit two
different Taiwanese institutions during two consecutive summers for intensive
training through two Advanced Studies Institutes (ASI) in display technology and
display manufacturing. Along with a cohort of 16 Taiwanese graduate students,
the cohort from the U.S. will be immersed in a series of short courses and
laboratory projects on various aspects of cutting edge display technologies,
novel applications, and wearable devices/systems, as well as key display
manufacturing knowledge. The selected students will become natural leaders as
public transport systems, personalized vehicles, healthcare, food production,
education, and other fields incorporate advanced display systems for monitoring
data and controlling operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to nucleate a scientific workforce to design and
manufacture next-generation display products in the U.S. Advancement of future
display technologies and technical capabilities has necessitated a collaborative
effort between globally engaged researchers in both academia and industry. A
cohort of 16 U.S. graduate-students will participate in a week-long Advanced
Studies Institutes (ASIs) in Taiwan for two consecutive years devoted to
disruptive techniques in display materials and device architectures. This will
help to greatly improve American expertise for producing existing display
products at reasonable cost as well as for conceiving novel display products for
long-term benefits to industry and society in future. Taiwan is a global
manufacturing leader in optics and electronics. The ASIs will be hosted by two
Taiwanese universities, National Taipei University of Technology (NTUT) and
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University (NYCU). Grouped among the top three
research institutions in photonics and electronics in Taiwan, and having
produced industry leaders and entrepreneurs in display technologies, both
hosting universities will leverage their manufacturing connections to organize
industrial visits for the American students. The first-year ASI hosted by NTUT
will cover innovative materials and structures for next-generation display
technology, while the second year ASI hosted by NYCU will focus on advanced
display devices and systems in the era of wearable electronics. Along with a
cohort of 16 Taiwanese graduate students, the American students will be immersed
in a series of 41 hours of lectures and 24 hours of laboratory projects on
various aspects of cutting-edge display technologies, novel applications, and
wearable devices/systems, as well as key display manufacturing knowledge. The
Organizating Committee comprises professors from The Pennsylvania State
University, University of Dayton, NTUT, and NYCU, as well as personnel from
industries in Taiwan and the U.S. Progress towards project goals will be
evaluated with a focus on the effectiveness of student recruitment and retention
across the two years, professional development, and cross-cultural experiences
and competencies developed between students from the two
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.