* 2154367
* Theory and Simulation of Non-adiabatic Excited State Dynamics in Nanoscale systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Oleg Prezhdo of the University of Southern California is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate ultrafast processes in
modern nanoscale materials and devices aimed at solar energy harvesting and
optoelectronic applications. Further progress in photovoltaics, photocatalysis,
electronics, imaging, detection, as well as in the emerging spintronics,
plasmonics, valleytronics and quantum information technologies, requires device
miniaturization and involves very fast timescales. In order to advance these
fields, Oleg Prezhdo’s group has pioneered and will further develop theoretical
and computational methods that allow them to model the new materials and
processes with atomistic precision and fine time-resolution. This modeling will
mimic most closely the key phenomena as they occur in nature, provide
fundamental interpretation of the experimental data, and guide future efforts in
design of materials and devices. The theoretical studies are essential for
advancing the technologies that are critical for our society
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Oleg Prezhdo and his group will develop
novel theoretical and simulation approaches for nonadiabatic molecular dynamics,
implementing them within real-time time-dependent density functional theory, and
investigating excited state dynamics in modern nanoscale materials and multi-
component hybrids. The balanced program combining theory and applications will
provide a detailed, atomistic picture of the photo-excitation dynamics in time-
domain, and in direct connection and collaboration with experiment. The methods
development and implementation will focus on modified Ehrenfest-type methods,
Liouville-space surface hopping approaches, Lindblad and Pauli master equations
with surface hopping rates, and machine learning analysis and acceleration of
nonadiabatic molecular dynamics. The applications include studies of excited
state dynamics in metal halide perovskites, transition metal dichalcogenides and
two-dimensional materials, metallic and semiconducting quantum dots, and hybrids
including several of these materials. Such materials and systems find important
applications in solar energy harvesting and optoelectronics. Oleg Prezhdo’s work
advances the fundamental aspects of quantum dynamics and addresses practical
questions in excitation and charge transfer on the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.