* 2154524
* RUI: Chiral Deep Eutectic Solvents: Developing Circularly Polarized Light Emitting Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Todd Hopkins, Butler University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2025
* USD 139,097.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Hopkins of Butler University is
studying circularly polarized light emitting materials based on deep eutectic
solvents and luminescent lanthanides. Circularly polarized light emitting
materials are potentially useful in a number of applications, including quantum
computing, as security labels, and as a way to increase the brightness of a
display. Deep eutectic solvents are formed by mixing two or more components to
yield a unique solvent with controllable properties. This project explores the
design of new deep eutectic solvents with properties that improve the efficiency
of circularly polarized light emission by dissolved luminescent lanthanides. The
resulting deep eutectic solvent-lanthanide combinations are explored as emitting
layers in circularly polarized organic light emitting diodes. The results of
this project will contribute to a publicly available database of deep eutectic
solvents maintained by Dr. Hopkins’ research group. This project will result in
training and research experiences for undergraduate students. The project will
engage undergraduate students in research at the interface of physical,
inorganic, and materials chemistry. The students enrolled in a physical
chemistry laboratory course will collaborate on the research project, and topics
related to deep eutectic solvents and light emitting materials will be
incorporated into the physical chemistry lecture
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
circularly polarized light emitting materials based on chiral deep eutectic
solvents (DES)/eutectic mixtures that serve as solvents to luminescent
lanthanide complexes. In order to achieve the objective, the project will 1)
develop and characterize binary and ternary DES/eutectic mixtures with chiral
components; and 2) characterize the photo- and electroluminescent circularly
polarized luminescence (CPL) properties of luminescent lanthanide complexes
dissolved in the developed chiral DES/eutectic mixtures. Deep eutectic
solvents/eutectic mixtures are mixtures that have a lower melting point than the
components (two or more), and their properties, such as chiral recognition, can
be controlled by choice of components. This project will explore the role of
both chiral and achiral components of binary and ternary DES/mixtures in their
ability to induce CPL from dissolved luminescent lanthanide complexes. The
successful combinations of chiral DES + lanthanide complex will be incorporated
into circularly polarized organic light emitting diodes (CP-OLEDs) to determine
their suitability as circularly polarized light emitting materials. When
completed, the project would provide new strategies to optimize materials that
display circularly polarized luminescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.