* 2154636
* Metalla-NHCs: Modular, Redox-Active Ligands for Next Generation Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Ian Tonks, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Ian Tonks of the University of Minnesota – Twin Cities will
study the design and synthesis of new metal-based carbene ligands called
metalla-NHCs (N-heterocyclic carbenes) that can be used for switchable catalytic
reactions. A key innovation of this work is that these ligands are the first
examples of structures that incorporate metals into the cyclic backbone of a
free carbene, the latter being a typically highly reactive form of carbon. These
new ligands can directly communicate electronic changes to a catalytically
active metal center, potentially allowing organometallic chemists to develop new
catalysts with unprecedented levels of precision control of reaction outcomes.
Fundamental studies into new classes of tunable metalla-NHC and related ligands
are critical for continued innovation in the global chemical catalysis field.
Additionally, innovation in student-led bottom-up chemical safety efforts has
been an integral part of the Tonks Research Group since its inception, and this
grant will support translating locally-successful safety initiatives to the
national stage by leveraging The Safety Net, a safety website jointly founded by
the University of Minnesota – Twin Cities and the University of North Carolina –
Chapel Hill. Specifically, Professor Tonks will expand their use of Learning
Experience Reports, examples of near-misses or accidents in academic labs, into
a publicly available (and editable) database. This database will be useful for
new researchers as they learn to carry out hazard assessments in chemistry
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
capitalize on the Tonks Group’s report of the first example of a free
metallacarbene complex containing a dicyclopentadienyltitanium moiety. This
proposal aims to synthesize a suite of other early transition metal
metallacarbene complexes using the synthetic strategies developed for the
titanium analogue. Specifically, the propensity of low valent early transition
metals to react with carbodiimides will be explored, where the steric and
electronic requirements for kappa-2 versus eta-2 bonding of the carbodiimide
will be delineated. Further, the deprotonation of metal-formamidine complexes
will be used to access derivatives that cannot be accessed via reductive routes.
The electronic structure of these metallacarbene complexes will be studied in
depth through combined spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques, as well as
computational modeling. Finally, the coordination chemistry of the metalla-NHC
complexes will be developed, with a specific focus on using them as strong,
redox active dative ligands for other catalytically active metal centers.
Ultimately, this research is focused on synthesizing new suites of redox active
ligands for catalysis applications such as polymerizations, and elucidating
metal-metal interactions in subsequent bimetallic complexes with an eye toward
switchable catalytic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.