* 2154083
* Pushing the Limits of Reactivity Principles for Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dean Tantillo, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 550,461.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Tantillo of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California, Davis is using modern
computational chemistry methods to explore the limits of reactivity principles
for reactions of organic molecules. The goal of this research is to provide
fundamental understanding of factors that control reactivity at a level useful
for predicting laboratory reaction outcomes. This research will advance
knowledge in mechanistic organic chemistry through the construction of new
mechanistic models, including those based on non-statistical dynamic effects
that allow reactions to circumvent orbital symmetry constraints, access unusual
reactivity of excited states and utilize entropy to control selectivity. In
addition to the fundamental importance of the mechanistic models uncovered
through this research, the project will serve to train students (graduate and
undergraduate, several from underrepresented groups) in multidisciplinary
approaches to mechanistic chemistry and expose them to diverse careers that
employ such techniques. In addition, educational resources for teaching students
about molecular vibrations during reactions, and methods for making applied
computational chemistry accessible to blind and visually impaired students, will
be developed and widely distributed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
focus on three classes of reactions, each with its own unique challenges:
apparently forbidden pericyclic reactions, photochemical organic reactions
displaying behavior akin to that of reactions with ground state post-transition
state bifurcations, and organic reactions with entropy-controlled selectivity.
Non-statistical dynamic effects will be analyzed and predicted for each, and
general models of reactivity and selectivity will be constructed and used to
design new reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.