* 2154736
* RUI: Condensed-Phase Effects on the Structural and Energetic Properties of Nitrogen Donor - SOx Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Phillips, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 313,276.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor James Phillips and his
undergraduate researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire will study
how the structures of certain stable molecules change as a result of their
associations with each other. Molecular structure is typically unaffected by
chemical environment; distances between atoms typically do not change when a
substance condenses or goes into solution. However, certain “molecular
complexes” - associations of two or more otherwise stable molecules - can
undergo major changes of this ilk, but the overall generality of such effects is
not well-established. This project will characterize a series of complexes apt
to change structure in inert, non-interacting “solvent” environments known as
“cryogenic matrices” (solid samples of argon, neon, or nitrogen, frozen at
temperatures near absolute zero). The complexes will be studied by probing their
resonant frequencies (how fast or easily their chemical bonds vibrate), which
shift systematically when structural changes occur. In addition, the systems
will be explored by computer simulations of the bonding to address the
underlying factors that drive the unusual structural changes. The knowledge
gained from these studies will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the
nature of chemical bonding, which in turn can help other researchers to better
understand and predict chemical reactivity in the research lab, industrial
settings, and the environment. The project will take place at an accessible,
public comprehensive university (UW-Eau Claire), and will provide transformative
research, mentoring, and career development experiences for undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This combined quantum-chemical and experimental
(matrix-IR and UV spectroscopic) investigation will target three types of
systems: i) H3N–SO2 and its methylated analogs, ii) Pyridine - SO2, and its
fluoropyridine analogs, and, iii) the analogous SO3 complexes. The central
hypothesis is that bonds about the central S-atom in SOx will manifest repulsive
forces that impede further coordination, and lead to extreme structural changes
in inert media. Confirmation of this will manifest a refined understanding of
factors affecting coordinate bond strength, which may impact many areas of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.