* 2154384
* New Synthetic Opportunities with N-Alkenylnitrones and N,O-Dialkenylhydroxylamines
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Laura Anderson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Laura Anderson of the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is developing new
reactions to rapidly assemble novel molecular scaffolds through unconventional
strategies that use the reactivity of two underdeveloped reactive intermediates,
N-alkenylnitrones and N,O-dialkenylhydroxylamines. Dr. Anderson and her team are
determining modular ways to generate these chemical linchpins from accessible
reagents and to control the selectivity of the rearrangement activity to form
more stable compounds with defined three-dimensional structures. This work is
targeting improved synthetic efficiency to expand chemical space. Improvements
in this area are expected to contribute to the discovery, accessibility, and
study of biologically active molecules, as well as the development of new
materials. These activities will also provide training for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students. Dr. Anderson plans to publicize the
benefits of undergraduate research opportunities by organizing undergraduate
research presentations in introductory organic chemistry courses and promoting
inclusivity by leading a committee to establish cohort-building opportunities
for aspiring undergraduate chemists at UIC, which is a minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving efficiency to enable rapid access to
sought after molecular targets and expanding chemical space to include new
molecular architectures remain two critical needs in organic synthesis to
support demands for new compounds with novel properties. Professor Andersonâ€™s
group is focused on developing the unique reactivity of N-alkenylnitrones and
N,O-dialkenylhydroxylamines to address synthetic challenges and improve
fundamental understanding of the reactivity of these versatile and unusual
synthons. Specifically, Dr. Anderson and her team are developing: (i)
torquoselective reactions for the asymmetric synthesis of azetidine nitrones;
(ii) diastereoselective functionalizations of azetidine nitrones, (iii)
substituent effects to control the rearrangements of N-alkenylisoxazolines, and
(iv) metal-catalyzed alkyne addition methods for the generation
N,O-dialkenylhydroxylamines and their asymmetric rearrangement to 1,4-dicarbonyl
compounds. The architecturally diverse products of these studies are being
included in medicinal and agrichemical libraries for activity testing. The
foundational reactivity being investigated are expected to expand the synthetic
toolbox of pericyclic and cascade reactions. These activities will also train
graduate and undergraduate students in chemical experimentation and design, as
well as be used to engage students in the types of opportunities available in
chemistry-related career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.