* 2154538
* Collaborative Research: Intrinsic Gas-Phase Acid-Base Properties and Structures of Non-Protein Amino Acids and Non-Protein Amino Acid-Containing Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jennifer Poutsma, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 50,726.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B program is
supporting the collaborative research of John C. Poutsma at the College of
William and Mary and Jennifer Poutsma at Old Dominion University. The group of
John Poutsma will employ mass spectrometry-based experiments to study the
interplay between the structure of peptides and their gas-phase energetic
properties. This study focuses on peptides containing non-proteinogenic amino
acids (NPAA), which are found naturally in plants and fungi, but are not
intended for protein synthesis. Many NPAAs are toxic to humans and other
animals, in part due to structural similarity to one or more of the twenty
common proteinogenic amino acids (PAA). NPAAs can compete with PAAs in a variety
of biological pathways including being mis-incorporated into proteins and
peptides. Studying the behavior of peptides into which NPAAs have been
systematically substituted will further our understanding of the relationship
between peptide structure and its behavior in the mass spectrometer. Ultimately,
this enhanced understanding may lead to improved automated peptide sequencing
algorithms for proteomics experiments. In collaboration with these experiments,
the group ofa Jennifer Poutsma will create computational models intended to
support and guide the experimental studies. Both research programs will
integrate research and educational components through the training of
undergraduate researchers. A majority of the research projects outlined in this
proposal will be performed by undergraduates at the College of William and Mary
and at Old Dominion University. Performing independent research helps to teach
these students not only the joy of scientific discovery but also how to handle
and work through the inevitable challenges that accompany real-world
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, intrinsic gas-phase properties
of peptides and their fragments will be determined using: 1) the extended
kinetic method, 2) hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 3) infrared multiphoton
dissociation spectroscopy and 4) density functional theory calculations. The
ultimate goals of these studies are to further understanding of the relationship
between amino acid structure and thermochemical properties, to better understand
the effects of intramolecular hydrogen bonding on the gas-phase chemistry of
amino acids and peptides, and to better understand the mechanisms for selective
fragmentations in low-energy tandem mass spectrometry experiments. This detailed
knowledge can be integrated into peptide sequencing technology to better account
for the presence of unusual amino acids, and for selective
fragmentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.