* 2154344
* Excellence in Research: Stress-induced expression and release of DAMPs: Regulatory role of Epigenetic Factors and Post-translational modifications
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Waneene Dorsey, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 725,291.00

An idea that has gained support in recent years is that epigenetic changes to
DNA and natural cellular modifications to proteins may effect stress-induced
immune responses. One of the major consequences of cellular stress is the
production and secretion of Danger-Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPS). The
DAMPs, including high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) and heat-shock
protein 70 (HSP70), induce inflammation in mammals by interacting with pattern-
recognition receptor proteins (proteins capable of recognizing DAMP molecules).
Earlier studies provide evidence about the possible role of chemical
modifications to proteins in the secretion of HMGB1 by stressed cells. We do not
know, however, if these modifications also affect secretion of HSP70. In this
project, the investigators will use both computational and cell biological
approaches to measure chemical changes to both DNA and proteins responsible for
the release of DAMPs from lung and liver cells challenged with
pentachlorophenol, a widely used organochlorine herbicide and wood preservative.
The incorporation of computational approaches to understand these basic cellular
mechanisms will greatly improve the research approach employed at the
participating HBCU Campuses, Southern University in Baton Rouge and Grambling
State University, both in Louisiana. An important highlight of this project is
to increase the number of undergraduate African-American students entering
careers as research scientists by providing these HBCU students with faculty-
supervised training from qualified and trained HBCU Ph.D. students, which will
also develop the mentoring abilities of the latter. This Excellence in Research
award will enable the investigators to develop and establish a rigorous and
high-quality research program that will significantly improve the research
experience and education of minority students in
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal investigates the molecular
mechanisms associated with the endogenous expression and extracellular release
of Danger-Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPs) in cellular models under
stressed conditions. The DAMPs include high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1)
and heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70). These proteins induce inflammation through
interaction with cell surface or cytosolic pattern recognition receptors.
Earlier studies provided evidence about the possible role of post-translational
modification (PTM) in the secretion of HMGB1 by stressed cells, but little is
known about HSP70’s secretory mechanisms. The investigators on this project will
use both computational and cell biological approaches to identify the epigenetic
factors and PTMs responsible for the release of DAMPs from lung and liver cells
challenged with pentachlorophenol, an organochlorine herbicide and wood
preservative. This will be accomplished in part through measurement of
epigenetic methylation of DNA on CpG sequences in promoter regions of genes
encoding DAMPs, as well as measurements of histone modifications in those same
promoter regions. The additional incorporation of computational approaches to
understand the basic cellular mechanisms will transform the research approaches
being employed at the two participating HBCU Campuses, Southern University in
Baton Rouge and Grambling State University, both in
Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.