* 2154392
* Conference: Flexibility and Rigidity in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Ralf Spatzier, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/28/2023
* USD 27,500.00

The workshop "Flexibility and Rigidity in Dynamical Systems” will be held from
March 7 to March 11, 2022 at the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics at Stony
Brook University. Dynamical systems model the time evolution of physical,
biological or mathematical systems, such as planetary motion, fluid flows, or
the progression of diseases. Several fundamental concepts and ideas, such as
entropy, chaos and attractors, have been developed to describe such systems.
Tools from symbolic dynamics have proved important in developing fast and safe
codes in computer science. Hyperbolic dynamical systems naturally arise in
electrical systems and their network problems. They also have applications
within mathematics, especially to number theory, mathematical physics and
geometry. This workshop will bring together experts in the dynamical systems
areas of rigidity and flexibility, as well as a large group of graduate students
and young researchers, to open new research avenues. The primary goal is to
foster collaboration and build a community of researchers engaged in studying
the interplay between flexibility and rigidity in dynamics. The workshop
includes three mini-courses in addition to research talks and a problem session.
The proximity of Stony Brook to many education and research institutions lends
itself particularly well to dissemination of new research directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on fine properties of hyperbolic
dynamical systems, i.e., systems whose orbits diverge exponentially fast - as it
is typical in many situations. Mathematicians introduced invariants, in
particular entropy and Lyapunov exponents, to describe their behavior. One can
naturally ask for the range these invariants can take in a given class of
dynamical systems (“flexibility”). Such ranges can be very restrictive, for
example, when the systems exhibit extra symmetries. Sometimes this leads to a
complete description of the systems (“rigidity”). While investigations on
rigidity started half a century ago, work on flexibility started only recently.
Highlights of recent research will form the core of the mini-courses of the
workshop, especially new advances on rigidity of hyperbolic dynamical systems,
entropy properties of negatively curved manifolds, and flexibility of group
actions on the circle. The conference website is at:
http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/33724&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.