* 2154955
* CAS: Properties and Activation Mechanisms of Mn-hydroperoxo and Mn-alkylperoxo Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Timothy Jackson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 437,828.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Timothy Jackson of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Kansas is developing and characterizing new
manganese-hydroperoxo and manganese-alkylperoxo complexes that mimic important
intermediates in several catalysts. The goal of this research is to understand
how to control the reactions of these complexes, which could lead to the design
of new catalysts. This research will also contribute to a better understanding
of biological enzymes that use manganese. Manganese is an earth-abundant metal,
and its increased use in catalytic reactions has the potential to mitigate some
of the environmental impacts and costs of chemical processes. This project lies
at the interface of inorganic and physical chemistry, providing a unique
training experience for graduate and undergraduate students. Graduate students
associated with this project will gain professional development skills, perform
experiments at National Labs, and be involved in disseminating the outcomes of
this work through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and
public events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese-hydroperoxo complexes are proposed
as intermediates in both biological and synthetic systems. Despite the
importance of such intermediates, our understanding of the fundamental
properties and reactivity of these complexes is in its nascent stages. In this
project, a combination of synthetic, kinetic, spectroscopic, and computational
methods will be employed to answer the following questions: 1) What are the
fundamental physical properties of manganese(III)-hydroperoxo complexes, and how
do these properties influence chemical reactivity? 2) Can we control proton and/
or electron delivery to manganese(III)-hydroperoxo and manganese(III)-peroxo
complexes to initiate specific decay pathways? 3) Can we manipulate the
coordination environment of manganese(III)-alkylperoxo complexes to influence
the O-O bond cleavage mechanism? The new knowledge generated from this work will
foster a better understanding of manganese enzymes and could yield principles
for use in the design of new catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.