* 2154579
* RUI: CAS: Production of Highly Reactive Metal-Oxo Species with Molecular Oxygen and Visible Light for the Selective Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rui Zhang, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 225,560.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Rui Zhang of Western Kentucky University (WKU) will study the reaction
of organic compounds with oxygen from the atmosphere using catalysts, in a
process called catalytic aerobic oxidation. This process is widely used daily on
a large scale for the production of valuable chemicals, the environmental
remediation of pollutants, and in the production of energy. Dr. Rui Zhang and
his students at WKU are working to develop bio-inspired photocatalysts that can
utilize sunlight to activate and incorporate atmospheric oxygen into inexpensive
materials for producing high-value commodity chemicals. The use of abundant
solar energy and atmospheric oxygen rather than a chemical reagent in the
oxidation of bulk chemicals generates less chemical waste, is more chemically
sustainable, and potentially reduces the economic costs associated with the
process. The research will impact the fundamental science and technology of
green chemistry. In addition, this project will provide cutting-edge research
experiences for the participating undergraduate students, including underserved
students and women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines, thereby training future STEM professionals. High school students
from the nationally renowned Gatton Academy, the residential Math and Science
Academy located on WKU’s campus, will also perform research in the laboratory
and learn about catalysis research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
Professor Rui Zhang and his team will study metal phthalocyanine complexes
(MPc’s) as sustainable and “green” oxidation catalysts in view of their easy
accessibility and outstanding redox and optical properties. This research will
focus on mechanistic studies and the generation of metal-oxo oxidizing species
involved in MPc-based catalysis, and will use the new knowledge obtained to
develop viable and practical catalytic methods for clean oxidations. Although
MPc’s are very attractive and are widely applicable catalysts in many oxidation
processes, mechanistic aspects of MPc-catalyzed oxidations and identification of
the MPc-based metal-oxo reactive intermediates are still underdeveloped. High-
valent transition metal-oxo oxidants in different macrocyclic systems can be
generated photochemically and used for oxidations through disproportionation
reactions. In this project, Dr. Zhang and his students at WKU aim to explore new
ways to probe the nature of active oxidizing species and elucidate mechanisms
extant in MPc-mediated catalysis. Importantly, a variety of new MPc-based
catalysts that contain photoabsorbed units will be synthesized and investigated
for photocatalytic aerobic oxidations. This research is expected to advance
knowledge in metal-oxo chemistry and photocatalysis and to have long term
implications for the conversion of solar energy in
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.