* 2154760
* Boosting Density Embedding with Machine Learning and Nonstandard Workflows
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Michele Pavanello, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 464,139.00

Professor Michele Pavanello of Rutgers University-Newark is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to model molecular condensed phases and materials from
first principles. Pavanello and his research group will develop open-source
software encoding first-principles Quantum Mechanics for the prediction of
materials properties and their rational design. The methods will exploit state-
of-the-art machine learning and divide-and-conquer algorithms to speed up the
computational time without compromising on the accuracy and rigorousness of the
approaches. Pavanello will apply the newly developed methods to open problems in
catalysis by computationally predicting reaction paths and in materials
engineering by predicting charge mobilities and polymorphism. The scientific
advances will be complemented by a strong outreach program aimed at training
high school students from unrepresented minority school districts in computer
coding (Python bootcamps) building on already-established programs between
Rutgers-Newark and nearby school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Michele Pavanello and his research group will develop density functional theory
embedding methods aimed at computing the electronic structure of materials and
molecular condensed phases tackling open problems ranging from catalysis to
charge mobility in molecular semiconductors. The project will consist of: (1)
boost DFT embedding employing machine learned Kohn-Sham one-electron reduced
density matrices to access system sizes beyond the nanoscale; (2) develop an
adaptive embedding method that defines in real time the most accurate subsystem
topology for the simulation and is capable of running ab initio dynamics for
applications to catalysis and other chemical processes; and (3) develop
nonstandard workflows for “hybrid” embedding schemes, such as Kohn-Sham DFT
embedded in orbital-free DFT to tackle nanoscale metallic subsystems,
wavefunction theory in DFT for applications to charged condensed-phase systems
and prediction of crystal polymorphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.