* 2154837
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Structure, Dynamics, and Reaction Mechanism of Supported Single Atom for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jing Gu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 268,769.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jier Huang of the Department of Chemistry at
Marquette University and Jing Gu of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at San Diego State University aim to construct and investigate new generation
single atom catalysts for visible light driven carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction to
form chemical fuels with high efficiency, selectivity, and stability.
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction through the harnessing solar energy represents one
of the most attractive strategies that attempts to simultaneously address the
greenhouse gas sequestration issue and work toward alternative energy sources
for the future. The research will be supplemented by diverse educational and
outreach activities, including efforts to encourage graduate and undergraduate
students, especially members of underrserved minority groups, to consider
pursuing careers in science. The Huang/Gu team will also provide opportunities
for students/teachers ranging from elementary to high schools to advance their
general understanding of catalysis and renewable energy technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported single atoms (SAs) have emerged as a novel class
of catalysts, offering new promise for light-driven CO2 reduction. The focus of
prior research is largely on documenting the efficiency, stability, and the
selectivity of the catalysts, not the fundamental mechanistic studies that
underlines the correlation of SA structure and their photocatalytic performance.
To address such gaps in knowledge, Drs. Gu and Professor Huang are targeting the
following objectives by leveraging their complementary expertise in materials
design and synthesis with time resolved spectroscopy: 1) to systematically tune
the geometric and electronic structures of supported SAs by altering the
intrinsic nature of SAs, the metal-support interaction, and by comparing with
nanoparticles with various sizes; 2) to examine the charge separation and
structural dynamics, and resolving the intermediate structures at catalytic
active sites with high temporal and spatial resolution using time resolved
optical and X-ray absorption spectroscopy; and 3) to evaluate the direct
correlation of the structures of the supported SA catalysts with their
photophysical properties and catalytic function to establish structure-property-
function relationships for CO2 reduction. Results obtained from these efforts
are expected to aid in the development of more effective supported SAs for
photocatalytic CO2 reduction, going forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.