* 2154624
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Markoff Triples, Cryptography, and Arithmetic of Thin Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Elena Fuchs, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2025
* USD 258,576.00

This project seeks to find new applications of classical number theory to
cryptographic hash functions, which are vital to password protection, digital
signatures, and more. The investigator aims to construct new algorithms for
finding paths between vertices of graphs whose structure underlies certain
number theoretic questions, as well as algorithms for finding short cycles in
these graphs. Advances will have implications for both the security of hash
functions and number theory itself. The project is multidisciplinary and will
bring together experts from number theory and cryptography. It is also seeking
to involve younger scientists at both the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has shed light on the so-called Markoff
mod-p graphs that underly many arithmetic questions about Markoff triples. This
family of graphs, conjectured to be an expander family, is the basis of a
cryptographic hash function introduced by the investigator and collaborators.
Many questions remain about the security of this hash function and about graphs
connected to generalizations of the Markoff surface, which may be even better
candidates for a hash. One such question concerns lifts of mod-p Markoff triples
to integer Markoff triples, and the investigator plans to prove results on the
average sizes of these lifts. Such results would feed into understanding the run
time of an attack. The investigator will also work to compare the security of
the new hash functions to hash functions that are accepted as secure today by
equating and drawing parallels between path finding in the Markoff mod-p graphs
and questions that are known to be difficult. A new quick path finding
algorithm, while unfortunate from the cryptographic point of view, would have
important consequences from the number-theoretic viewpoint. Finally, the
investigator will continue her number theoretic work on thin groups, such as the
one lurking behind Markoff triples. She aims to extend results on local to
global principles in various circle packings; currently such a principle is
known to exist when the symmetry group connected to the packing contains certain
nice groups, and she plans to relax this restriction. Another goal of the
project is to establish results on thickened prime components in Apollonian
packings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.