* 2154804
* Hybrid Computational Models for Membrane-Protein Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Qiang Cui, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Qiang Cui of Boston University is
developing effective computational methods for tackling problems that involve
collective behaviors of proteins/peptides at the lipid membrane interface. These
problems are difficult to study using existing computational methodologies due
to the involvement of multiple length and time scales. Taking advantage of
recent progress in machine learning (ML) techniques, Dr. Cui will aim to
overcome these challenges to establish efficient and reliable computational
models that enable the mechanistic analysis of protein phase separation at cell
membrane surface and protein mediated membrane porations, which are critical in
important biological processes such as cell signaling, viral infection and
synaptic transmission. Cui will also engage in various education and out-reach
activities to inspire students of broad backgrounds to pursue a career at the
boundary between physical chemistry, computational science, and biology. At the
undergraduate level, Professor Cui will endeavor to enhance the integration of
computation and basic programming concepts into the chemistry curriculum at
Boston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the research goals, the
Cui team will effectively integrate recent advances in simulation methodologies
in unique biophysical contexts. In one problem, Cui and co-workers will aim to
understand how protein-membrane interactions modify the conformational and
interaction properties of proteins in the context of liquid-liquid phase
separation. The unique angle will be to develop a hybrid ML/MM model in which
the protein and its interaction with the membrane environment are described
using ML, trained with atomistic simulation data and a reference coarse-grained
model; the advantage of this hybrid model is that many-body effects at the
coarse-grained level are captured, a feature expected to be essential to the
proper description of collective behaviors of proteins in different
environments, including phase separation at or wetting of the lipid membrane. In
another problem, the challenge is to understand the mechanism by which multiple
types of peptides or protein motifs regulate membrane pores. The Cui group will
combine finite temperature string and an ML approach to expand the list of
collective variables automatically and systematically for evaluating the
underlying minimum free energy pathways. The fundamental strategy of combining
the strengths of global (string) and local (PIB) enhanced sampling techniques
will be potentially applicable to a broad range of problems in which a minimal
set of global progress variables is known ahead of time, yet important local
degrees of freedom remain obscure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.