* 2154480
* International Conference on Microlocal Analysis, Harmonic Analysis, and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Alex Iosevich, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 36,171.00

This award supports a conference on microlocal analysis, harmonic analysis, and
inverse problems, which will take place August 15-17, 2022 at the University of
Rochester. These three research areas have many points of intersection and have
each seen tremendous progress in recent decades. Furthermore, research in these
areas has led to advances in applied subjects such as diffuse and X-ray
tomography, non-invasive imaging, and cloaking technology. The purpose of the
conference is to bring together mathematicians working at the borders between
these three research areas, to spur the cross-fertilization of ideas and
generate new directions for the global research agenda. The conference also
includes specific activities geared towards early-career mathematicians, and
aims to provide such researchers with valuable experiences to help further their
professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the workshop is to
bring together an international group of experts in three research areas:
microlocal analysis, inverse problems, and harmonic analysis. A variety of
topics are expected to receive prominent attention during the meeting. These
include eigenfunction bounds for Laplace-Beltrami operators on Riemannian
manifolds, regularity of Radon transform operators, Falconerâ€™s distance set
conjecture and some of its more recent generalizations, and connections between
Fourier integral operators, inverse problems, and integral geometry. The
conference program includes specific activities intended to promote a robust and
informative dialogue among researchers from the three focus research areas, as
well as opportunities for the professional development of junior researchers. &l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;https://people.math.rochester.edu/faculty/iosevich/allanconf
erencewebsite.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.