* 2154013
* RAPID: Evaluation of post-wildfire effects on soil physical and chemical properties in response to the Caldor and Tamarack fires near Lake Tahoe
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Markus Berli, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 39,389.00

Wildfire-induced changes to soil properties impact infiltration, runoff, and
soil erodibility in fire-prone areas. Recent wildfires in the eastern Sierra
Nevada mountains provide a unique opportunity to quantify fire effects on soil
properties in natural field settings. These wildfires represent a new generation
of large high-temperature canopy fires that are likely to increase in frequency
in this region due to changing climate. Reduced infiltration and enhanced runoff
after fire are directly related to changes in the structure and surface
chemistry of the pore system within the soil. Fire effects on soil physical and
chemical properties have been quantified mostly in the laboratory but not in
natural field settings. This project will quantify the effect of two large
wildfires (Caldor and Tamarack) on soil physical and chemical properties to
better understand how fires affect hillslope hydrologic processes (infiltration,
runoff, erosion), fire-related secondary risks such as flooding and debris
flows, and forest management practices related to fire
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify post-fire changes to
soil physical and chemical properties to better understand their impact on post-
fire runoff, infiltration, and erosion in natural settings. Samples will be
collected from burned and unburned locations both to measure soil hydraulic and
thermal conductivity functions via controlled evaporation experiments and to
identify functional groups in soil organic matter that influence soil
hydrophobicity using proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry.
Additionally, infiltration and soil hydrophobicity will be measured in-situ
using infiltrometer tests. Results will be presented to local stakeholders of
fire-prone watersheds to guide forest management and improve the sustainability
of water and ecosystem resources. Results will be transferable to watersheds in
the Sierra Nevada with similar soil conditions. This project will provide
research opportunities for an early career scientist, field training to a Ph.D.
student, and hands-on experience for an undergraduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.