* 2154547
* Abilities, Opportunities and the Future of Work Conference
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Connie Sung, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 46,144.00

Individuals with disabilities are an important part of the American economy.
Substantial challenges exist in integrating individuals with disabilities into
their specific work environments. Unemployment rates for persons with a
disability are substantially higher (10.1%) than those without (5.1%), according
to the 2021 Bureau of Labor Statistics data. To discuss this challenge, an
interdisciplinary team of researchers plan to host a conference. The conference
aims to discuss approaches to scale the employment of individuals with
disabilities, delineate key challenges that businesses face in effectively
engaging in disability employment, and finally, clarify the return on investment
(ROI) imperative for the employment of individuals with disabilities. The
conference invitees will come from an inclusive diaspora of an interdisciplinary
group of academics (vocational rehabilitation, business, industrial relations,
engineering), industry practitioners, Diversity, Equity, Access and Inclusion
(DEA&amp;I) professionals, not-for-profits, and State vocational rehabilitation
(VR) counselors that work with businesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will span over one and a half days. It will feature the following three panels:
(a) Human Resource Management/Vocational Rehabilitation; (b) Operational
Challenges in employing Workforce with Disabilities; and (c) Corporate Social
Responsibility in Managing a Workforce with Disabilities. Each panel will
feature multiple cross-disciplinary panelists from academia, non-profit
organizations, state agencies, and leading corporations that employ individuals
with disabilities. In addition, each panel will be paired with a breakout group
where participants will interactively debate the challenges enumerated by
panelists and discuss them. These deliberations will be recorded. At the end of
the conference, the workshop organizers and volunteer participants will collate
the information learned at the conference to develop a white paper on the
deliberations and way forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.