* 2154923
* Mechanistic Studies of Halenium-Alkene Additions for Chemical Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* James Jackson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 410,390.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Babak Borhan and James E. Jackson of Michigan State University are
studying new methods to control the three-dimensional structure and "handedness"
of products in reactions that generate carbon-halogen and carbon-nucleophile
bonds in the same operation. The products of these reactions serve as important
chiral building blocks for many applications, for example, for the synthesis of
pharmaceutically active agents or of agrochemicals. The Borhan-Jackson teams are
working to expand and refine methods to catalyze the formation of a wide range
of compounds of a specific desired handedness from much simpler starting
substances. Sophisticated analysis techniques will be brought to bear on the
areas of study such that superior catalysts can be rationally designed, in
contrast to the essentially trial-and-error approaches used in the past.
Ultimately, it is anticipated that this work will lead to more efficient
processes for the manufacture of chiral molecules of importance to science,
engineering, medicine, and commerce. The broader impacts of the funded project
will extend to allowing the two PIs and their coworkers to recruit, train, and
scientifically stimulate high school and undergraduate students in the
laboratory via programs such as Project SEED. The involvement of these early
stage science students many of whom belong to groups underrepresented in the
physical sciences, in a dynamic, international lab and learning community, has
the potential to help diversify the pool of students considering future STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics)-based study and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halofunctionalizations of alkenes have recently
joined the list of broadly applicable and genuinely useful chemical
transformations that can be achieved in an enantioselective manner using chiral
catalysis. However, to date, the most effective catalysts for asymmetric
halenium-alkene addition processes, for example the well-known cinchona alkaloid
dimer (DHQD)2PHAL, have been identified largely on an empirical basis. This
collaborative project focuses on detailed mechanistic analyses of important
classes of halofunctionalization reactions with the goal of enabling the
rational design of simplified and practical new catalysts that are both
affordable and highly selective. The approach taken is multi-faceted and
involves examination of reaction kinetics, isotopic label tracing, kinetic
isotope effects, quantum chemical models, and spectroscopic and structural
analyses, with particular attention to the interactions among substrate alkenes,
halogenation agents, and catalyst reactive sites. With an emphasis on
allylamides, the investigative team will survey intramolecular halocyclizations
and intermolecular halofunctionalizations, derive rate laws for each class of
reaction, and determine the factors that control the mechanistic pathways. The
alkene additions of interest form two new stereocenters in one step, potentially
giving rise to four structurally distinct chiral products, or even eight when
both regiochemical possibilities may be accessed. Coming from simple olefinic
starting materials, this diversity of complex, functional group rich products is
valuable, but only if the selectivity can be controlled. This research aims to
provide the intellectual foundation needed to achieve generalized catalyst and
process design, accelerating discovery based upon mechanistic understanding. If
successful, these collaborative experimental/mechanistic studies will provide a
useful model for the design and development of stereoselective catalysts well
beyond the halenium-alkene addition reactions under study
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.