* 2154237
* Discovery and Optimization of Enantioselective Catalysts Guided by Informatics and Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 415,583.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Professor Scott E. Denmark of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and his team are working to
develop a new approach to the design of catalytic processes that combines the
creative power of diversity-oriented synthesis with the computational power of
informatics. The foundational requirements for this program are the invention
and implementation of high-resolution chemical descriptors that are able to
accurately reflect the chemical properties of molecules in computationally
readable form. The development of a truly general, computationally guided
workflow for the optimization of molecular function could have broad scientific
impact by providing the experimentalist with better tools to design new
compounds with desirable chemical properties from target/therapeutic selectivity
to optical and materials properties. Of paramount interest here is the discovery
and optimization of catalysts for industrially relevant chemical processes. The
planned research activities planned are ideal for the intellectual and practical
training of students at the interface of preparative organic chemistry and data
science. The unifying theme of this activity is the invention of new chemical
reactions that challenge current thinking. In the context of educational
outreach, funds are requested to support an undergraduate intern each of the
three years under the auspices of the St. Elmo Brady Summer Research Scholars
Program at UIUC. This program is a 10-week summer research experience to
increase the percentages of students from underserved groups in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Denmark and his UIUC team are will developing a
research program that combines computational analysis with experimentation, in
an iterative fashion, namely: (1) in silico generation of a large library of
hypothetical catalyst structures, based on a given scaffold, followed by
calculation of descriptors of each library member, (2) diversity analysis to
generate a representative “training set”, (3) synthesis of the training set, (4)
evaluation of the training set in a given reaction, (5) development and
validation of a mathematical model of that correlates empirical output with
molecular properties (6) application of that model to the virtual library of
catalysts, (7) synthesis and evaluation of best predicted catalysts, and (8) the
repetition of steps 4-7 until desired output is achieved. One of the most
powerful features of this approach is that the training set is applicable to a
wide variety of reactions that are susceptible to catalysis by that scaffold.
Accordingly, all three objectives encompass the established
chemoinformatic/experimental workflow. Within each objective, the training set
generated for each scaffold will be evaluated for the optimization of several
chemical reactions. Because the catalyst selection process is performed using
catalyst descriptors alone, this process is reaction- and mechanism-agnostic,
and chosen catalyst training sets can be used to evaluate many transformations.
Each objective involves the generation, synthesis, evaluation and optimization a
ligand or catalyst: Objective 1 – Brønsted acid catalysts for atropo-selective
cyclohalogenation; Objective 2 – Enantioselective oxidative nitroso-ene
reactions and reductive Heck reactions and Objective 3 – Enantioselective
epoxide and aziridine desymmetrization under organometallic
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.