* 2154964
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: End-to-end Verified Secure Sandboxed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Fraser Brown, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Almost all software systems we use, from cloud-based server applications to
client-side web browsers, are built by composing third-party code.
Unfortunately, such composition is insecure and the source of countless attacks
in the wild. Software sandboxing promises to confine third-party code and ensure
that bugs in third-party code cannot compromise the whole system. However,
existing sandboxing frameworks only reason about code running in the sandbox and
thus their security guarantees don't extend to most real programs, which
ultimately need to exit the sandbox to communicate with the outside world. This
project will develop foundations, techniques, and frameworks for building end-
to-end secure sandboxing systems that provide formal security guarantees even
across the sandbox boundary. If successful, this project will let developers
safely use and benefit from open source and third-party code, without needing to
absorb all the risk. This will, in turn, address many of the security problems
that arise when building large software systems and the ensuing financial and
social costs associated with cyberattacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will: (1) design novel type systems that will allow developers to
explicitly encode sandbox boundary invariants and automatically generate
boundary code that is secure by construction; (2) develop formal foundations for
sandbox context-switching to characterize the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability requirements of secure context-switching; and (3) develop a formal
semantics for the interface between the sandbox runtime and the key operating
system abstractions that are expose to sandboxed programs to communicate and
perform I/O. Together, these formal foundations will be used to synthesize a
verified-secure runtime system and portable system interface, which will allow
sandboxed modules to safely interact with each other, the application, and
operating system services. The project will yield new innovations in the design,
implementation, and verification of secure sandboxing frameworks, and lead to
new techniques and tools that will empower developers to build large-scale
systems that are secure by construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.