* 2154998
* CAS: Understanding Catalyst Roles in Aluminum Nanocrystal Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ian Tonks, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 219,001.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Naomi Halas of Rice University and Professor Ian Tonks of the
University of Minnesota are studying how titanium catalysts can control the
formation of aluminum nanocrystals with tunable structural and physical
properties. Coinage metal nanoparticles are well-known for their optical
properties that arise due to their collective electronic resonances, known as
surface plasmons. The plasmonic properties of these materials have been shown to
support a range of phenomena including surface enhanced spectroscopy and
photothermal heating characteristics. While most studies have focused on gold-
and silver-nanoparticles, there is growing interest in earth-abundant metals
such as aluminum. The synthesis of aluminum nanocrystals is unique because it
requires a titanium catalyst. Professors Halas and Tonks are working together
with their research teams to determine how these catalysts work and how they can
be controlled to form aluminum nanocrystals with predictable structures and
function. These collaborative activities will also combine the scientific safety
expertise of the two research groups to share best practices across universities
and catalysis fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the synthetic chemistry of
aluminum nanocrystals has only recently begun to be investigated, there is
significant interest in preparing these materials due to the earth-abundance and
outstanding plasmonic properties of aluminum. The synthesis of aluminum
nanocrystals is distinct from noble and coinage metals in that a catalyst is
required for nanocrystal nucleation and growth. Professor Halas and Professor
Tonks are working together to develop a comprehensive mechanistic picture of
aluminum nanocrystal synthesis. Using a combination of kinetic analysis, model
systems, and spectroscopy that blends the catalytic expertise of the two
research groups, proposed mechanisms for nucleation will be tested, the impact
of the catalyst structure on nanocrystal morphology will be investigated, and
the relationship between catalyst and nanocrystal structure will be studied.
These activities will provide interdisciplinary training for graduate students
from both research groups and support the exchange and enhancement of chemical
safety culture between both universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.