* 2154725
* Hyperbolic Dynamics in Physical Systems and Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Marian Gidea, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2025
* USD 164,215.00

This project concerns mathematical research in the fields of dynamical systems
and ergodic theory as well as applications to mathematical physics. The research
focuses on hyperbolic dynamical systems, where a small perturbation causes
exponential uncertainty in both negative and positive time. Such systems appear
in many real-world dynamics, for example in interacting particle systems. Much
is known for hyperbolic systems of particles with low degrees of freedom and
with hard ball interactions by models of mathematical billiards. An important
goal of this research is to investigate the case of high degrees of freedom,
which is more relevant for physical systems - ergodic theory provides an
abstract point of view on dynamical systems by studying time and space averages
instead of the local geometry. Another research goal is to extend the
understanding of infinite ergodic theory and partial chaos by hyperbolic
dynamics examples. Moreover, a summer school will be offered to advanced high
school or first year undergraduate students and several research projects will
involve both undergraduate and Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is comprised of three main parts. The first part concerns the study high
dimensional billiards and deterministic walks. Topics that are well understood
in two-dimensional billiards (complexity bounds, long flight times) will be
investigated in higher dimensions. The second part is devoted to hyperbolic
dynamics in physical systems. Based on earlier results by the investigator on
smaller building blocks, larger systems of mass and energy transport will be
studied. Both these parts make significant advances towards better mathematical
models of high dimensional real-life dynamical systems. The third part is to
study the role of hyperbolic dynamics in infinite ergodic theory: a field which
is more suitable for some large physical systems than traditional finite ergodic
theory. New examples of partial chaos will also be
constructed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.