* 2154746
* RAPID: Interactive effects of wildfire and severe drought on plants, soil microbes and C storage in a semiarid shrubland ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* David Lipson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2023
* USD 198,970.00

Like many semiarid ecosystems around the world, southern California is subject
to increasingly frequent and intense wildfires and droughts. These extreme
events can cause long-term changes in the ecosystem by allowing invasive weeds
to replace native shrubs and disrupting the physical structure of soil and the
communities of microscopic organisms (microbes) like bacteria and fungi that
live in the soil. These changes to plants, microbes and soils can affect how the
whole ecosystem works, including how effectively the ecosystem can absorb carbon
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere and store carbon for a long time as organic
matter. The ability of land to absorb and store carbon is very important because
it can slow down the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere, slowing down its
effects on the climate. Computer models predict how future changes in ecosystems
will influence atmospheric CO2. However, there is not enough information to make
confident predictions of how wildfire and drought will change semiarid
ecosystems like southern California shrublands. Studying the combined effects of
wildfire and drought requires experiments where otherwise similar parts of the
landscape are either burned or unburned, and the amount of rain falling on an
experimental plot can be controlled. For safety reasons, prescribed burns are
carried out under conditions that are very different from natural wildfires, and
might represent how real wildfires will affect ecosystems. On the other hand,
wildfires are unpredictable. This makes it hard to plan an experiment that
requires comparable burned and unburned landscape, access to the location,
preliminary information about the area before the fire, and the time to
establish rain shelters before the onset of seasonal rains. This NSF RAPID
project takes advantage of such an opportunity, in which a wildfire burned part
of a well-studied nature preserve, and a rainfall experiment could be
established before the main rainy season, given immediate
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of a rare and time-
sensitive opportunity to combine a natural wildfire with a controlled rainfall
experiment in a factorial design and incorporate the data into an improved model
for predicting the response of semiarid ecosystems to episodic and gradual
aspects of climate change. This RAPID award allows rainfall shelters to be
constructed in burned and unburned areas prior to the onset of seasonal rains.
The project tests the hypotheses that fire and drought will interact to promote
invasion by grasses and other herbaceous species, and cause 1) earlier phenology
of ecosystem C gain as well as a shorter growing season, and 2) an increase in
the vulnerability of the ecosystem to loss of C and N via changes in soil
structure and microbial communities. Thus, together fire and drought will
synergistically contribute to lower ecosystem C stocks. This project will (1)
establish a factorial drought × wild fire experiment, (2) measure ecosystem
responses (including plant and soil components) to the factorial treatments, and
(3) organize these data for incorporation into the Millennial Model and the
Community Earth System Model (CESM), enabling predictions for both the U.S.
Southwest, and other semiarid ecosystems around the world. C and N will be
measured in soil physical fractions (various size classes of aggregates,
particulate organic matter, microbial biomass, etc.), and the microbial
community structure will be characterized using shotgun metagenomic sequencing.
Plant measurements will include community composition, phenology, and
ecophysiological measurements at the canopy and leaf level, and remotely sensed
imagery at the landscape level. The ecosystem modeling activities will place
these data into an ecosystem-level framework. This one-year project will lay the
groundwork for longer-term studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.