* 2154835
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis: Maximal Functions, Singular Integrals, and Multilinear Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joris Roos, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2025
* USD 120,720.00

This project concerns research on several topics of current interest in harmonic
analysis. Theoretical results and methods from harmonic analysis are widely
applicable in a diverse range of areas in science, engineering and technology
such as digital signal processing, medical imaging, fluid mechanics, and data
compression. Foundational research in harmonic analysis endeavors to enrich the
mathematical toolbox that these disciplines require to move forward and to
provide unified perspectives that connect seemingly unrelated fields of science
and mathematics. Of considerable interest is the study of various integral
transforms such as the Hilbert transform, which can be understood as a frequency
filter acting on a given signal and is a prototypical example of a singular
integral operator. Other mathematical operators important to this project are
the Fourier transform, which decomposes a signal into its frequency components,
maximal functions and various Radon-type transforms. A basic example of a Radon-
type transform is the X-ray transform, which is used in computerized tomography
applications. In summary, the scientific goal of the project is to contribute to
an improved theoretical understanding of these mathematical objects and their
generalizations. The project will further entail organization of an online
seminar series, writing a book on undergraduate analysis, curriculum
improvement, and training of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus
of the work will be on a variety of topics in real and discrete harmonic
analysis. The first topic concerns spherical maximal operators associated with
restricted sets of dilations on Euclidean spaces and Heisenberg groups. This
work will be focused on establishing sharp Lebesgue space mapping properties
dependent on the fractal geometry of the associated dilation sets. A second
topic concerns discrete analogues of classical operators in harmonic analysis
related to maximally modulated singular integrals of Stein-Wainger type. This is
motivated by fundamental conjectures in ergodic theory and will involve a
combination of techniques from number theory and analysis. The third topic
concerns multilinear singular integrals with Radon-type behavior such as
triangular Hilbert transforms with curvature. Of particular interest are
associated multilinear smoothing inequalities. Such inequalities have direct
applications in arithmetic combinatorics. In addition, work will be conducted on
related questions such as boundedness of Carleson-type operators, analysis on
the Hamming cube and questions related to restriction and decoupling
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.