* 2154119
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: An Incident-Response Approach for Empowering Fact-Checkers
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 396,000.00

Fact-checking can be effective in countering the growing threat of online
misinformation because people across the political spectrum and demographics
tend to trust credibility judgments of fact-checkers. However, a pipeline of
manual and labor-intensive practices fragmented across disparate tools makes it
difficult to scale fact-checking efforts. As a result, fact-checkers are
inundated with information and lack effective dissemination mechanisms for
countering misinformation early and effectively. To address these challenges,
this project combines the complementary information processing strengths of
humans and computation to transform the efficiency, effectiveness, and scale of
fact-checking. The project can enable fact-checkers to spot misinformation
early, prioritize effort, and unify the various tools and techniques used for
fact-checking. The research outcomes can scale the work of human fact-checkers
and boost information literacy in society, which can significantly reduce the
number of people exposed to misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
draws upon the core components of security incident response (i.e., preparation,
detection, containment, and post-incident activity) to transform the ad-hoc,
time-consuming, and small-scale nature of current fact-checking practices with a
security-analyst perspective and a unified user experience (UX). The research
approach leverages the power of computation and personalization while retaining
the synergistic advantages of the human fact-checker in the loop. The
interdisciplinary sociotechnical approach involves empirical studies of fact-
checker practices, collection of data and development of computational
techniques to address their challenges and barriers, and design explorations of
novel UI/UX techniques to connect humans and computation. The research
incorporates a feedback loop to disseminate fact-checking outcomes, thus
boosting their visibility and impact on end users exposed to misinformation. The
researchers are developing early warning and detection techniques to reduce the
time between misinformation generation and fact-check dissemination and are
employing prioritization and personalization for more effective and efficient
use of fact-checking resources. The researchers are engaging with professional
fact-checkers to translate the research outcomes to the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.