* 2154633
* Tunable Masks for Triggered N-heterocyclic Carbene Organocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jessica Lamb, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 229,026.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Jessica Lamb of the University of
Minnesota is studying a new way to control chemical reactivity via catalysis.
Because of their wide utility, N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) are a particularly
important class of catalysts that has garnered a lot of attention in the past
few decades. NHCs are sensitive compounds that can degrade if exposed directly
to air or moisture; therefore, small molecules can be used to hide, or “mask”,
the NHC reactivity until heat or light is used to release the NHC catalyst at
the desired time. Despite extensive work in this area, little is known about how
changing the small molecule “mask” can tune the exact conditions under which the
NHC will release. The Lamb group will explore new mask structures that will be
used to systematically study how changes in the mask will alter the catalytic
behavior of the NHCs. The work has broad implications for designing new
releasable catalysts, catalyst recycling, and polymer synthesis in the future.
The project lies at the intersection of catalysis, polymer, and physical organic
chemistry and thus will provide excellent interdisciplinary training and
education to the supported graduate and undergraduate students. The Lamb group
is composed of a diverse group of scientists who are actively engaged in
outreach activities focused on recruiting and retaining underrepresented
scholars in the STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Latent/switchable catalysis uses external stimuli
to control when and where chemical reactions take place. N-Heterocyclic carbenes
(NHCs) are powerful, tunable organocatalysts, but their sensitivity to air and
moisture often necessitates the use of latent catalysis through the use of
“masked” NHCs. Current masked NHC systems are limited because the adduct bond
strength is controlled by the structure of the NHC, leading to a trade-off
between latency and activity of the catalyst. This project will investigate
fundamental structure-property relationships that dictate NHC adduct bond
stability and release by changing the mask, not the catalyst, structure.
Specifically, the Lamb group will investigate carbodiimides and triarylboranes
as modular mask scaffolds that can be activated using heat or light as the
external stimulus. This work will apply physical organic techniques to
understand and predict structure-property relationships first between mask
structure and adduct stability then further correlate that stability to catalyst
activity. The work will have societal impact in terms of education of
undergraduate and graduate students – including students from underrepresented
groups – publication of research that increases fundamental chemical knowledge,
and through supporting Dr. Lamb’s outreach activities focused on recruiting and
retaining underrepresented scholars in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.