* 2154831
* Development and Applications of Density Functional Methods for Large Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Weitao Yang of Duke University
will develop methods in density functional theory for accurate prediction of
energy, charge distributions and optical spectroscopy for large and complex
systems. The proposed developments should have broad application in a wide range
of computational modeling in biology, chemistry, physics, engineering and nano-
science and technology. Yang and his research group will disseminate the
knowledge and technology gained through these studies through publication of
original research work and the public distribution of software packages. The
proposed work will contribute to the development of human resources, for the
future generation of theoretical and computational chemistry researchers, and
will broaden participation in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
through Project SEED. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Weitao Yang and
his research group will develop corrections to common density functional
approximations to satisfy key constraints on fractional charges and fractional
spins. Commonly used approximate functionals have major systematic errors: the
delocalization error, as the deviation from the exact linearity condition for
fractional charges in a convex behavior, and the strong/static correlation
error, as the violation of the constancy condition for fractional spins.
Necessary conditions for overcoming these errors have been expressed in terms of
fractional charges, fractional spins and their combination. Outstanding
challenges in density functional theory remain to satisfy these conditions and
overcome the associated systematic errors. Yang and his group will focus on the
following three directions: (1) eliminating delocalization error with localized
orbital scaling correction, (2) exploring the fundamental principles of
obtaining excited state energetic information from ground state density
functional theory calculations, and (3) reducing static correction error with
localized orbital scaling correction and with multireference density functional
theory based on the linear response theory. The broad scientific impact of the
work will be enhanced as the Yang team plans to make the computational software
developed in this work freely available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.