* 2154387
* Frontiers in Modulation, Dynamics, and Pattern Formation for Hyperbolic, Kinetic, and Convection-Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Zumbrun, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 235,718.00

Roll waves are large-scale periodic pulses that form in a rapidly moving
inclined flow, such as on a canal or dam spillway. As potentially destructive
phenomena, it is important from a hydroengineering standpoint to understand the
conditions and the characteristics for their occurrence. This translates into
questions on the stability, or persistence under small disturbances, of such
waves. Until recently such questions were out of reach of existing mathematical
tools. The PI and collaborators have developed a substantial toolkit for this
study, which will be brought to bear on practical applications. A second,
equally challenging topic, concerns the study of many-particle systems via
Boltzmann's equation, again using recently developed technical tools. Finally,
the study of modern biomorphology models promises to give new insights into
initiation and emergent dynamics phases of vasculogenesis and related biological
processes. The project will also provide research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate a selection of
key open questions on relaxation, kinetic equations, and biomechanical pattern
formation. Of particularly interest are open questions on nonlinear time-
asymptotic stability of discontinuous inviscid periodic waves and multi-
dimensional hydraulic shocks, invariant manifolds for steady Boltzmannâ€™s
equation, and bifurcation and stability of Turing patterns in biomorphology
models possessing conservation laws. The objective of the project is the
development of new theoretical approaches to unresolved questions of practical
interest in shallow-water flow, gas dynamics, and morphogenesis. Methods include
a blend of finite- and infinite-dimensional dynamical systems tools with
specialized techniques coming from shocks and hyperbolic conservation laws: in
particular, Kreiss symmetrizer and pseudodifferential
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.