* 2154279
* RUI: Algebra and Geometry of Matroids and Polytopes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Federico Ardila, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The field of combinatorics has grown and deepened enormously in the last 50
years, in response to the mathematical needs of modern computing, physics, and
biology, and the computational needs of all areas of mathematics. This research
project in combinatorics is driven by two related philosophies: many
mathematical objects are best understood by studying the rich discrete
structures underlying them, and many of those discrete structures are best
understood by building geometric models for them. This grant constitutes the
academic backbone of the San Francisco State University-Colombia Combinatorics
Initiative, a vibrant research and training collaboration featuring research-
based courses, research projects, and summer schools. Since 2007 the initiative
has trained more than 250 pre-Ph.D. students; more than half of the US
participants are members of underrepresented groups in mathematics, and more
than 80 have gone on to Ph.D. programs. The initiative’s practices of excellence
and inclusion are shared broadly by the PI and many others, and they serve as a
model for other math and science programs nationwide and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies two research directions at the
intersection of combinatorics and geometry: 1. We construct and study several
geometric models of a matroid. Using tools from tropical geometry, Hodge theory,
and intersection theory, we derive novel combinatorial properties of matroids
that do not seem accessible purely combinatorially. 2. Measuring polytopes is
very difficult in general, but it can be done when the polytopes have sufficient
combinatorial or algebraic structure. We construct and measure families of
polytopes arising in various mathematical settings, and use those measurements
to compute algebraic and geometric quantities of interest. In both of these
research directions, relevant objects are often built from a configuration of
vectors – usually a root system. Polytopes and matroids offer a powerful toolkit
to study such configurations. The proposed projects will further our
understanding of fundamental questions in combinatorics, discrete geometry,
representation theory, and algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.