* 2154531
* Decoupling Theory and Exponential Sum Estimates
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Zane Li, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 02/28/2023
* USD 32,759.00

This project concerns the study of decoupling inequalities in harmonic analysis.
Such inequalities measure the oscillation and cancellation in the Fourier
transform of various curved geometric surfaces such as the paraboloid, cone, or
moment curve. These inequalities arise from studying partial differential
equations such as the Schr√∂dinger equation or wave equation and also from number
theory through exponential sums, which can be thought of as Fourier series that
encode certain arithmetic data. Over the years, tools in these two areas have
developed somewhat independently from each other. One aim of this project is to
bring more tools from number theory into Fourier analysis. The connections
between these two areas will be studied with hopes of proving decoupling
inequalities for a wider and more general class of surfaces and improving upon
quantitative versions of these inequalities. Activities will further include
organizing an online seminar, several undergraduate activities, and even
presentations motivated by the research that are accessible to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, Bourgain, Demeter, and Guth were able to
prove a decoupling theorem for the moment curve from which the Main Conjecture
in Vinogradov's Mean Value Theorem (VMVT), a longstanding open question from
1935, followed as a corollary. Their method was purely Fourier analytic. At
roughly at the same time, Wooley used his method of efficient congruencing to
give a purely number theoretic proof of the VMVT. Decoupling and efficient
congruencing developed separately and independently of each other. One objective
of this project is to further study connections between them. Previous attempts
at interpreting ideas from efficient congruencing from the perspective of
decoupling have yielded fresh insights and new points of views. The project
includes a continued study of progress on VMVT in hopes of uncovering new tools
in harmonic analysis to use them to prove decoupling estimates for a more
general class of surfaces. Other goals of this project are to obtain improved
quantitative estimates for VMVT via decoupling over local fields which has
applications, for example, to the Riemann zeta function. Additionally, work will
be done on proving decoupling estimates for different norms and surfaces and
more refined situations where more information is known than what is typically
given.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.