* 2154357
* Black Phosphorus Supported Single Site Catalysts for Hydrocarbon Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Alexandra Velian, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2025
* USD 449,984.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Alexandra Velian of the University of Washington is studying the development of
a new generation of catalysts for hydroformylation, a process of industrial
relevance that is responsible for the synthesis of oxo compounds used in a
variety of manufacturing processes. The formation, structure, and effectiveness
of transition metal hydroformylation catalysts supported by a material called
black phosphorus are being evaluated to determine if they can be tuned to be
more energy efficient and selective than established systems. Additionally, this
work is uncovering basic scientific knowledge regarding the design of
heterogeneous catalysts supported by the extended network of phosphorus atoms in
the most stable form of the element phosphorus. This work is serving as a
platform to train a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in
inorganic chemistry and catalysis. Dr. Velian and her team are creating “at
home” science experiments for middle school and high school students that focus
on topics related to inorganic materials and catalysis. Dr. Velian is also
actively promoting and exposing students to undergraduate research through a
“Chemistry Frontiers” course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most successful
hydroformylation catalysts used at industrial scales are homogeneous rhodium
catalysts and, to a lesser extent, cobalt catalysts, with hydride, carbonyl, and
phosphine ligands. The high price of rhodium and the challenges in recycling
homogeneous catalysts make the idea of blending the advantages of homogeneous
catalysis and heterogeneous catalysis through the use of single-atom catalysis
to be an appealing option for the development of new hydroformylation systems.
Dr. Velian and her research group are developing single-atom catalysts for
hydroformylation supported by black phosphorus. Activities supporting this over-
arching goal include: 1) probing the characteristics of black phosphorous as a
support for hydroformylation catalysts and determining how catalytic activity
differs from homogenous analogues; 2) evaluating how the unusual
stereoelectronic properties of black phosphorus influence the regioselectivity
and stereoselectivity of olefin hydroformylation, and 3) determining if black
phosphorus can provide a canvas for multi-component single atom catalysts that
can work synergistically (i.e. for olefin isomerization and hydroformylation).
Further foundational studies are focused on elucidating the nature of black
phosphorus as a ligand, and how its unique physicochemical properties can be
leveraged in developing next-generation single atom
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.