* 2154333
* CAS: Catalytic funneling and upgrading of biomass-derived phenols and polyols
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* MAHDI ABU-OMAR, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Abu-Omar of the University of California, Santa Barbara is studying
the development of catalysts for making renewable chemical feedstocks.
Currently, the vast majority of chemical building blocks used to make polymers
come from nonrenewable petroleum. Biomass is the most abundant renewable carbon
source and offers a potential alternative to petroleum for producing feedstock
chemicals. A current barrier to using biomass as a renewable source for
industrially relevant monomers is that the deconstruction of biomass leads to
mixtures of molecules, which require high energy input for separation and
further transformation. Professor Abu-Omar and his research team are designing
metal oxide catalysts and investigating their reaction chemistries on the
molecular level with biomass-derived chemicals to better understand and improve
the selectivity of these processes for selectively providing important monomers.
Synergistically, a freshman-level undergraduate chemistry course is being
developed called "Sustainability by the Numbers" and is focused on providing
students from a broad range of disciplines with the analytical skills to
evaluate the sustainability of choices made in daily life using a combination of
chemistry and a systems level approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New catalysts are
needed to improve reactivity and control selectivity in the hydrodeoxygenation
and dehydration of biomass-derived molecules. Professor Abu-Omar and his
research group are addressing this problem by combining transition metal sites
with controlled acidic sites on metal oxides to tailor product selectivity.
Specifically, the deposition of well-defined platinum nanoparticles on tungsten
oxide is being used to evaluate structure-function relationships that effect
selectivity in these systems and sulfated zirconia-catalyzed conversion of
sorbitol to isosorbide is being interrogated to better understand the mechanism
of the process and further optimize reactivity. Experimental approaches common
to both projects are the study of structure-function relationships through
kinetic studies of reaction mechanisms, isotope labeling experiments, and
establishing free energy relationships. These activities are also simultaneously
providing graduate student training in multidisciplinary fields of chemistry
spanning synthesis, catalysis, chemical kinetics, and green
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.