* 2154662
* Dearomative Alkaloid Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joel Smith, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program (SYN) in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE), Joel M. Smith of Florida State University (FSU) will study more
efficient ways to prepare complex biologically active natural products. The
structural complexity of the target molecules still poses a significant
challenge for molecular construction. This provides an opportunity for inventing
and implementing novel synthetic strategies and tactics to assemble these
important molecular scaffolds. To this end, we will use feedstock starting
materials as cheap and malleable building blocks to quickly build some of
nature’s more challenging molecular architectures. The chemistry developed under
this grant will not only benefit our scientific goals, but will provide a novel
technological platform for other practitioners to exploit when building
important nitrogenous molecules. Additionally, the impact of chemistry will be
emphasized both in the curriculum at FSU and in the broader Tallahassee area. A
new course will be made available to both graduates and undergraduates that will
incorporate talks from practitioners in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries. Furthermore, laboratory demonstrations and activities for primary
and secondary students will highlight the role chemistry has on everyday life
(e.g. indigo in denim clothing). These research and educational endeavors aim to
inspire both interest in the art of molecular construction and provide a
foundational platform for the promotion of science in young
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The piperidine ring is the most prevalent
heterocycle in marketed pharmaceutical ingredients and is a common substructure
in many biologically active alkaloids. Joel Smith and his FSU team are
interested in the controlled synthesis of a variety of complex fused piperidines
from pyridines, their aromatic congeners. The controlled functionalization of
pyridines is endowed with as many advantages for redox economy as much as it is
fraught with challenges with imbuing precise regiochemical and stereochemical
outcomes. The Smith Lab has developed a malleable dearomatization reactivity
platform with which to access various alkaloids including those from the
aspidosperma, tangutorine, strychnos, and manzamine families. Many of these
synthetic targets have never been accessed previously. Having a unified approach
to this level of molecular diversity is distinguishing feature of this approach.
Surmounting these synthetic challenges will provide for new avenues in chemical
reactivity, and advance the area of pyridinium-system-based strategic approaches
to architecturally novel and complex natural product scaffolds. If successful,
the proposed regio- and stereocontrolled entries into these alkaloid natural
products will permit the further study of their biological activity and allow
for the inclusion of a collection of interesting fragments in diversity-oriented
synthesis (DOS) endeavors in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.