* 2154206
* Developing Electroanalytical Methods for Enzymology Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Shelley Minteer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 220,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Biosensors program in the CBET Division,
Professor Shelley Minteer at the University of Utah is developing new
electroanalytical tools for investigating enzymes, biological catalysts that
play critical roles in the chemistry of life processes but that are also very
useful in biotechnology. Biochemists and molecular biologists have keen interest
in how enzyme structure controls function. In addition, enzymes have inspired
the design of selective catalysts for challenging transformations such as
reduction of carbon dioxide to methanol and nitrogen (N2) to ammonia. These
attributes have motivated extensive enzymology research over the last couple of
decades, prompting interest in developing better analytical tools for
investigating enzyme function. The Minteer group is both developing such tools
and extending their impact through educational opportunities offered to both
college and high school students. For example, Professor Minteer is providing
unique high school student research internships to inspire student interest in
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop new electroanalytical methods for
enzymology, it is critical to be able to immobilize enzymes on electrode
surfaces in a manner whereby they can undergo direct electron transfer with the
electrode without the need for exogenous redox mediators. The Minteer group is
utilizing two strategies to enable direct electron transfer: 1) incorporation of
non-natural amino acids as orienting tags for conjugation of proteins to
electrode surfaces, thereby ensuring that the active site is within tunneling
distance of the electrode surface; and 2) "wiring" enzymes to electrode surfaces
by incorporating metal-binding peptide sequences that promote in-situ formation
of metal nanoparticles within the protein. Bioelectrodes modified by either
approach will be used to study both single enzymes and enzyme cascades using new
galvanostatic titration methods, with an aim of improved understanding of how
the rate of electron injection into the active site of a protein (i.e.
nitrogenase) controls the selectivity of the products formed (ammonia versus
hydrogen). Additionally, rotating ring-disk electroanalytical chemistry methods
are being developed to study substrate channeling and to quantitate the leaking
of intermediates to the bulk solution from the supercomplex of an enzyme
cascade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.