* 2154055
* New Technology for Exploring State-Dependent Reactivity in Radiative Association Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Leah Dodson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2025
* USD 495,262.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Leah Dodson and her
students at the University of Maryland will study the reactivity of atomic metal
ions with a class of neutral molecules—cyanopolyynes. Contrary to conventional
chemical reactivity, the rates for these reactions are expected to increase as
temperature decreases; however, this inverted temperature dependence is
challenging to measure in the laboratory. The experimental challenges will be
overcome by devising new instrumentation to prepare reactants at low
temperatures and measure reactivity through direct detection by mass
spectrometry. The results will provide insight into a class of reactions
occurring in cold astrophysical objects and test theoretical predictions at a
fundamental level. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this
multidisciplinary research, and the team will collaborate closely with faculty
from nearby Prince George’s Community College to provide research opportunities
for students in their associate degree program, many of whom are members of
underrepresented groups. The broader impacts of this work will include a more
complete picture of ion/molecule radiative association reactions that invites
collaboration with theoretical chemists and contributes to the understanding of
planetary and stellar evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
the cryogenic cooling techniques necessary to study ion/molecule radiative
association reactions at low temperatures (down to 10 K). The radiative
association of metal monocations (such as magnesium) and cyanopolyynes is
predicted to have a rate that depends strongly on the rotational energy and
dipole moment of the neutral reactant. To directly measure the temperature-
dependent rates, the cold ions and molecules will be produced independently
prior to reaction. Gaseous atomic metal ions will be generated in a glow-
discharge ion source and trapped and cooled in a cryogenic multipole ion trap.
The cyanopolyyne neutral reactant will be cooled in a buffer-gas collision cell
before being injected into the ion trap. Kinetics data will be obtained from the
time-dependent ion signals. The dependence of the measured rate constant on
reactant rotational energy and dipole moment will provide independent data
necessary to test discrepancies between theoretical methods that currently
differ by up to four orders of magnitude. The project will provide opportunities
for training graduate, undergraduate, and associate degree students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics through the development of new
technologies and a focus on professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.