* 2154173
* Many Faces of Transfinite Hierarchies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Linda Westrick, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 48,774.00

Strictly speaking, an algorithm is a procedure which can be carried out on a
computer, but computability theory also includes more expansive notions of
algorithm. A generalized algorithm runs for transfinitely many steps, and even a
single step is too hard for an ordinary computer, but this kind of algorithmic
thinking gives a useful perspective on mathematics. This project will use the
algorithmic perspective of computability theory to analyze various hierarchies
from classical analysis, topological dynamics, and descriptive set theory.
Sometimes a hierarchy-derived tool, such as the measurability of a Borel set, is
less powerful than a full hierarchy analysis, but still strong enough for many
purposes. The research will explore this distinction, among other questions. The
project will also support the training of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theorems about Borel sets are sometimes proved by
recursing along the structure of the Borel sets, but more often they are proved
via measure or category. When the usual measure and category approaches do not
pan out, reverse mathematics provides one framework for formalizing the question
of whether any measure or category approach could succeed. This framework will
be applied to analyze various theorems about Borel sets, in particular theorems
from descriptive combinatorics. Second, the PI will address a number of
questions about computability-theoretic properties of hierarchies in classical
analysis, such as the Bourgain rank or the hierarchy of Denjoy integrable
functions. Finally, shifts of finite type (SFTs) are certain topological
dynamical systems which are simply described but exhibit complex behavior,
because their dynamics can simulate Turing computations. It is not well
understood which properties of the resulting dynamical system can be controlled
by these computations. The project aims to develop usable meta-theorems
describing classes of algorithms that can be implemented in
SFTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.