* 2154916
* Electronic Structure Models Using Coarse-Grained Representations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Nicholas Jackson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Nicholas Jackson of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
(CTMC) program in the Division of Chemistry for research to develop computer
simulation methods to support the discovery and development of complex molecular
and materials systems. Targeted research areas include the design of new
materials for use in low-cost batteries, solar cells, and organic
microelectronics. This theoretical and computational research will advance
science by improving our fundamental understanding of how to design systems that
better harvest, store, and control energy. While modeling of smaller systems has
significantly progressed in recent years, characterizing, understanding, and
controlling the complex behavior of large collections of atoms and molecules is
hindered by slow and computationally costly simulation methods. Nicholas Jackson
and his group will develop new computational methods that will dramatically
increase the speed, and decrease the cost, of performing computer simulations of
such technologically important systems. This work will train a new generation of
scientists fluent in both chemistry and advanced computer simulation methods,
including data science and machine learning. It will also set the foundation for
a new curriculum that will introduce machine learning and data science methods
to Chemistry domain scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Nicholas Jackson
and his group will establish a new paradigm for scalable quantum chemical
predictions utilizing electronic prediction models that act on coarse-grained
molecular representations. They will develop methods via systematic
parameterization against underlying quantum mechanical datasets, in analogy with
the existing array of coarse-grained modeling methods of molecular dynamics that
are parameterized against underlying all-atom force-fields. Specifically, the
new methods will deal with (1) electronic prediction models by renormalizing
all-atom quantum chemistry predictions to coarse-grained representations and (2)
dimensionality reduction techniques to identify electronically active collective
variables for mapping operator identification and model Hamiltonian design. The
new developments are expected to have a similar impact on condensed phase
electronic predictions as molecular software has had on single molecule
predictions in the molecular sciences, transforming the design of condensed
phase materials systems across chemical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.