* 2154432
* Unsupported Z-ligands as key Initiators of New Catalytic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michel Gagne, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
and Chemical Catalysis Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michel
R. Gagné of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is studying the
fundamental structure of ligands that coordinate to metal complexes. The goal of
changing the properties of metal-ligand bonds will enable new catalytic
reactions to be discovered. Catalysis is a cornerstone technology that underpins
all industrial chemical transformations and is therefore of enormous global
economic impact. The Gagné project could potentially uncover entirely new ways
for ligands to behave, which would consequently enable new catalytic reactions
and have impact across the field of organometallic chemistry in both academia
and industry. One focus area will be on activating C–O bonds; these are
ubiquitous in biorenewable sources of carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gagné
group will study the fundamental reactivity of unsupported ligands whose
reactivity, but also perhaps whose structure can be described as Z-like. The
Z-designation for a ligand is not common and is reserved for those ligands that
act as electrophiles. The addition of a nucleophile to such a ligand cleaves the
M-Z bond in a manner that reduces the metal and will enable additional
downstream chemistry. The specific focus will be on metal-silicon complexes that
act as sources of silylium, Si+ ions (and reduced metal), along with metal-
iodide complexes that act as sources of iodonium (I+) ions and reduced metal.
The role of metal oxidation state and supporting ligands on the structure and
reactivity of the putative Z ligand are of paramount
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.