* 2154162
* Hamiltonian Methods for Dispersive Fluids and Plasmas
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Benoit Pausader, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 401,152.00

Physical phenomena related to galaxies, gases, and plasmas can be modeled by the
partial differential equations describing fluid motions. This project addresses
several aspects of such equations, including the qualitative and quantitative
study of their asymptotic behavior and the stability of various equilibriums
(stable equilibriums correspond to objects that can be encountered/observed). An
underlying theme of the project is to develop robust methods to leverage the
stabilizing mechanisms of dispersion (the fact that, since all objects move
constantly in an infinite space, a high concentration at any given point at any
given time becomes increasingly unlikely as time passes). Another central theme
of the project is to study the effect of rotation on fluids. While it has been
already recognized that this induces a stabilizing dispersive effect, the extent
of this effect, its precise mathematical expression, and its consequences,
remain largely unknown. This project will also contribute to preparing the next
generation of scientists by training graduate students, developing courses, as
well as collaborative opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses various stability and asymptotic questions on kinetic and fluid
equations, using the dispersive mechanism to obtain long-time control of the
solutions. For kinetic equations, a goal is to understand the long-time behavior
of solutions with a point charge part, using (and developing) the method of
asymptotic action-angle. A first example is the stability of a Dirac mass, in
the repulsive or (tentatively) the attractive case. A second question is to
investigate the case of large data and the extension to the relativistic case.
Another problem addressed concerns homogeneous equilibrium with an aim to better
understand Landau damping (in the whole space). The PI will consider a model of
fat-tail equilibria (the Poisson equilibrium) and will prove stability, by
decomposing the electric field into an electrostatic contribution with faster
decay and an oscillatory component that dissipates slowly. Using normal form
techniques, the PI will prove that the long-time contribution of the slow but
oscillatory component remains under control, and will close with a bootstrap
argument based on Lebesgue norm of the density alone. Other generalizations will
also be pursued. Finally, this project also considers situations where the
rotation induces a stabilizing decaying mechanism, starting with global
stability of the vector field of rigid motion for the incompressible 3d Euler.
This in turn reduces to a problem of small data global existence for a
quasilinear dispersive problem, which will be tackled using methods originating
from the space-time resonance method and extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.