* 2154210
* Spin, Exciton and Chemical Dynamics in Crystalline Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 03/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of
the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Miguel A. Garcia-Garibay of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UCLA will investigate the use of light and
crystals to explore a new platform for Quantum Information Science (QIS).
Crystals make it possible to design chemical processes and reactions that cannot
occur in liquids or in gases. They open the door for a deeper understanding of
reaction mechanisms and for the exploration and design of solvent-free synthesis
and applications in materials science. While molecules in crystals do not have
the freedom of motion that is expected for chemical reactions to take place,
reactions in crystals can be engineered in a reliable manner by taking advantage
of a strategy used by nature based on biological structures that can capture and
guide the energy contained in sunlight. Examples of such sunlight-induced, or
“photobiological” processes include photosynthesis, DNA repair, and the
biological compasses used by birds to guide their navigation across the planet.
Similar to those systems, reactions in crystals rely on the capture of light to
generate excited states that go on to form highly reactive intermediates, whose
fate is controlled by the crystal’s rigidity, homogeneity, and order. Pulsed
lasers aimed at selected crystalline ketones will be used to generate relatively
long-lived magnetic species known as “triplet radical pairs”. These consist of
two extremely close unpaired electrons formed by the cleavage of a single
chemical bond, which causes their magnetic spins to be strongly entangled and be
relatively impervious to external magnetic perturbations. These characteristics
endow them with great potential for applications in Quantum Information Science
(QIS). The second part of this project explores a relatively exotic type of
chemical reaction where a single light particle, or “photon”, leads to many
chemical events. These so-called quantum chain reactions are enabled by the
strong energetic interactions between neighboring molecules, which lead to the
transformation of photons into “excitons” and are helped by reactants that
contain and unleash large amounts of energy. The third objective of this project
is to provide a multi-disciplinary training ground for students who will
contribute to the intellectual and human infrastructure needed to support our
country’s academic and industrial enterprises. The PI will lead the annual UCLA
Physical Sciences Fair, “Exploring your Universe,” which attracts ca.
7,000-10,000 visitors to campus, and group members will have a booth to share
with the public the exciting things that can be done with crystals and
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Garcia-Garibay group has established the
structural and energetic requirements needed to engineer a number of
photochemical reactions in the crystalline solid state. For the intellectual
merit of this project, they will take advantage of nanocrystals (ca. 200 nm)
suspended in water in order to detect the absorption spectra and decay kinetics
of triplet excited states and triplet radical pairs to explore two photochemical
processes that can only occur in crystalline solids: (1) the chemical and spin
dynamics of highly entangled triplet radical pairs as a potential platform for
quantum information science (QIS), and (2) the potential of quantum chain
reactions with triplet chain carriers as a powerful signal amplification
mechanism. With triplet excitons providing efficient energy delocalization
mechanisms, these reactions are expected to reach chain lengths with as many as
106-109 reactions per photon absorbed, depending on the lifetime of the triplet
excited states. For the first part, they take advantage of a series of
1,1-diphenyl-2-propanones and 1,1,1-triphenyl-2-propanones with a variety of
substituents at C3 to study the kinetics of intersystem crossing of triplet
radical pairs. While ketones with radical stabilizing substituents at C3 are
known to lose CO to form triplet alkyl-alkyl radical pairs that go on to give
products from a radical-radical combination reactions, ketones with high C2-C3
bond dissociation energies can only undergo an alpha-cleavage of the C1-C2 bond
to form triplet acyl-alky radical pairs. These intermediates go back to the
starting material after intersystem crossing to the corresponding singlet acyl-
alkyl radical pairs. Much of what it is known about intersystem crossing in
radical pairs comes from experiments where long inter-radical distances lead to
weak exchange interactions with dominant hyperfine coupling (hfc) intersystem
crossing mechanisms. By contrast, radical pairs in crystalline solids offer the
opportunity to explore a new frontier: one where rigid radicals are highly
entangled as a result of a very large singlet-triplet gap. Long triplet
lifetimes are observed despite having the two electrons within van der Waals
distance as the result of (a) inefficient hfc, (b) unfavorable geometries for
spin-orbit coupling (SOC), and (c) spin-lattice relaxation slowed down by
crystal rigidity. Long-lived entanglements makes these crystal-trapped radical
pairs excellent qubit pair candidates for applications in quantum information
science. For the exploration of a triplet exciton-enabled quantum chain
reaction, this research will study solid state reactivity of crystalline
sensitized Dewar benzenes. These are known to undergo an efficient triplet state
adiabatic reaction where the triplet state Hückel benzene photoproduct is a
competent energy donor that can carry out a quantum chain. Altogether, the work
covered by this project is expected to improve basic understanding of reaction
mechanisms and chemical reactivity in rigid materials and provide students the
opportunity to receive a highly interdisciplinary
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.