* 2154873
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Machine Learning for Cybersecurity: Robustness Against Concept Drift
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* David Wagner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

A promising direction for cybersecurity is to use machine learning to detect
threats and attacks. For instance, machine learning is currently used to detect
computer viruses, malware, malicious mobile applications, spam email, and
network intrusions. However, one fundamental challenge for using machine
learning in this way is the problem of concept drift. Concept drift refers to
the problem that threats change over time, and normal benign behavior changes
over time, and as a result, machine learning algorithms rapidly degrade and
become less effective as time passes. Empirically, concept drift is one of the
main challenges that make it hard to apply machine learning more broadly in
cybersecurity. This project will develop new methods tailored to the
cybersecurity domain for addressing concept drift, and it will advance the state
of knowledge on robustness against concept drift in cybersecurity. The project
has the potential to improve cybersecurity protections for everyday people,
including improving antivirus software, phishing detectors, fraud/scam
detection, and more, thereby making the Internet safer for
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's approach is based on an understanding
of the fundamental drivers of concept drift, including both gradual drift and
emergence of entirely new types of threats. Threats can often be categorized
into multiple categories. For instance, malware falls into many different
"malware families". Each category may experience concept drift at a different
rate. This provides an opportunity for new methods that take advantage of such
differences across categories. To address the problem of categories that are
experiencing rapid concept drift, the team plans to develop techniques to detect
which categories are suffering from concept drift to the greatest degree and
then select samples from those categories for human analysts to evaluate. For
new types of threats, the team plans to develop techniques to identify samples
from new categories so they can be submitted for human analysis. For categories
that are experiencing gradual but sustained concept drift, the team plans to
explore use of semi-supervised learning and pseudo labels to help the machine
learning algorithm adapt to these changes in the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.