* 2154617
* Near-field Vibrational Imaging of Doping and Thermal Effects in Polymer Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Terefe Habteyes, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Terefe Habteyes of the University of New Mexico
will investigate chemical phase separation, charge localization, and localized
thermal effects in polymer thin films to map chemical heterogeneity with
nanometer spatial resolution and to develop a better understanding of localized
electron transfer processes. Scattering-type scanning near-field optical
microscopy (s-SNOM) and localized Fourier transform infrared (nano-FTIR)
spectroscopy allow for the direct visualization of chemical species in organic
films with ~10 nm spatial resolution. Improving the understanding of how
carriers are transported across an interface has the potential to advance
fabrication methods of various electronic films, photovoltaics, and displays.
Research performed by the Habteyes research team will be enhanced through
collaborations with federal government laboratories. Dr. Habteyes and his group
will also engage high school teachers and students through summer outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project relies on the use of a sharp
probe that serves as a nanoantenna for nano-FTIR spectroscopy and s-SNOM
chemical imaging measurements. Nano-FTIR spectroscopy identifies chemical
species in organic material blends, while s-SNOM imaging maps the chemical
species in two-dimensions. The research team will evaluate molecular doping and
charge localization in organic semiconductors (OSCs), hot electron transfer to
OSC and molecular dopants, and temperature-dependent intermolecular interaction
in polymer blends. The direct observation of charge states and chemical
complexes with nanoscale spatial resolution will inform how material fabrication
is influenced as a function of solution processing and organic thin film post-
processing steps. The fundamental understanding obtained from this research has
the potential to advance the application of polymeric materials for different
technologies such as photovoltaics, field effect transistors, photodetectors,
thermoelectric and other emerging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.