* 2154116
* Synthetic Control of Lanthanide Physical Properties Using Functionalized Metallacrowns
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Vincent Pecoraro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2025
* USD 560,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Vincent L. Pecoraro of the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor will study the synthesis of new metal based
molecules that may serve a variety of practical applications such as luminescent
imaging, temperature measurements across a broad, technologically important
range (150-400 K). As an integral part of these studies, the Pecoraro team will
work to develop a fundamental understanding of the electronic structure of
lanthanide ions in and out of applied magnetic fields. The studies will be
utilized in applications ranging from understanding the production of qubits
from lanthanide based molecules used in quantum computers, to measuring precise
temperatures for electronic materials or cells and tissues. Research
collaborations with scientists at the Centre Biophysique Moleculaire (CBM) in
Orleans and University of Paris-Saclay will broaden the experience of trainees
from both countries. The results of these studies will be disseminated worldwide
and could provide basic science foundations directly relevant to applications
varying from the development of white light emitting diodes, to microelectronics
and to Josephson junctions for cell biology and medicine. The targeted
metallacrowns will also be used in the public educational outreach
presentations/activities planned both in the United States and Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal is the development of
MCs in two main areas: innovative luminescent agents and metallacrown-cored
dendrimers. The primary objective of this research proposal is to further the
understanding of lanthanide electronic structure and to exploit the superb
luminescence properties of the lanthanides using functionalized metallacrowns.
Scientific collaborations are included that will help expand the impact of this
work to areas such as biological imaging or material science. As MCs can
incorporate different modular components, the same/similar scaffolds will be
used to achieve the varied objectives of these lanthanides metallacrown systems.
These systems are well suited to make innovative luminescent imaging agents,
novel nanothermometers, and stable metallodendrimers. Emphasis will be placed on
shifting the excitation energies for Ga- and Ln-based metallacrown emitters to
the red, to provide a more biologically compatible chromophore for near infrared
emission studies. To achieve this and other goals, molecules will be synthesized
and purified in order to clarify the fundamental electronic structure of these
lanthanide complexes, using, for example, Stark
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.