* 2154126
* Exploring Spectral Signatures of Molecular Vibrations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Anne McCoy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Anne B. McCoy of the University of Washington is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational tools that
will be used to explore the manifestations of nuclear quantum effects in
hydrogen-bonded systems. Hydrogen-bonding is ubiquitous, and there are often
surprisingly large differences between properties of normal water (H2O) and
heavy water (D2O). Many of these differences are attributed to the quantum
mechanical nature of molecular vibrations. While knowing that these effects
exist is easy to articulate, quantifying them is much more difficult. Anne McCoy
and her research group develop tools for exploring quantum mechanical effects in
molecular vibrations, and through collaborations with experimental groups has
worked to enhance our understanding of these effects. The methods that she and
her research group are developing can be applied to systems of up to 20 atoms
that are small enough for detailed calculations and comparisons to spectroscopic
experiments, but large enough to exhibit the types of nuclear quantum effects
that affect properties of liquid water or ice. In parallel with this work, Anne
McCoy and her group are developing tools that can be used by the community to
implement the approaches she has. She is pursuing a variety of activities that
focus on development of the next generation of physical chemists including
mentoring students and promoting early career scientists through her roles as
chair of the International Advisory Committee for the International Symposium on
Molecular Spectroscopy and an officer of the American Physical Society’s
Division of Chemical Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported work focuses on
the development of vibrational perturbation theory and diffusion Monte Carlo
approaches and using these approaches to explore the manifestations of nuclear
quantum effects in hydrogen-bonded systems. The work on vibrational perturbation
theory focuses on the development of approaches for identifying resonances and
exploring the role of third and higher order corrections to the results obtained
at second order (VPT2). A key feature of this work is the exploration of the
impact of coordinates in which the Hamiltonian is expanded on the insights
obtained from vibrational perturbation theory. The work on Diffusion Monte Carlo
(DMC) focuses on the development of efficient procedures for evaluating the
potential energies used in DMC using neural-network potentials, which are based
on the geometries evaluated from small DMC simulations. These potential surfaces
are then in larger DMC studies. A central application of these studies is an
exploration of how nuclear quantum effects are manifested in water through
studies of water clusters. This work focuses on probing relationships between
spectra, large amplitude motions and how and why the structure of water and
protonated water systems change with deuteration. A theme that underlies these
studies is the development of versatile approaches that can be used to explore a
broad range of systems, and to develop general understandings that provide
broader insights in quantum effects in hydrogen bonding that extend beyond the
specific systems that are being studied. The codes developed in this work are
part of the PyVibDMC and PyVibPTn codes that Anne McCoy and her research group
have been developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.