* 2154433
* Towards Predictive Coarse-grained Models
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* William Noid, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 500,746.00

William Noid of the Pennsylvania State University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theory and computational methods for improving the
predictive power of coarse-grained models in the chemical and materials
sciences. Atomically detailed simulations provide exquisite insight into
molecular structure, dynamics, and interactions. However, due to their
computational cost, atomically detailed simulations can only effectively
investigate very small length- and time-scales. In contrast, by eliminating
unnecessary atomic details, coarse-grained (CG) model promise the necessary
efficiency for simulating many processes of fundamental and technological
significance that are far beyond the scope of atomically detailed models, e.g.,
the mechanisms by which viruses invade host cells or the phase behavior of
industrially important polymers. Unfortunately, existing CG models provide a
relatively poor description of thermodynamic properties. Moreover, CG models
often demonstrate poor transferability, i.e., they require reparameterization
for each system and environment of interest. These fundamental limitations
severely curtail the predictive powers of current CG models. William Noid and
his research group will derive, implement, and assess both theory and
computational methods for ensuring that CG models are not only efficient, but
also provide predictive accuracy and transferability for modeling soft
materials, such as liquids and biomolecules. In addition, William Noid will
continue developing an intergenerational science club that engages students of
all ages in scientific discourse and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; William
Noid and his research group will develop rigorous theory and robust
computational methods for addressing fundamental limitations of bottom-up CG
models. Noid and his research group will analyze the many-body potential of mean
force (PMF) to reveal fundamental insight and derive practical approaches for
improving both the transferability and the thermodynamic properties of bottom-up
models. The resulting insight will inform a dual approach for addressing the
density-dependence of CG pair potentials, as well as the temperature-and
composition-dependence of many-body local density potentials. Noid and his
research group will also investigate the dual approach for describing the
thermodynamic driving forces for self-assembly with CG models. Noid and his
research group will investigate the influence of the CG mapping upon the exact
PMF and upon the properties of approximate CG models. Noid and his group will
develop and distribute software for implementing these methods as part of the
Bottom-up Open-source Coarse-graining Software (BOCS) package. Noid will provide
mentorship and rigorous training for graduate students. Moreover, Noid and his
group will develop an intergenerational science club that integrates local
senior citizens, emeritus faculty, and undergraduate students in order to build
bridges between the academic and civic communities, educate the public about
contemporary scientific topics, share the joy of scientific discovery, and
promote a healthy lifestyle of life-long learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.