* 2154346
* Manifestation of Magnetic Field Effects in Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Xiaosong Li of the University of Washington is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop computational methods for gaining in-depth knowledge about
chemical processes driven by magnetic fields. These phenomena underlie the
advancement of new technologies that are crucial to sustainable energy,
catalysis, quantum computing, and other applications that can immediately impact
society. Xiaosong Li will develop new computational methods to model chemical
processes driven by magnetic fields in order to interpret current experimental
data, as well as inform the rational design of future experiments and
technological improvements. This research program will provide a mechanism for
advanced interdisciplinary education and training in the areas of inorganic,
theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry, to prepare participating
undergraduate and graduate students for future careers in science, engineering,
and education. Students will also have unique opportunities to gain experience
in software development for high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this project is to develop new theoretical and computational
capacities to simulate magneto quantum dynamics, driven by not only electric
field, but also magnetic field. This project includes new method developments to
enable the full description of the interaction between a molecule (electrons and
nuclei) and electromagnetic fields, to model characteristics of molecular
dynamics perturbed by a finite magnetic field and probed by optical pulses. New
computational algorithmic advances will be distributed through the open-source
relativistic spectroscopy and quantum dynamics software, Chronus Quantum. By
providing a time-resolved interpretation for the chemical dynamics encoded in
magneto-optical spectra, the proposed development will aid in the design of new
catalyst and quantum materials that exhibit desirable magnetic and optical
properties, with the potential for revolutionary and transformative impact in
the broader scientific community and beyond. The proposed development represents
the next frontier for innovations in computational spectroscopy which will have
far-reaching impact in the education and training of researchers in
multidisciplinary scientific communities; including chemistry, physics, nano-
and surface-science, and other fields that rely on these cutting-edge
spectroscopic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.