* 2154551
* Applications of Oxidatively Generated Carbocations in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 506,906.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Paul Floreancig of the University of Pittsburgh is studying
new methods to prepare value-added materials from simple precursors via
oxidative transformations. The approaches being developed are based on carbon-
hydrogen bond cleavage reactions and include the use of electricity as an energy
source in combination with an electrocatalyst to generate synthetically useful
positively charged intermediates called carbocations. The pathways by which
these intermediates emerge are being studied in detail and their inherent
reactivity will be exploited to produce structurally complex molecules that are
of potential utility as pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other
materials of value to science, engineering, and commerce. The broader impacts of
the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to society as Professor
Floreancig and his coworkers engage in a variety of educational and outreach
activities in the greater Pittsburgh area. In a signature effort designed to
support future leaders in the chemical sciences, Professor Floreancig will lead
workshops to prepare senior graduate students and post-doctoral associates at
the University of Pittsburgh for possible transitions to independent careers as
junior academics. Support for this project is also aiding Professor Floreancig's
ongoing efforts to increase the diversity of the graduate student body at the
University of Pittsburgh by the establishment of protocols designed to remove
implicit biases during the graduate admissions process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funded research is focused on fundamental mechanistic studies of oxidative
carbon–hydrogen bond cleavage processes from allylic ethers and application of
the insights gained to the design of new chemical reactions. A primary goal of
the study is to understand the impact of remote functional groups on the
kinetics of hydride-abstraction reactions with quinone (e.g., DDQ) and
oxoammonium ion (e.g., Bobbitt's salt) oxidants. Understanding these effects
will aid in the design of oxidative transformations that proceed at a sufficient
rate to be applicable to an environmentally benign electrocatalytic protocol
recently reported by the Floreancig group. Remote conformational effects
impacting the oxidatively-generated oxocarbenium ions through electrostatic
interactions will be investigated with the objective of enhancing stereocontrol
in cationic cycloaddition reactions. Acyliminium ion formation will also be
studied with the expectation of devising new oxidative processes for the
synthesis of nitrogen-containing compounds. This objective is founded on
understanding the conformational preferences of highly substituted acyliminium
ions and exploiting the results for stereocontrolled heterocycle formation
through rearrangement processes. Conformational preferences will also be used to
instruct on the design of optimal substrates for stereoselective quaternary
carbon formation with applications to complex alkaloid synthesis. The findings
of the research are anticipated to provide the synthetic chemistry community
with new transformations, valuable mechanistic insights, and blueprints for
designing additional oxidative functionalization reactions going
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.