* 2154500
* CAS: Interrogating the Intersection of Structure, Bonding, and Reactivity of Hypervalent Halogens
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Theresa McCormick, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2025
* USD 442,816.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors David Stuart and Theresa
McCormick of Portland State University are studying the intersection of chemical
structure, bonding models and chemical reactivity of hypervalent organohalogens.
Synthetic molecules enhance daily life through new medicine, agricultural
advances, and cutting-edge technologies. Organohalogens are a class of compound
that may facilitate the synthesis of these molecules by acting as catalysts or
reagents that introduce key structural components. In some cases, it is probable
that organohalogens may replace expensive and rare metals that are commonly used
in synthesis. To fully realize the potential of hypervalent organohalogens in
synthesis, a deeper understanding of fundamental bonding events is needed. This
will be achieved through a combined experimental and theoretical approach
applied in this work. Training of the next generation of scientists will occur
with this award by including graduate and undergraduate students in research.
Portland State University is recognized as a “First-gen Forward” Institution,
which enables inclusion of first-generation college students in research
experiences. Finally, during this award period the principal investigators will
increase access to laboratory research for blind high school students through a
day camp at PSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-covalent bonding interactions are a
cornerstone of the reactivity of hypervalent organohalogens, yet the underlying
atomic-level properties that dictate their strength are not well understood.
With this award, the principal investigators tackle non-covalent interactions of
hypervalent halogens from multiple perspectives. Both theoretical and empirical
approaches are employed to gain new insight into halogen bonding and the
bifunctional character of diaryliodonium salts. They will use a combination of
physical organic chemistry techniques (conductance, NMR titration, kinetics) and
theory (DFT and NBO) to correlate bonding models with structure and
thermodynamic/kinetic reactivity. They will specifically focus on three key
areas: 1) the orbital interaction of halogen atoms in halogen-bond donors, 2)
bifunctional character of diarylhalonium salts when participating in non-
covalent interactions, and 3) reactions of diarylhaloniums with pronucleophiles
based on bifunctional activation. These activities, when completed, would
contribute to advances in new synthetic methods and catalysis for organic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.