* 2154359
* CAS: Elucidating Trends in Earth-Abundant Metal Catalyzed Dehydrocoupling
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ryan Trovitch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Ryan J. Trovitch of Arizona State University is studying the development of
sustainable catalysts that feature abundant, inexpensive metals that do not have
known toxicity to the environment. These catalysts will be deployed to
synthesize value-added chemicals and polymers in a more efficient manner. This
project aims to establish trends that relate to optimal catalyst structure. This
information will be used to guide the development of catalysts based on abundant
metals for a variety of chemical transformations. The initial reactions of
interest will target molecular precursors critical to semiconductor
manufacturing. This approach will then be expanded to explore the preparation of
anti-corrosion and anti-graffiti coatings for the construction and
transportation sectors, compounds for chemical vapor deposition, quantum dot
precursors, and reagents for organic synthesis. The broader impacts of this
project include the planned development of research-driven undergraduate
laboratory experiment(s) and the creation of a manual for sustainable general
and inorganic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Ryan J. Trovitch of Arizona
State University is studying the development of highly-active manganese, iron,
cobalt, and nickel catalysts for the dehydrocoupling of main group hydrides.
Physical inorganic techniques will be relied on to elucidate trends in electron
count, metal oxidation state, geometry, chelate coordination, and ligand redox
activity that correlate with catalyst efficiency and lifetime. This effort will
begin with the preparation of arene diimine compounds that are structurally
related, yet electronically distinct from popular pyridine diimine compounds. As
isostructural series and isoelectronic pairs are characterized, their ability to
mediate the dehydrocoupling of amines and silanes will be evaluated. The most
effective catalysts will be then used to prepare industrially-relevant
aminosilane monomers and polymers. Catalysts developed during this project will
also be screened for main group element dehydrocoupling reactions that have not
been previously achieved. Applications will include the preparation of chemical
vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition precursors that feature N-Ge, N-Al,
and Ga-P bonds, quantum dot synthons that feature P-Si and P-Ge bonds, and
reductive functionalization reagents that feature B-Si and Al-Si bonds. Overall,
this project has the potential to expand the known scope of main-group element
dehydrocoupling chemistry and elucidate halogen-free synthetic pathways that can
be used to prepare a versatile set of products. The broader impacts of this
project include the potential for positive societal outcomes in the fabrication
of quantum dots and the distribution of effective catalysts to members of the
synthetic community. A sustainable general and inorganic chemistry laboratory
guide for post-secondary educators will be developed and undergraduate students
will evaluate the sustainability of competing synthetic transformations through
the newly developed coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.