* 2154271
* Cryogenic Ion Spectroscopy Studies of Ion-Receptor Interactions in Water Soluble Molecular Recognition Complexes and Their Hydrated Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* J. Mathias Weber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor J. Mathias Weber and his team will
study how charged atoms and molecules (ions) bind to molecules designed to
capture them (receptors) in a process called molecular recognition, and how the
presence of water molecules changes this recognition process. Ion receptors can
be used to measure and control the concentration of ions in numerous chemical
contexts, ranging from a group of antibiotics to sensors and materials science.
Ion recognition also has impact on important issues regarding food and water
sources, such as the safety of public water supplies, or pollution with some
types of molecular ions from industrial and agricultural sources. Professor
Weber plans to develop outreach and educational activities related to his
scientific studies, including developing simulations for use in teaching
advanced undergraduate chemistry topics, which would provide a valuable
resource, particularly for students who cannot participate in hands-on
activities on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the role of
the solvent in receptor-ion interactions, which is one of the most difficult
problems for understanding molecular recognition in solutions. The complexity of
solutions presents many obstacles to investigating the interplay of ion,
receptor, and solvent, from the presence of multiple species in the same sample
with similar responses to experimental probes, to the bulk solvent masking key
spectroscopic signatures, to the fluctuating number of solvent molecules
interacting with the host-guest pair. The charged nature of many ion-receptor
complexes allows selective preparation and mass spectrometric isolation of
relevant species, including their hydrated clusters, and circumvents the
obstacles mentioned above. The Weber group employs cryogenic ion spectroscopy in
concert with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry to measure the infrared
spectra of ionic complexes consisting of anions and synthetic receptors binding
such ions. These spectra and the accompanying quantum chemical calculations will
yield information on the structures and intermolecular forces governing
molecular recognition of negative ions. Additionally, the Weber group will
characterize the interaction of these complexes with water molecules. The
knowledge gained in this work will help in developing predictive methods for the
design of synthetic ion receptors. The broader impacts from the expected outcome
of this work has the potential to change the way scientists think about ion
molecular recognition, which is a frontier in chemical science. The development
of applications that address the impact of ions in environmental as well as
technical scenarios, including the nexus of food and water, can have significant
societal impact. Professor Weber will also continue outreach and educational
work, including development of web-based simulations for teaching quantum
mechanics, chemical kinetics, and spectroscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.