* 2154578
* Variational Problems and Dynamics in Spaces of Large Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wilfrid Gangbo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 315,519.00

This project investigates a broad array of challenging problems. One of them is
on the theory of optimal transport, which dates back to Gaspard Monge in 1781.
The theory studies, for instance, the optimal way to move a pile of sand to an
excavation, where optimality is measured against a cost function which may be
proportional to the distance traveled. Many works led to connections with
partial differential equations, fluid mechanics, geometry, probability theory
and functional analysis. Currently, optimal transport enjoys applications in
signal and image representation, inverse problems, cancer detection, shape and
image registration, and machine learning, to name a few. The project relies on
the theory of optimal transport to make advances in games which consist of a
large number of players, and keeps a focus on equations such as the so-called
master equation pioneered by Lasry and Lions. It also features variational
problems and dynamics of systems of finitely many and infinitely many particles
and also deals with non-commutative optimal transport theory. The project offers
training opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers, as well as learning seminars. The students are
involved in a research program that aims to encourage interactions between
mathematicians, computer scientists, and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project studies Hamilton-Jacobi equations with non-local terms, known to be
challenging, especially when the non-locality appears in the gradient of the
unknown function. In this context, the so-called Lasry-Lions monotonicity
condition allowed to obtain the first well-posedness result on the master
equation. In a previous research project, an alternative condition was proposed,
which made it possible for the first time to handle non-separable Hamiltonians.
This prior work relied heavily on the presence of the so-called individual
noise. This project explores new ideas for handling non-separable Hamiltonians
with only common noise in the master equations. It also initiates studies on
inverse optimal transport and inverse Mean Field Games problems, with the goal
of achieving desired outcomes by designing appropriate Lagrangians. Working on
bounded domains makes it more difficult to predict the Lagrangians needed to
produce desirable Nash equilibria in Mean Field Games. The project identifies
minimal information on the boundary needed to deal with non-smooth augmented
Lagrangians which appear in the resolution of these inverse problems. The
project also considers inverse optimal transport problems in unbounded sets.
Another part of this project is on partial differential equations on graphs and
relies on a metric manifold of discrete densities. The project develops a well-
posedness theory as well as a stability property for differential equations on
graphs. While the role of optimal transport is well established in classical
mechanics, establishing these ideas in the quantum setting, opens doors to
several new avenues of research. For instance, one faces the challenge of
identifying the non-commutative common noise operator, and studying its
properties. To achieve these goals, there is a need to continue unearthing new
properties of the Biane-Voiculescu's transport distance, and study non-
commutative dynamical systems. Non-commutative optimal transport theory offers
the appropriate setting for studying dynamics of random matrices, whose sizes
will later tend to infinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.