* 2154114
* Quantum Master Equations for Simulating Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Eitan Geva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Eitan Geva of the University of Michigan is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop a new general purpose cost-effective and
efficient methodology that will enable computer simulations of the chemical
dynamics underlying technologically and biologically important processes, such
as photosynthesis, photovoltaics and nanoelectronics. The new methodology aims
at closing the gap between theory and experiment, by focusing on measurable
quantities and reducing the inputs to the minimum required in order to
understand how those measurable quantities change over time. In addition, Eitan
Geva will also advance a novel Compute-to-Learn (C2L) pedagogy, which is based
on a peer-led honors studio where undergraduate students work collaboratively to
create public-domain interactive computer demos that demonstrate physical
chemistry concepts. With above 50% female enrollment, the C2L pedagogy is a
model for how to make teaching programming inclusive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eitan Geva and his group will develop and benchmark new
types of generalized quantum master equations that allow for much greater
flexibility than is currently available with respect to the electronic
observables of interest and their dimensionality, thereby giving rise to more
streamlined, cost-effective and efficient implementations. Each generalized
quantum master equation corresponds to the exact equation of motion for the
electronic observable it is derived for. Within those equations, the effect of
projected-out degrees of freedom is given in terms of compact memory kernels and
inhomogeneous terms, which can be obtained from projection-free inputs by
solving Volterra equations. Computational protocols are developed for
calculating the projection-free inputs for all-atom models of chemical
condensed-phase systems via either mapping onto harmonic models and using
quantum-mechanically exact methods or using quasiclassical methods based on
combining the linearized semiclassical approximation with the mapping
Hamiltonian framework. In addition, multiple new perturbative quantum master
equations that mirror the multitude of non-perturbative generalized quantum
master equations are developed, as well as protocols for calculating the
corresponding perturbative memory kernels via the same methods used for
calculating the projection-free inputs. The quantum master equations developed
will be applied to and tested on new benchmark models, all-atom models and
polaritonic chemistry models. The potential of using initial state entanglement
to achieve quantum control of chemical dynamics is also
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.