* 2154640
* Oxidative Strategies for the Synthesis of N-Alkyl and N-Aryl Pyridinium Salts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Graham Dobereiner, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2025
* USD 477,048.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Sarah Wengryniuk of Temple University is studying new approaches for the
preparation of an important class of chemical substances called N-alkyl and
N-aryl pyridinium salts. These positively charged, nitrogen-containing compounds
are involved in cellular processes, found in a variety of useful functional
materials, and they can be used as antimicrobial agents in products such as
mouthwash. Furthermore, pyridinium salts serve as valuable precursors to
subunits that commonly occur in active pharmaceutical ingredients. The funded
project will focus on the development of new methods to generate pyridinium
salts using environmentally benign processes, including the use of non-toxic
iodine-based oxidants and electrochemical methods. The chosen approaches will
allow for access to a more diverse range of pyridinium salts than was previously
possible, facilitating the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, and their study will
also help to advance emerging technologies for chemical synthesis. The broader
impacts of the award will extend to enabling Professor Wengryniuk to continue
her significant efforts to advance the mentorship and promotion of women in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Specifically, under
the auspices of the previously established Outstanding Women Leaders in Science
(OWLS) initiative, the PI will develop a female mentor/female mentee match
program and establish an annual Women in Chemistry seminar series at Temple
University to provide scientific and professional mentorship opportunities for
female students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of N-alkyl and N-aryl
pyridinium salts will be investigated by two strategies that offer unrivalled
versatility as compared to earlier approaches by virtue of their reactivity
umpolung. The first aim will build upon the PI's established research program in
the area of nitrogen-ligated iodine(III) reagents, with the development of
heterocyclic group transfer reactions for a metal-free oxidative
functionalization of alkenes and arene C–H bonds. The second aim complements the
first in both reagent platform and target scaffolds. Thus, through the use of
electrochemical oxidation, radical cation intermediates will be leveraged as a
means of synthesizing 2,4,6-trisubstituted pyridinium salts via C–H amination,
providing new points of entry to emerging cross coupling handles. Throughout,
the overarching goal of the funded project is to provide innovative and enabling
methods to access N-alkyl and N-aryl pyridinium salts by oxidative strategies.
Success in these endeavors will not only provide access to diverse scaffolds for
azacycle synthesis and radical cross couplings, but also advance both nitrogen-
ligated hypervalent iodine reagent chemistry and electrochemistry-based
synthetic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.