* 2154501
* Ring-opening/1,3-difunctionalization of Cyclopropanes Enabled by Copper Catalysis and Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Qiu Wang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Qiu Wang of Duke University is studying the chemistry of
cyclopropanes to explore their potential in organic synthesis. This project will
develop new catalytic methods that can transform readily available cyclopropanes
into high value-added, richly functionalized products of value as molecular
building blocks for broad use in industry and academia. The proposed research
will also provide engaged graduate students with strong training in synthetic
methodology, catalysis, and organic synthesis. The educational activities aim to
improve the diversity of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) training pipeline, to broaden student participation in research, and to
foster outreach activities for local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic
applications of simple cyclopropanes to deliver versatile functionalized
products without the necessity for specific activating substituents are highly
attractive, yet represent unmet challenges. This application aims to develop new
activation strategies and novel methods to achieve selective ring-
opening/1,3-difunctionalization reactions of non-activated cyclopropanes. To
achieve this goal, Dr. Wang and her team will investigate copper-catalysis,
electrolysis, and photocatalysis to promote selective Câ€“C cleavage of
cyclopropanes to achieve rapid access to diverse 1,3-difunctionalized motifs and
heterocyclic frameworks that are highly sought-after in organic synthesis,
medicinal chemistry, and agrochemistry. In the longer term, insights obtained
from this project will likely facilitate the invention and development of new
multi-component reactions related to copper catalysis, electrocatalysis, radical
chemistry, and heterocyclic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.