* 2154747
* CAS: Bimetallic Transition Metal Phosphide Nanostructures as High-Efficiency, Earth-Abundant, and Durable Catalysts for Electrochemical Water Splitting
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Indika Arachchige, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 429,412.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Indika Arachchige and Ka Un Lao of the Virginia Commonwealth
University are studying the fundamental properties of metal phosphide
nanoparticles as effective catalysts for splitting water into environmentally
friendly hydrogen and oxygen fuel. The inexpensive generation of hydrogen from
water using electricity (electrochemical water splitting) would provide an
abundant source of renewable fuel. Currently, the most active catalysts used in
water splitting are comprised of expensive and rare metals such as platinum.
This project will develop new chemical syntheses to produce efficient catalysts
from metal phosphides that are less expensive and abundant. The activity of the
phosphide catalysts is improved by modifying the surface of the particles by
incorporating multiple metal atoms. The research team combines synthesis and
catalysis expertise with quantum chemistry calculations and artificial
intelligence to garner a thorough understanding of the effects of particle size,
shape, and composition on key catalytic properties and chemical stability. The
collaborative nature of this project provides multidisciplinary training and
mentoring for graduate and undergraduate students, to develop skills in catalyst
design and synthesis, computational chemistry, and nanoscience. The summer
outreach to Richmond Public Schools exposes K-12 students to cutting-edge
nanochemistry and catalysis projects, and develops age-appropriate nanoscience
educational modules impacting hundreds of underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrocatalysis enabled water splitting presents
an exciting opportunity to produce environmentally benign fuel to power human
activities. Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) have emerged as earth abundant
catalysts for water electrolysis and their activity can be enormously augmented
by admixing synergistic metals to modify the surface affinity and the kinetics
and mechanisms of hydrogen (HER) and oxygen evolution (OER) reactions.
Underpinning their efficient application is the ability to rationally and
predictably achieve precisely controlled catalyst features, including specific
catalyst structures, surface facets, morphologies, and compositions, that
directly impact the HER/OER activity, stability, and durability. The objective
of this program is to exploit a comprehensive theoretical and experimental
approach to produce bimetallic TMP nanostructures with control over intrinsic
features as high efficiency electrocatalysts for HER and OER. A series of TMP
nanostructures having various sizes, compositions, and morphologies are produced
by colloidal chemistry methods. The influences of synergistic metal alloying on
charge distribution, ion adsorption, oxidation/reduction kinetics and
mechanisms, and stability are thoroughly probed with experiments guided by
density functional theory simulations and machine learning models. The theory-
guided experiments are designed to probe specific catalyst structures, crystal
facets, surface terminations, and compositions that show superior water
splitting activity and stability, which are correlated to underlying kinetics
and mechanisms of HER and OER. These efforts reveal the fundamental influences
of simultaneous control over nanostructure, crystal facets, morphology, and
composition on water splitting activity and develop roadmaps that guide
researchers to produce highly efficient, robust TMP nanocatalysts for the
rational design of electrochemical reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.