* 2154101
* Monadic Expansions, Borel Complexity, and Absoluteness in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Chris Laskowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 440,000.00

This research project is in model theory, which is a branch of mathematical
logic. Much of model theory concerns the ways in which a theory, which is simply
a set of sentences in a formal language, controls its class of models. The PI
has previously investigated on mechanisms by which a theory can either admit or
forbid certain combinatorial configurations in its models; this project
continues these investigations in several contexts. In some cases, this
investigation melds well with computational learning theory. As one example, if
a theory forbids the independence property, then all the concepts i.e.,
definable sets, arising in the models of the theory conform to the probably
approximately correct (PAC) learning framework. This project will provide
research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the PI has noted a strong
connection between the complexity of hereditary classes C of finite structures
and monadic expansions of infinite models of Th(C). There is a hierarchy of
dividing lines, such as monadic NFCP, monadic stability, and monadic NIP.
Working with Braunfeld, the PI has multiple characterizations of a model of
Th(C) being monadically NIP. The project expects to show that if some model of
Th(C) is not monadically NIP, then the class is wild, e.g., the growth rate of
unlabelled structures in C is superexponetial and the class is not n-wqo for
some integer n. Potential canonical Scott sentences have proved to be a useful
tool in determining the Borel complexity of invariant classes of countable
structures and the research intends to streamline these methods by exploring
thickness and groundedness of classes of models. The project aims to compute the
Borel complexity of every mutually algebraic theory. Theories with non-maximal
uncountable spectrum are classifiable. Recent technical results about the
existence of prime models make it tractable to settle Vaught's conjecture for
classifiable theories and possibly for superstable theories as well. In first
order logic, aleph1-categoricity of a theory is an absolute notion, as can be
seen by the Baldwin-Lachlan characterization of aleph1-categoricity. The PI aims
to determine whether a similar characterization can be found for
aleph1-categoricity of sentences of L(omega1, omega), or equivalently for
classes of atomic models. Specifically, the project intends to determine whether
aleph1-categoricity is absolute for classes of atomic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.