* 2154295
* Using a Well-Controlled Heterogeneous Permeability Field to Study Its Role on Miscible Density-Driven Convection in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Cheng Chen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 12/31/2023
* USD 217,089.00

Injection of carbon dioxide (CO2) into deep saline aquifers is a promising
solution to lessen global climate change. Injected CO2 dissolves in aquifer
water and increases its density. Increased density affects the water flow and
the mobility of the injected CO2. This mobility is also influenced by the
permeability of the aquifer. The permeability of deep aquifers varies greatly in
space and affects the ways in which the fluids move. This research uses 3D
printing technologies to build experimental setups that can reproduce the
complex characteristics of deep aquifers and study how variable permeability
influence the density-driven movement of fluids in porous media. Results from
this research will benefit society by providing needed information for efficient
management of CO2 injection in deep aquifers. This is critical to understanding
the feasibility of using carbon capture and storage in deep aquifers as a viable
technology to mitigate CO2 emissions, global warming and climate change. The
project will also serve to broaden the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students, increase public scientific literacy, engage women and
minority students, and develop partnership with industry and local
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to use
high-resolution 3D printing technologies to overcome the challenges encountered
by conventional experimental methods, in order to: 1) validate the influence of
permeability on the critical Rayleigh-Darcy number and critical time for the
onset of miscible density-driven convection, 2) construct a known and well-
controlled heterogeneous permeability field to study its role on the onset of
miscible density-driven convection, and 3) investigate how heterogeneous
permeability fields dictate the later-time flow patterns and mass transfer
rates. Specifically, computer modeling is used to generate particle assemblies,
which are referred to as "digital sediment" blocks. The pore structural
information will be imported into a lattice Boltzmann simulator as internal
boundary conditions of flow modeling for permeability calculation. These
"digital sediment" blocks will then be fabricated using high-resolution 3D
printing to construct the desired permeability structure. In this project, the
heterogeneity structure of a permeability field is characterized by permeability
variation and correlation length. An experimental analogue fluid system equipped
with high-speed cameras will be used to measure the convective mass transfer
rate under various combinations of permeability variance and correlation length.
The 3D-printed "digital sediment" blocks have known and well-controlled
permeabilities and are reusable for a different heterogeneous permeability
field. These advantages facilitate the construction of heterogeneous porous
media and thus increase the total number of laboratory experiments that can be
conducted, which is critical for satisfying the ergodicity requirement and makes
the fluid system a valuable experimental analogue for validating analytical and
numerical findings. Generated knowledge is transformative and will contribute to
the study of other density-driven convection processes in heterogeneous porous
media. Reinforced by the research plan, the outreach plan will target different
educational settings to increase public scientific literacy, engage women and
minority students in STEM, and prepare students to contribute to a modern
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.