* 2154403
* Computational Characterization of Inter- and Intramolecular Non-Covalent Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 484,922.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, the research group of Professor Greg
Tschumper at the University of Mississippi will carry out a computational
chemistry study of subtle attractive interactions between molecules,
specifically of non-covalent or non-bonding interactions. Although non-covalent
interactions are generally much weaker, their collective contributions are
central to a host of chemical processes in physics, chemistry and biology, from
the structure of DNA to aerosols in the atmosphere and natural gas clathrate
hydrates on the ocean floor. The team will use computational chemistry methods
based on quantum mechanics (QM) to study both fundamental aspects of non-
covalent interactions as well as practical applications for organic
semiconducting devices. More broadly, the potential impact of this work includes
accelerating the development of novel materials for flexible electronics, clean
energy technologies, water purification, water harvesting and more. This
research will contribute to the education and training of science students from
underrepresented groups at the graduate and undergraduate levels, and will
provide research experiences for community college students through a
collaboration with Dr. Jeremy Carr of Central Alabama Community College
(CACC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project in the Tschumper group will
examine the use of halogen, chalcogen and pnictogen bonding to produce unique
morphologies in nanoscale molecular assemblies for organic semiconducting
devices as well as how these non-covalent interactions alter the opto-electronic
properties of the components. This research team will also employ high-accuracy
QM techniques to probe fundamental aspects of hydrogen bonding in clusters of
water and small prototypes that provide important test systems for theoretically
and experimentally studying cooperative effects associated with these non-
covalent interactions. Emphasis is placed on the evaluation of spectroscopic
signatures of these interactions to facilitate direct comparison to experimental
measurements, and the ongoing development of the N-body:Many-body integrated
QM:QM method facilitates the application of these demanding high-accuracy
procedures to larger clusters with modest computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.