* 2154882
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: AQUASORB: Predictive Modeling of Atmospheric Water Sorption
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Brian Space, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 02/28/2026
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems contribute funds to this award, which supports the AQUASORB research
team taking an innovative approach to the discovery and development of materials
for capturing water. The PIs include the Space group at North Carolina State
University, the Zaworotko group in Ireland and the James group in Northern
Ireland. The tripartite team seeks to produce superior water sorption materials
to address a variety of pressing national and world needs. For example, access
to fresh water typically occurs from sources such as lakes, rivers,
precipitation, glaciers and groundwater. Unfortunately, conventional water
sources are unevenly distributed and, according to the United Nations, by 2025,
two out of three people worldwide will be living in a territory facing a
freshwater crisis. Thus, atmospheric water harvesting and dehumidification are
the focus problems. Whereas only 0.04% of water exists as atmospheric water,
this represents a vast quantity (about 1.29 x 10^16 liters!) and is infinitely
renewable. Further, humidity control is critically important for industries such
as food production, pharmaceuticals, chemical processing and petroleum refining.
Current technologies for dehumidification are energy intensive, using as much as
50% of the energy footprint of air handling systems and consuming 5-10% of
global energy production. Driven by insights provided by modeling, the Space
group will lead the team to produce transformative materials with our
experimental partners to address the need for plentiful fresh, water that is
renewable, widely available and inexpensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the activities focus on materials discovery and design via an iterative
cooperative approach. The project leverages synergy between an international
team to study experimental sorption performance in hybrid ultramicroporous
materials (Zaworotko, Ireland) and porous liquids (James, N. Ireland) to enable
the development of predictive models (Space, USA) for sorbent performance. The
diverse project will provide educational training spanning theoretical modeling,
materials synthesis and the design of systems for practical water harvesting.
Students will interact across disciplines and locations developing a powerful
skill set for future impactful work in the age of tailor-made materials for
grand challenge problems. The aim is to produce and employ modeling that will
usefully guide synthetic materials chemists, using the power of high quality,
reliable molecular modeling. Simulations, synthesis and materials evaluation are
needed to jointly address sorbent material performance under different
conditions. Rational insights will be sought into controlling, harvesting and
manipulating water in porous materials via our experimental / theoretical team,
supporting human flourishing on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems contribute
funds to this award, which supports the AQUASORB research team taking an
innovative approach to the discovery and development of materials for capturing
water. The PIs include the Space group at North Carolina State University, the
Zaworotko group in Ireland and the James group in Northern Ireland. The
development of energy efficient approaches for water harvesting is a global
challenge because of its critical relevance to three key sectors: atmospheric
water harvesting, dehumidification and farming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Problem
to be Addressed by AQUASORB: Whereas solid desiccants enable several current
technologies for water capture, they suffer from two major drawbacks: (i) High
energy footprint: Water capture is not in itself a challenge as there are many
inexpensive desiccants that readily capture water, even at low relative
humidity. The subsequent release of water is a different matter. This is because
most effective commercial sorbents work too well; their regeneration generally
requires heating at high temperatures, well above the boiling point of water.
(ii) Poor performance at low relative humidity: The most widely used
commercially available desiccants such as commercial silica, have a relatively
low (but still high) energy footprint and tend to perform much less effectively
at low humidity. Despite finding utility in commercial dehumidification
applications, such desiccants are unsuited for water harvesting applications
where most needed, i.e arid regions. These factors render the current generation
of desiccants commercially unsuitable or expensive for water harvesting because
of their high energy costs and the resulting high carbon
footprints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution: AQUASORB – a Tripartite Medley of
Modeling and Experiment – A Virtuous Cycle of Materials Discovery. The team will
take an innovative approach to the discovery and development of the next
generation of regeneration optimized desiccants. Given the context above, it is
unsurprising that there is high interest in the development of new energy
efficient liquid and solid desiccants. Currently, the number of reported
desiccants in these respective fields is enormous, and growing. In essence, the
number of potential desiccants is growing exponentially but the experimental
screening of these desiccants is time‐consuming and expensive. AQUASORB will
address this challenge by exploiting the expertise of the groups of Zaworotko
(University of Limerick, desiccant synthesis, and characterization), James
(Queen’s University Belfast, porous liquid application of desiccants) and Space
(North Carolina State University, materials modeling and design) to develop a
predictive approach to identify new desiccants with regeneration optimized
capture/release performance. These desiccants will capture and release
atmospheric water with high working capacity, low energy of desorption and fast
kinetics by having just the right level of water binding – not too strong and
not too weak. AQUASORB’s ultimate objective is two-fold: (i) to advance the
science of water sorption modeling in order to (ii) identify desiccants that
capture water vapor under ambient conditions and release that water with a low
energy footprint. Meeting these requirements will enable disruptive new water
harvesting technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Space group leads in modeling
interfaces and porous materials with a track record of innovation over two
decades and will lead the team via materials modeling and design. The project
leverages expertise in simulations, evolved through productive working
relationships with our experimental partners, to tackle water sorption
materials. This includes the substantial challenge of adding water to our force
field such that its behavior in a variety of porous solids is reliably
described. We have expanded our extensive collaboration on porous materials with
the Zaworotko Group at the University of Limerick to include porous liquids with
the James group at Queens University Belfast seeking to understand water in
complex materials that will lead to practical solutions for people. Insights to
control the subtle balance between water sorption energetics and entropics when
ordered within a structure will be pursued. Accurately capturing water structure
in complex environments and abstracting its essential behavior is a master
challenge ideally suited to the strengths of our productive experimental /
theoretical AQUASORB partnership. The resulting force field and modeling
innovations will be shared with the scientific community including making our
codes widely available while incorporating them into commonly used programs.
Iterative team materials design and evaluation will be pursued with experimental
synthesis and characterization fueled by advanced
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.