* 2154853
* Synthetic Studies on Herqulines and Lycopodium Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dirk Trauner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Dirk Trauner of the University of Pennsylvania is
developing new methods and strategies to synthesize alkaloids. Alkaloids are a
class of natural products that have played a critical role in the advancement of
organic chemistry and pharmacology. They continue to inspire new synthetic
chemistry, as new types of alkaloids are found in a variety of biological
sources. The Trauner group studies an alkaloid named herquline A, which has been
isolated from the fungus Penicillium herquei and characterized as an inhibitor
of the H1N1 influenza virus. In parallel to laboratory work, the Trauner group
proposes to develop an educational platform for synthetic design, called
Denksport ("Brain Sports"): Denksport involves solving a puzzle that centers on
a multistep synthesis, usually of a natural product, a drug, or of a designer
molecule with interesting physical features. In addition to being an excellent
tool for teaching synthetic strategy and retrosynthetic analysis, it
familiarizes students with a wide variety of synthetic methods, reaction
mechanisms, reagents, and building blocks. It has been made accessible, free of
charge, to the chemical community and has been embraced by undergraduate and
graduate students from diverse backgrounds who are invited to contribute to this
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Herquline A has been a challenge to synthetic
chemists and has not been made in the laboratory to date. To meet this
challenge, the Trauner Group has developed new methodology based on organoboron
chemistry that can be used to rapidly establish the carbon skeleton of herquline
A. In addition, Trauner's team studies alkaloids that stem from Lycopodium club
mosses. These natural products are amongst the most popular synthetic targets
due to their attractive molecular architectures, which are often paired with
significant bioactivity. The Trauner group will pursue synthetic strategies that
mimic biosynthetic patterns to synthesize the Lycopodium alkaloids phlegmadine
A, as well as huperphlegmines A and B. New chemical methodologies, such as
anionic cyclizations of ynones, will be pursued to reach these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.