* 2154532
* New Strategies for Regulating Non-Living Olefin Polymerization Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Loi Do, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 11/30/2025
* USD 487,795.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Loi Do of the University of Houston is studying how to improve the synthesis of
polyolefins, polymers that account for more than 60% of plastics used worldwide.
Polyolefins are some of the most attractive synthetic materials known because of
their light weight, resistance to damage by water, oil, and solvent, and ability
to be easily shaped into consumer items. A large percentage of polyolefins are
made using a catalytic process known as living polymerization. However, such
processes are inefficient because only one polymer chain is produced for each
catalyst reactive site. In contrast, polymerizations using non-living catalysts
yield many polymer chains per site. The main limitation with the non-living
catalysts is that it is difficult to control the polymer products they generate.
The Do team's research will focus on using earth abundant metal additives to
modify non-living polymerizations. This work seeks to develop more sustainable
ways to synthesize polyolefins and provide access to previously unknown polymer
structures with technologically useful properties. The objective of the Do
team's outreach activities is to enhance the research experiences of
undergraduate students in the Gulf Coast region of the United States by creating
a Texas Chemistry Consortium focused on sharing scientific resources and
expertise, exchanging students for training, hosting site visits, and creating
professional networking opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this research project, the Lo group at the University of Houston strives to
improve catalytic efficiency and precision in polyolefin synthesis. Polyolefins
can be synthesized from olefin monomers using either living or non-living
catalysts. Living catalysts provide excellent control over the chain growth
process but yield only a single polymer chain per metal. In contrast, non-living
catalysts lack control over polymer chain propagation but afford many polymers
per metal. Because polyolefins derived from living catalysts contain high metal
content, they must also be subjected to further purification steps. To combine
the benefits of both living and non-living reactions, Dr. Do and his team are
developing a cation-based strategy to regulate polymerizations by coordination
insertion catalysis. Under dynamic switching conditions, polymer chain growth
occurs from a single catalyst that continuously interconverts between the
monometallic and bimetallic forms. The key to success is that cation exchange
must proceed slower than chain growth but faster than chain termination. The Do
group is also designing new catalysts to achieve stereocontrolled polymerization
of functional olefins. A library of chiral catalysts will be assembled by
pairing chiral metal auxiliaries with a common catalyst platform, which will
provide access to molecular structures that are inaccessible using conventional
organic scaffolds. Because polyolefins represent greater than 60% of the
commercial plastic produced around the world, improvements in the way they are
manufactured on an industrial scale could dramatically reduce cost, energy, and
environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.