* 2154827
* New Frontiers in Organic Exciplexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joseph Dinnocenzo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Joseph Dinnocenzo at the University of
Rochester will investigate new classes of excited state intermediates called
exciplexes. Exciplexes form when a molecule which has absorbed light forms a
complex with another molecule which is still in its ground state. Exciplexes
have found use in a wide variety of applications, such as sensors, biological
probes, and in organic light emitting diodes (OLED). Due to their greater
solubility in water, the new exciplexes formed from charged electron acceptors
and/or donors have much greater potential to find use in biological imaging
applications than conventional exciplexes. The fundamental knowledge generated
by the proposed research could be used to rationally guide the use of the new
exciplexes in these and other applications. Research in this project has the
potential to generate new foundational knowledge about exciplexes that could
contribute to applications in chemistry, biology, and medicine. Based on
connections the PI has established at the University of Guam (UoG), a minority
institution, the project will engage undergraduates from the UoG, who are
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) in
summer research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research into emissive
exciplexes with different charge types (cationic, anionic, and nonionic) will
extend organic exciplexes in new directions, including those that absorb in the
visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum to increase their potential
utility. Studies to better understand the fundamental photophysical properties
of these exciplex intermediates will likely provide insight into the factors
that govern their fate (return electron transfer, radiative and nonradiative
decay, separation, etc.). This, in turn, would provide valuable knowledge for
the design of new exciplexes that have a variety of potential uses, especially
for sensing. The discovery of nonionic exciplexes is particularly intriguing
because their emission spectra are expected to be largely independent of medium
polarity, which would be an unprecedented result for exciplex emissions and one
that could be of practical importance. Research objectives for each of the three
types of exciplexes include determining which electron acceptor/donor pairs are
optimal for emission, the electronic nature of the exciplexes (e.g. electronic
coupling matrix elements) through theoretical fitting of the radiative lifetimes
of the exciplexes (determined by Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting, TCSPC)
and their fluorescence spectra, measuring some of their photophysical properties
(e.g. lifetimes and emission quantum yields), examining the exciplex emissions
in a variety of media, and using the combined insights from these studies to
synthesize intramolecular examples, which have the greatest potential for
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.