* 2154246
* Collaborative Research: PurSUiT: Understanding the Neotropical Velvet Worms (Onychophora, Peripatidae, Neopatida), a Cretaceous Radiation of Terrestrial Panarthropods
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gustavo Hormiga, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,294.00

Velvet worms (Onychophora) are ancient terrestrial invertebrates with a fossil
record dating back to the Carboniferous. They have remained largely unchanged
morphologically over their 300 million year history, and are thus considered
“living fossils”. Velvet worms are therefore an ideal model to investigate how
animals successfully colonize different environments and locations over long
periods of geological time in the absence of any significant morphological
change. Because velvet worms are rare and mainly inhabit remote forests, they
are relatively poorly studied. This research will focus on the least-understood
group of velvet worms, the Neotropical Peripatidae. The researchers will
document and describe all newly discovered species, assess their conservation
status, and analyze the evolutionary processes affecting species diversity and
distribution through geological time. The research team and several trainees
will combine cutting-edge molecular approaches with modern anatomical methods to
advance our knowledge of the diversity and evolutionary history of this under-
studied group. A 100-square-foot exhibit will be developed for the Harvard
Museum of Natural History to explore the biodiversity, biogeography, ecology and
evolution of velvet worms. The exhibit will also provide the opportunity for
associated public programs, including lectures and K-12 activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rigorous estimate of Onychophora species diversity in
the Neotropical region will be provided by using high throughput sequence data
and by the application of cutting-edge morphological techniques. This research
will produce high-quality genomes for onychophorans and a UCE (ultra-conserved
elements) probe set targeting about 1,000 genomic loci that will be applied to
fresh and museum-preserved specimens. The resulting evolutionary groupings will
be used to test hypotheses related to Caribbean biogeography, including specific
radiations in Jamaica and Puerto Rico and the colonization of the Lesser
Antilles. All specimens and genetic products of the study taxa will be deposited
in the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University. All specimen data,
including images, videos, and genomic data, will be linked to publicly available
specimen records through a centralized database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.