* 2154930
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: A Networking Perspective of Blockchain Security: Modeling, Analysis, and Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ning Zhang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 87,653.00

Blockchain has emerged as a "secure by design" technology that can provide
security among a group of mutually distrustful nodes without relying on a
trusted central authority. The fundamental security of the blockchain is based
on distributed consensus, which assumes the system is secure as long as a
certain threshold amount (greater than half) of the whole network's computing
(or voting) power is honest. However, in reality, many factors can effectively
change this threshold, significantly impairing blockchain security. This project
aims to address these fundamental security challenges in blockchain technology
by developing new theories and systems to gain a deeper understanding and guide
the development of new defense solutions. The project team will investigate how
clustered power in large mining pools, heterogeneous network connectivity, and
malicious peer-to-peer network link manipulation can impact fundamental
blockchain security. The external data feed is another fundamental security
challenge towards the broader application of blockchain technology. Therefore,
another goal of the project is to address the data truthfulness challenge, where
external Byzantine sources may supply false inputs to the blockchain
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities of this
project focus on three main thrusts. First, the team will examine the
fundamental security properties of blockchain through the lens of modeling and
analysis of consensus protocols, network connectivity, and other factors in the
system, with the goal of providing quantifiable insights on fairness, liveness,
and safety of blockchain operation. Second, the will investigate the use of
trusted computing to enable remotely attestable policy-driven software-defined
networks for defense and mitigation of routing-based attacks on blockchain.
Third, the team will design a novel trustworthy data feed mechanism that
leverages decentralized truth discovery and off-chain efficient agreement to
address the long-standing data truthfulness challenge for blockchain
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.