* 2154292
* New Concepts for Multifunctional Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Seidel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Daniel Seidel of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Florida is studying new methods for asymmetric catalysis,
particularly in the important area of chiral Brønsted acid catalysis. The
ability to prepare complex chiral molecules in the most cost-effective way
possible is directly dependent on the availability of sustainable synthetic
methodologies. The new synthetic methods being explored and developed in this
work have the potential to provide improved access to important compounds such
as polycyclic ethers and lactams, with potential applications in the chemical
and pharmaceutical industries, as well as throughout academia. Furthermore, this
project provides an ideal training ground to prepare the next generation of
researchers in the chemical sciences. Undergraduate students from different
institutions will participate in the planned
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the field of
asymmetric catalysis on a fundamental level through exploration of conceptually
new and underdeveloped methods of substrate activation. A major goal is the
development of reactions that produce enantiomerically enriched products through
intervention of chiral ion pairs. Novel Brønsted acids and hydrogen bond donor
catalysts will be explored to facilitate unprecedented enantioselective
processes and address challenging synthetic problems. There is real room for
innovation in this area as most such chiral Brønsted acid catalysts studied
heretofore are based upon now familiar BINOL-phosphate frameworks. A focus is on
reactions that proceed via the intermediacy of highly reactive oxocarbenium ions
and related species. Multifunctional catalysts are being developed with the goal
of achieveing enzyme-like catalysis and enantioselectivity under mild reaction
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.