* 2154388
* Ultrafast Imaging of Molecular Polariton Transport: Competition between Coherence and Localization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Libai Huang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Libai Huang and her research
group at Purdue University are studying new ways to use light to control the
transfer of energy between confined molecules. The project uses light trapped
between a pair of very closely spaced mirrors to control the migration of energy
between the molecules. Recent developments demonstrate that millions of
molecules can collectively interact with a single mode of light when they are
placed in a properly designed cavity. Although the molecules normally act like
independently oscillating pendula (representing excited electron-hole pairs
called excitons), the interaction with light inside the cavity results in a
correlated motion of the pendula as if they are all attached to a single driving
rod. When the energy exchange rate between the photons and the excitons (i.e.,
the light and the pendula) is faster than other energy loss pathways, new
quantum states known as polaritons are formed with mixed light-matter
characteristics. Polaritons have a low effective mass that allows the energy to
travel at an extremely high speed, many orders of magnitude faster than the
excitons alone. Thus, polaritons have the potential to enhance the speed of
energy migration in molecular materials. However, the polariton states are very
fragile and short-lived because the synchronization of millions of molecules can
be easily disrupted. When the coherence is disrupted, energy becomes localized
on a few molecules instead of being shared by millions of molecules.
Understanding the competition between coherence and localization holds the key
to harnessing the power of polaritons. The research team led by Prof. Huang is
addressing this scientific challenge by developing microscopy techniques to
record the propagation of polaritons with a resolution of 15 femtoseconds (a
femtosecond is one quadrillionth of a second) and of 50 nanometers (a nanometer
is one-billionth of a meter). The team also images the direction of propagation
to differentiate polariton and exciton contributions. The research activities
are integrated with K-12, undergraduate, and graduate science education.
Specific educational and outreach activities include developing an
undergraduate-level quantum chemistry lab module on strong light-matter coupling
and partnering with the Superheroes of Science YouTube channel to make short
videos for K-12 students and the general public on topics related to the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong coupling between molecular excitons and
cavity photons provides a new paradigm for achieving long-range coherent energy
transport. A single mode of light can collectively interact with millions, or
even billions, of molecules to form macroscopically coherent light-matter hybrid
states known as polaritons. The formation of polaritons can dramatically alter
the energy landscape and dynamics of the molecules. The photonic nature of
polaritons enables fast propagation and long-range delocalization, which are
beneficial for enhancing exciton transport. However, challenges remain in
exploiting strong light-matter interactions for long-range energy transport in
molecular systems, due to the inherent inhomogeneities and large vibronic
coupling that result in ultrafast dephasing, a high density of dark states, and
disorder-induced localization. This project aims to develop ultrafast microscopy
tools in both real- and Fourier-space to provide a comprehensive picture of the
competition between coherent polariton transport and decoherence processes in
molecular aggregates. The measurements probe the transport of molecular
polaritonsÂ with simultaneously high spatial (~50 nm) and temporal (~15 fs)
resolution as well as momentum selectivity by combining ultrafast pump-probe
microscopy with Fourier filtering. Molecular aggregates in Fabry-Perot
microcavities with tunable Rabi splitting are used to investigate the role of
vibronic coupling, disorder, and dark states in the transition from coherent to
diffusive transport regime, as well as the direct visualization of remote energy
transfer on macroscopic length scales resulting from the collective coherence.
Beyond the fundamental insights made possible by these measurements, comparison
with quantum chemistry calculations in collaboration with theory groups provides
valuable information to aid the development of quantum mechanical theories for
modeling molecular polaritons. The broader impacts of the project are further
enhanced through educational and outreach activities that make the research
accessible to a wide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.