* 2154904
* RI: Small: Cooperative Planning and Learning via Scalable and Learnable Multi-Agent Commitments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Qi Zhang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 332,423.00

Stemming from human societies, the notion of commitment refers to a decision
maker, or agent, making credible and prolonged promises about various aspects of
the consequences of its future decisions, thus facilitating cooperation with
other agents. Engineering commitments is therefore a promising framework to
achieve cooperative artificial intelligence (AI) that equips a group of
autonomous agents with the capability of planning and learning to maximize their
joint utility. This research project seeks to initiate a paradigm shift that
brings the notion of commitment to its full potential by scaling it to various
dimensions of complexity in cooperative AI, developing novel methods that
promise to significantly and positively impact real-world and large-scale
cooperative AI applications. This project integrates an array of education
initiatives, playing key roles in PI's classes, the recruitment and training of
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds, and extensive
activities planned to involve high school students and junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of two cohesive
thrusts: Thrust 1 redesigns an existing approach for commitment-based
distributed cooperative planning with a predefined parameterization for
probabilistic commitments, by developing novel algorithms and analyses in
planning under constraints and uncertainty, approximate linear programming, and
robust planning that address long decision horizon and high-dimensional
perception and action; Thrust 2 develops and evaluates a novel approach for
distributed cooperative learning with emergent commitment parameterization,
which combines the best from the framework of multi-agent commitments and deep
reinforcement learning to address all aforementioned dimensions of complexity.
Success of the proposed research is expected to significantly increase the
applicability of commitment-based planning and learning for large-scale and
complex cooperative AI systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.