* 2154368
* Invariants in Several Complex Variables and Complex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Peter Ebenfelt, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 307,873.00

The study of invariant geometries is of fundamental importance in mathematics.
Such geometries arise naturally in areas of mathematics such as several complex
variables, partial differential equations (PDE), and algebraic, complex, and
differential geometry. This project investigates a particular geometry – CR
geometry -- that arises in the study of several complex variables and complex
geometry. It has deep connections with current topics in mathematical physics,
including quantum field theory, general relativity, and string theory, as well
as applications in, e.g., systems engineering and control theory. For example,
the study of obstruction flatness has a direct link to the equations of motion
in conformal gravity. The notion of Kähler-Einstein metric is highly relevant
for these investigations; such metrics are measurements of distance and angle in
higher-dimensional spaces (manifolds), which curve according to Einstein’s
equations of relativity in vacuum. One way in which CR manifolds arise is as the
boundaries of regions in high-dimensional complex spaces which curve in a well-
behaved fashion in complex directions; such regions are known as pseudoconvex
domains. Techniques to be used in this project come from a variety of
mathematical areas: complex analysis/geometry, PDE, and differential geometry.
At the same time, techniques and tools developed in this project will influence
these areas as well. The project will also provide interesting research topics
for graduate students and postdocs. The seminar activity resulting from the
project will inspire and stimulate both students and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study
geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of real submanifolds in complex
varieties, together with their symmetries. Such aspects include, for instance,
the geometric consequences of global vanishing on a compact CR manifold of a
higher order local invariant that arises as an obstruction in the study of a
complex Monge--Ampere equation. In three dimensions, this invariant coincides
with the trace on the boundary of the log-term in an asymptotic expansion of the
Bergman kernel. Solutions to this Monge-Ampere equation give rise to complete
Kähler-Einstein metrics with negative curvature, and a major goal of the project
is to characterize domains and complex manifolds in terms of properties of
various metrics and kernels, and their relations. As an example, one aim is to
understand what assumptions ensure that the Bergman metric on a domain is
Kähler-Einstein if and only if the domain is biholomorphically equivalent to the
ball. Another topic to be considered is the existence of CR umbilical points on
compact CR 3-manifolds. Umbilical points on a manifold are locations where the
manifold exhibits an unexpectedly high degree of symmetry and smoothness. It is
not known whether such points always exist on bounded strictly pseudoconvex
domains in complex 2-dimensional space; this question remains open if the domain
is diffeomorphic to the ball. Finally, the project considers existence,
uniqueness, and regularity questions for CR maps. These include the study of CR
maps between generic submanifolds of infinite type and the recently discovered
phenomenon that for infinite type hypersurfaces the biholomorphic, formal, and
smooth CR equivalence classifications are distinct. These investigations are
expected to shed new light on the nature of CR maps between infinite type
manifolds, and to lead to a better understanding of the Pfaffian systems arising
in this context. In conclusion, this project will significantly enhance the
understanding of the role of invariant objects and symmetries in several complex
variables and complex geometry, which in turn will increase the utility of the
theory in physical models and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.