* 2154238
* IRES Track II: Multidisciplinary Coastal Zone Hazards Institutes - France, Japan, Indonesia
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Magaly Koch, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2025
* USD 399,636.00

Over the course of this 3-year project, a total of 42 U.S. students (14 per
year) will gain multidisciplinary training and hands-on laboratory and field
experience in coastal zone hazards research during a two-week stay at foreign
institutions in one of the three Advanced Studies Institutes (ASI) sites (one
ASI site per year). The U.S. team (Boston University, Northern Arizona
University, and University of Alaska Fairbanks) will lead the ASI activities in
partnership with faculty/lectures in the University of South Brittany (UBS),
France, Tohoku University (TU) and RIKEN, Japan, and the University of
Diponegoro (UNDIP) and University of Gadjah Mada (UGM), Indonesia. The ASI
activities set in an international context will provide a multi-stage, high-
quality training and research for graduate students that will produce data sets
and learning materials applicable to PhD work and other research activities
beyond the duration of this project. Women and under-represented minorities in
STEM fields will be particularly targeted by the U.S. team. The STEM experiences
set in the global context will prepare participating U.S. students to address
global challenges using both a scientific as well as policy lens in their future
career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These ASIs address the compounded effect
of physical and human-induced changes affecting densely populated coastal zones.
As coastal areas become more densely populated, they become increasingly exposed
to climate change phenomena (sea level rise, tidal and storm-surge flooding)
which in combination with natural geological hazards (earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, landslides, land subsidence) and human driven landscape
transformation (urbanization, agriculture and aquaculture, deforestation) can
amplify the destruction and loss of ecosystem services, life, and property.
Remote Sensing technology and big data analytics provide us the mean to measure
and observe changes across scale and time. However, the vast amount of data
produced by near-real time observations imposes a new challenge: how can we
effectively use the data to assess and predict risk exposure of a growing
population in coastal regions to these coastal hazards? Understanding the
processes underlying coastal dynamic changes requires a set of skills drawn from
multiple disciplines that is often missing in graduate programs in the U.S. This
is the motivation for establishing a multidisciplinary coastal hazards training
program for advanced graduate students in three locations that exemplify various
types and levels of coastal change processes and
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.