* 2154872
* RESEARCH-PGR: Exploring the genetic and mechanistic bases of quantitative disease resistance in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Peter Balint-Kurti, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Plant diseases cause an estimated 13% loss of global crop yields annually,
reducing incomes and food quality/safety. Host resistance is the most effective
method of managing plant diseases. Quantitative disease resistance is generally
durable and usually works against all variants of pathogens, and thus is an
effective disease management tool. This proposal aims to improve the
understanding of quantitative disease resistance at multiple levels, from genes
to tradeoffs at the whole plant level. The research will focus on some of the
most important diseases of corn. The broader impacts of this proposal are
twofold. First, the proposed research will identify disease resistance
mechanisms in corn, which is both a model species for plant quantitative
genetics and the most valuable crop in the US. These results directly relate to
ongoing genetic improvement of corn and other important crop species. The second
impact is through training of students and postdoctoral scholars during research
activities and the education of high school students and teachers during
outreach activities. This includes working with a specialist educational
organization, The Science House at North Carolina State University. North
Carolina State University will participate in and provide funds to continue and
update a successful plant breeding and genetics workshop for science teachers
that has run annually from 2013 to 2019, as well as participate in a residential
Ag-Discovery camp for high school students. In addition, the researchers will
engage high school students through the 4-H Illini Summer Academy and
Discovering STEM in ACES at the University of Illinois.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative disease resistance (QDR) is the most
important form of resistance for maize and crops more broadly. Prior work by
this research team and others has shown that QDR is based on diverse genes and
mechanisms, most of which are not yet understood. Several quantitative trait
loci and genes associated with resistance to multiple maize diseases have been
previously identified and characterized. To further dissect disease resistance,
as well as other traits, a large population of near-isogenic lines (NILs) has
been developed and evaluated for resistance to several diseases. This proposal
aims to exploit and develop these data and resources to expand the understanding
of QDR and focuses on the following four objectives: 1) develop the NIL
population as a resource for the maize genetics community; 2) study QDR, its
mechanistic bases, and associated pleiotropies; 3) study the mechanistic bases
of vascular disease resistance in maize using microscopy; and 4) identify QDR
causal genes using fine mapping and gene editing. This effort will use an
integrative approach incorporating genetics, genomics, transcriptomics,
histology, pathology/microbiology, quantitative genetics, field research, and
CRISPR- mediated gene-editing. Successful completion of this project is expected
to result in the identification of key genes, mechanisms and tradeoffs that can
inform the deployment of quantitative disease resistance in crops. Since many of
the mechanisms under investigation in maize are likely to be broadly applicable,
the proposed work will ultimately contribute to a holistic understanding of QDR
with a focus on its application to improved crop production and
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.