* 2154078
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Audacity of Exploration: Toward Automated Discovery of Security Flaws in Networked Systems through Intelligent Documentation Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Feng Qian, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Specifications, developer guides and other documentations of networked systems
(e.g., Internet applications, carrier networks) describe how these systems are
designed, used and operate. These documentations are important sources for
understanding security weaknesses in these systems and have not been fully
leveraged due to the difficulty in analyzing their imprecise, convoluted and
ambiguous content. Project Audacity (AUtomated Documentation Analysis for
seCurITY) aims at addressing the challenge for security weakness discovery and
remedy. Its novelties are the development of innovative technologies to enable
automated document analysis for security protection. The project’s broader
significance and importance include transferring the technologies to industry,
involving members from under-represented groups in the project and disseminating
outcomes through K9-12 outreach and community services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on mitigating security risks of both
design flaws and implementation vulnerabilities in networked systems, through
automatically recovering security-related information (e.g., models, security
properties) and confusing descriptions (e.g., inconsistent statements) from
documentations to evaluate their security implications (e.g., verification of
system designs, validation of predicted weaknesses on system implementations).
This purpose is served by novel techniques based upon machine learning and
natural language processing for analyzing different types of documentations,
such as those for payment, single-sign-on, and for the 3rd Generation
Partnership Project or 3GPP. Examples of such techniques include sentiment
analysis for finding the statements related to security requirements and a
similarity and differential analysis that compares different statements about
similar security-critical operations to capture inconsistency. Furthermore, the
project studies emerging techniques such as service syndication through
comparing the documentations of different services and the 3GPP ecosystem from
analyzing its public text data for risk measurement, identification and
mitigation. This work complements program analysis to help enhance the security
quality of networked systems, contributing to a better procedure and ecosystem
that make security-critical documentations more precise, more consistent and
less error-prone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.