* 2154563
* Spectral Theory and Universality
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Milivoje Lukic, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 04/30/2025
* USD 339,651.00

The project concerns questions in spectral theory, which is the mathematical
theory that corresponds to physical notions such as energy levels of quantum
systems and vibration frequencies of mechanical systems. One of the topics of
this project is universality, which is the appearance of certain universal (or
common) local statistical behaviors for different systems. The research is also
motivated by integrability, which is the existence of many conserved quantities
in certain nonlinear systems used to describe their behavior over time. The
project focuses on Schrödinger operators, central to quantum mechanics, and
related systems in one dimension; the mathematical methods developed have the
potential to illuminate other mathematical models and physical applications such
as electron conductivity in disordered materials and signal transmission using
solitons. Several graduate students and a postdoc will be trained, and
conference organization as well as writing of a monograph on reflectionless
operators is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One focus of this project is the
application of de Branges canonical systems to universality limits for
orthogonal polynomials and related systems. A new approach co-authored by the PI
reformulates the question in terms of a limit of canonical systems and uses that
to obtain a very general criterion for bulk universality; substantial extensions
of this approach to other universality phenomena will be studied. Another focus
of the project will be the development of inverse spectral theory for
reflectionless Schrödinger operators for Dirichlet-regular Widom spectra without
the “direct Cauchy theorem” property; the structure of the isospectral torus in
this regime will have immediate consequences for the Korteweg-de Vries equation
with almost periodic initial data. Finally, of interest will be new research
directions made possible by the recent development of Stahl-Totik regularity for
Schrödinger operators, such as the study of sum rules for Schrödinger operators
with arbitrary essential spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.