* 2154339
* Neutrino Emission From Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,597.00

Over the next decade, neutrino astronomy will probe the rich astrophysics of
neutrino production in the sky. Neutrinos, which are very light subatomic
particles with low levels of interaction with matter, are difficult to detect,
but are important probes for astronomy since they can be traced directly back to
their origin without having interacted with intervening material. In addition to
neutrinos from the Sun, core-collapse supernova (SN) bursts (e.g., SN 1987A) and
relativistic jets (e.g., blazar TXS 0506+056) technological improvements in
detector masses, energy resolution, and background abatement will allow
observation of new signals from different stages of the lifecycle of stars, in
particular pre-supernova neutrinos, the diffuse supernova neutrino background,
and neutrinos from matter-rich binary mergers. Ultimately, the goal will be to
observationally test neutrino production across the entire Hertzsprung-Russell
diagram, which graphically represents the full population and life cycle of
stars. A research group at Arizona State University will study neutrino
production in stars and will embed its diversity, equity, and inclusion
practices into its everyday research activities, through a complete program of
training and mentoring a graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reach the
goals of the project, a suite of stellar evolution models, spanning a wide range
of initial masses, will be used to analyze the impact of the initial stellar
composition, helium burning nuclear reaction rates, and neutral current de-
excitation physics on the thermal and nuclear components of the total neutrino
luminosity. The results of the research project provide targets for current
generation neutrino telescopes that can now detect pre-supernova neutrinos, and
provides new predictions for individual stars and for stars collectively as the
stellar neutrino background signal. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.