* 2154495
* Better Scientific Software Fellowship Program
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Shelly Olsan, Krell Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 379,185.00

Addressing the scientific software challenges facing the nation requires broad
collaboration to foster practices, processes, and tools to improve software
developer productivity and software sustainability. Both of those are key
aspects of ensuring the integrity of computational results and increasing
scientific productivity. The Better Scientific Software (BSSw) Fellowship
Program, launched in 2018 with support from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE),
provides recognition and funding for leaders and advocates of high-quality
scientific software. This project enables NSF to collaborate in sponsorship of
the BSSw Fellowship Program and participate in managing the program. The project
was piloted for one year with NSF support of one BSSw Fellow and one Honorable
Mention. This award expands NSF's participation in the program to support three
BSSw Fellows and three Honorable Mentions each year for two years, the same
level of support provided by DOE. Each BSSw fellow will receive a stipend that
can be used for various activities that promote improved scientific software,
such as organizing a workshop or creating a tutorial. All BSSw fellows and
honorable mentions receive travel support to work with scientific community
members and form a cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF and DOE are leaders in
advanced computing, pushing the growth of computational and data-enabled science
and engineering as an essential driver of scientific and technological progress.
Moreover, NSF and DOE researchers have developed a wide range of high-impact
scientific software for advanced modeling, simulation, discovery, and analysis.
The country faces a software crisis, however, due to disruptive changes in
computer architectures and increasing complexity in next-generation
computational science. NSF partnership in sponsoring the BSSw Fellowship Program
will enable a more robust approach toward pioneering the future of advanced
computing ecosystems in support of American leadership in science and
engineering. The BSSw Fellowship Program enhances workforce development and
pathways to the NSF and DOE software communities, though nurturing a network of
people who advance software practices as a fundamental aspect of increasing
overall scientific productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.