* 2154145
* CAS: Understanding the Electrochemistry of Carboxylate Compound-Based Organic Anodes in Rechargeable Sodium and Potassium Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Andre Clayborne, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 452,082.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Chao Luo and Andre Clayborne of
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at George Mason University are
investigating the electrochemistry of carboxylate compounds in rechargeable
sodium batteries and rechargeable potassium batteries. They are seeking a
fundamental understanding of the correlation between chemical structures and
electrochemical behaviors. Rechargeable sodium batteries and rechargeable
potassium batteries are attractive alternatives to the well-known lithium ion
battery, which are widely used in electric cars, electronic, and energy storage.
Research activities will involve graduate, undergraduate, high school, and
middle school students. Outreach activities include the development of
sustainable battery workshops for high school and middle school students, and
the training of high school students with basic hands-on skills for battery
research to enhance their interests in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current inorganic anodes limit the
development of rechargeable sodium batteries and rechargeable potassium
batteries, because of low capacity, poor cycle life, and sluggish reaction
kinetics. Carboxylate compounds, with their advantages of lightweight and low
cost, stand out as promising anode materials for rechargeable sodium batteries
and rechargeable potassium batteries. However, they can suffer from low
Coulombic efficiency and slow reaction kinetics. Professors Chao Luo and Andre
Clayborne plan to overcome these limitations by studying functional groups,
heteroatoms, conjugation structure, structural isomerism, and interfacial
chemistry in conjunction with computation chemistry and data analytics.
Innovative structure design and facile fabrication approaches will be developed
to synthesize carboxylate-based organic anodes. The combination of extensive
electrochemical and material characterizations, in situ/ex situ electrode
measurements, and computational chemistry could lead to the fundamental
understanding of the battery chemistry of new carboxylate
anodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.