* 2154854
* Synthesis and Reactivity at the Edges of Electrocyclic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Alison Frontier, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Alison J. Frontier of the University of Rochester is studying the
preparation of cyclic molecules using chemical reactions that can be formally
characterized as "electrocyclizations." The processes being explored lie on the
borderline between well-defined reaction classes that are typically considered
to be separate from one another and which operate according to different
principles. A central goal of the project is to learn more about these ambiguous
and little explored transformations by investigating the reactivity of molecules
specially designed to exhibit behavior at the "edges" of an accepted paradigm.
Beyond the theoretical advances anticipated from the research, which combine
insights gained from both experimental and computational chemistry, the work is
expected to provide new practical approaches for the synthesis of complex
molecules containing multiple rings and that possess well-defined three-
dimensional structures. Such compounds are of potential utility as precursors to
new pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other advanced chemical materials
of value to society. The broader impacts of this award will extend to the
benefits to chemical education accrued as Professor Frontier continues to
develop and maintain the innovative "Not Voodoo" website that she created in
2004. The site, which is now complemented by useful social media-based outreach,
is designed to help practitioners of synthetic organic chemistry to demystify
laboratory techniques and procedures. It serves hundreds of experimentalists
each day, from students just beginning their independent research, to more
advanced scientists looking for tips or tricks. "Not Voodoo" also plays a
valuable role in promoting chemical safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
in the Frontier group at the University of Rochester will focus on the
development of three new synthetic methods, each involving an underdeveloped
reaction type that occurs by an ill-defined mechanistic pathway at the edges of
known electrocyclic chemistry. In Project 1, the scope of an ambiguous type of
pentannulation, the "iso-Nazarov" cyclization, is being expanded upon and the
electrocyclic vs. ionic nature of these borderline reactions interrogated by a
combination of experimental and computational techniques. In Project 2, the
boundaries of electrocyclic reactivity are being extended to previously unknown
higher-order cationic electrocyclizations (e.g., 6 pi-election processes leading
to 7-membered rings) by studies of carefully designed unsaturated substrates.
Finally, Project 3 has as its aim the discovery of a route, or a bridge,
allowing efficient passage from radical to electrocyclic chemistry. Herein, a
1,5-hydrogen atom transfer-based radical-polar crossover strategy is being
explored as a means to generate both cationic and anionic intermediates, thereby
potentially accessing electrocyclic chemistry in a novel way. All three projects
are anticipated to lead to significant new methods for the synthesis of unusual
polycycles, including examples containing cycloheptane rings, spirocyclic
motifs, and nitrogen and oxygen heterocycles. Improvements to the Not Voodoo
website are also underway, including: (1) addition of chemical information
resources; (2) introduction of new chemical safety content using information
collected from the Chemical Safety Library; (3) site maintenance, which evolves
continuously with user input; and (4) expanding the scope of the practical
technical content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.