* 2154255
* Expanding Reductive Chemistry and Oxidation State Diversity Using the Synthetic Chemistry of the Rare-Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,249.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor William J. Evans, Chemistry Department, University of
California – Irvine is studying the chemistry of seven new oxidation states of
rare earth elements. Rare earths are heavy metals that have vital roles in
electronics, medicine, and others. The rare earth metals most commonly have an
oxidation state of +3, but some can have other values such as +2. This project
explores the chemistry of seven rare earth elements for which a +2 oxidation
state has recently been discovered. Elements with this new oxidation state have
properties which make them ideal for applications in energy conservation through
magnetism (neodymium in the world’s most powerful magnets) and lighting
(europium and terbium in energy efficient lighting) as well as in medicine
(gadolinium in magnetic resonance imaging), and catalysis (cerium in automotive
catalytic converters). The Evans group is studying how these new oxidation
states can impact fundamental chemistry, while training students in the science
of these strategically important metals. Professor Evans is also pursuing
applications in the development of the smallest, most efficient, magnets that
can be designed at a molecular level, namely single-molecule magnets, and in
quantum information science to make new types of quantum bits, i.e. qubits. The
project provides training and education in the manipulation and application
development of the rare earth elements and contains an outreach component that
encourages middle and high school students to continue in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry of new +2 ions of praseodymium,
gadolinium, terbium, holmium, erbium, and lutetium is being explored to evaluate
the special reactivity and physical properties that can arise from their
unexpected electron configurations which involve not only the valence 4f
orbitals but also the higher energy 5d orbitals. These 4fn5d1 ions differ from
traditional +2 oxidation states of the lanthanide metals that have 4fn+1
electron configurations. The chemistry of the new +2 rare earth ion of yttrium,
a 4d1 system, is also being studied for comparison. The synthesis of new
molecular complexes of these ions has led to a rapidly evolving perspective of
how these new ions can be utilized. For example, a molecular complex of Lu2+ has
been found to have one of the largest electron-nucleus hyperfine coupling
constants that provides a stable transition called a clock transition that could
be used as a qubit with minimum noise. The project also will seek to discover
new small molecule activation reactions, e.g. with nitrogen and nitrogen oxides,
and other new oxidation states, e.g. the +1 ions of the rare earth metals. In
addition to training students to develop technical expertise of f-block
chemistry there is significant outreach to middle and high school students and
participation in a University of California - Irvine Chemistry Undergraduate
Scholars Program to support first generation, low income and minority students
in General Chemistry through peer mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.