* 2154646
* Mechanisms of neuron excitability for vocalizations in songbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Claudio Mello, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

Understanding how the brain controls fine motor skills such as playing the piano
or producing vocalizations such as song requires knowing how electrical
properties of brain cells are regulated. Songbirds, like the zebra finch, are
excellent species for understanding how the brain controls fine motor skills
involved in song production because the juvenile songbird learns to sing its
species songs by imitating an adult of its species. The brain circuits involved
in this imitative learning have been studied for many decades and are now well
described. The project is aimed at understanding the electrical properties
within these well-studied brain regions by focusing on the cells in these areas
and how ions move in and out of channels in these cells to produce electrical
properties. The goal of these studies is to measure precise electrical activity
of these cells and to modify genes in these cells that may influence electrical
properties thereby possibly affecting motor patterns during song production.
These studies will expose undergraduate and high school students to cutting edge
molecular and cellular neuroscience. Students will be recruited with a major
emphasis on underrepresented minorities, including Latin-American trainees,
through participation in a Summer Equity and Neuroscience Programs,
presentations to Native American communities, and participation in minority-
focused meetings. The results of our work will be available through
publications, presentations at scientific conferences, science fairs and Brain
Awareness events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to study how intrinsic
excitable properties of neurons are modulated within the brain circuitry that
subserves a complex learned behavior. We will use zebra finches, a songbird
species with a well characterized vocal circuitry, and focus on nucleus RA
(robustus arcopallialis), a motor cortical area analogous to upper cortical
vocal motor neurons in mammals. We have recently found that high-threshold
voltage gated potassium channels (Kv3.1) are differentially expressed in RA and
undergo marked developmental “switches” in expression, in concert with marked
age differences in the excitable properties of RA neurons. We hypothesize that
these molecular and cellular changes play key roles in shaping RA’s excitability
properties and establishing features of adult RA (e.g. high firing rates and
fidelity) that are important for the emerging bioacoustic features of song
during the critical period for vocal acquisition. We will test these hypotheses
using whole-cell patch clamp recordings in brain slices, in situ hybridization,
and song bioacoustics analysis, as well as viral-based manipulations and dynamic
clamp modeling to mechanistically test the role of specific key ion channel
subunits in modulating the remarkably narrow action potentials of RA projection
neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.