* 2154203
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Neural and perceptual mechanisms that bias mate choice in complex signaling environments
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 572,056.00

Humans and other animals often communicate in complex social environments in
which multiple individuals produce series of repeated vocalizations, and
listeners respond after assessing signal properties that emerge over long times
scales. How listeners track individual signalers through time will determine
outcomes of many consequential decisions, especially if too many competing
signalers create confusion on the part of listeners. This project investigates
the extent to which female frogs choose mates using neural mechanisms that are
susceptible versus resistant to confusion to understand how neural mechanisms in
listeners shape the evolution of vocal behavior. The research focuses on Cope’s
gray treefrog, Hyla chrysoscelis, a species in which prior work shows that
females prefer males that produce vocal mating calls at faster and more regular
rates. The proposed aims will provide a mechanistic view of the sensory and
perceptual biases frequently proposed to impact signaling and mate choice. The
aims develop new technological approaches to characterize behavioral responses
and record neural activity that will enable new insights into how neural
circuits in a listener can track an individual signaler in noisy environments.
This project will provide training and career opportunities for postdoctoral
fellows who identify as members of historically excluded groups in STEM and for
up to 12 undergraduate students each year. Finally, the project will extend a
highly successful educational game that teaches undergraduates the fundamentals
of neural decision making by having students build creatures with simple neural
circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal integrates behavioral and neural
approaches to determine how receivers evaluate a series of signals in complex
signaling environments. Aim 1 will determine how female preferences for male
call rate and regularity depend on the number of competing signalers using
classical behavioral phonotaxis measures of preference. Aim 2 will use new
sensor technology that measures detailed movement dynamics to study the
perceptual processes females employ when assessing call rate and regularity. Aim
3 will leverage newly developed flexible electrodes to evaluate how female
preferences for series of calls are dynamically coded by neural circuits in a
major sensory-motor midbrain region. If the proposed research finds that sexual
selection is reduced in complex acoustic environments, the experiments will
identify neural mechanisms that constrain the ability to follow signal series
through time. Alternatively, if sexual selection operates effectively even with
many signalers present, the experiments will identify behavioral and neural
mechanisms that support the ability of females to exhibit mate preferences even
in active leks. In addition to opening new paths of inquiry into how the
capabilities or constraints of neural processing impact mate choice, this
project seeks to resolve neuroscience studies demonstrating that repeated
stimuli tend to elicit weaker sensory responses over time with behavioral
ecological models for sensory and perceptual biases that posit that preferred
mating signals are those that that elicit stronger sensory responses in
receivers. Probing the intersection of these conflicting expectations will help
achieve greater consilience between behavioral ecological and neurobiological
approaches to understanding animal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.