* 2154233
* Spin Effects on the Excited-state Dynamics of Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* James McCusker, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor James K. McCusker of the Department
of Chemistry at Michigan State University will be exploring how certain aspects
of the electronic structure of transition metal-based complexes manifest in
their photo-induced chemical properties. The specific aspect being studied is
electron spin, which is the origin of many properties that people are widely
familiar with (e.g., magnetism) but whose influence on photochemical reactivity
has not been elucidated. To achieve this goal, the research program will involve
the synthesis and characterization of a range of chemical systems that have been
designed to enable the establishment of a clear correlation between the spin
properties of the system and the photo-induced properties that they exhibit.
Working at the interface of synthetic organic and inorganic and experimental
physical chemistry, the research will provide a fertile training ground for
students to understand and appreciate the interconnection between these formally
disparate subfields of chemistry while developing fundamental new insights into
how a very basic component of atomic structure can be leveraged to create new
molecular functionality for a wide variety of potential light-enabled
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservation of angular momentum is a
fundamental property of Nature. While its influence on certain aspects of
molecular science are well known, this research program is asking the following:
to what extent does this concept manifest in photo-induced chemical processes?
To address this fundamental question, the research will involve the synthesis of
a series of transition metal-based donor-acceptor complexes whose spin
properties can be systematically varied, either by judicious choice of a single
metal ion (e.g., replacement of Cr(III) by Co(III)) or by exploiting the
temperature dependence associated with the spin ladder of a Heisenberg exchange-
coupled polynuclear metal cluster. Characterization of the photo-induced
electron and/or energy transfer dynamics will focus on steady-state and time-
resolved spectroscopies, including variable-temperature ultrafast optical and
x-ray methods. It is anticipated that the research will provide insight into how
zero-field spin polarization manifests in the photophysics of molecular systems
with the goal of demonstrating how consideration of these effects can suggest
new approaches for the development of compositional platforms using spin as a
design feature for creating and manipulating photo-induced molecular
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.