* 2154771
* NSF-BSF: SaTC: CORE: Small: Rowhammering Peripherals
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Donald Porter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

This project studies an emerging, potential attack vector against modern
computer systems: vulnerable peripheral devices, such as flash storage or
network devices. Many modern computer memory (Random Access Memory, or RAM)
designs are vulnerable to a rowhammering attack, where some regions of memory
can be corrupted by repeated accesses from application code. This project
observes that peripheral devices are no longer purely hardware, but instead have
their own internal CPU and RAM, which can also be attacked---indirectly---
through heavy input/output (I/O) operations. The novelties of this project are
demonstrating a proof-of-concept that one can potentially deny service or gain
administrative privilege on a system through vulnerable peripheral devices, as
well as creating strategies to mitigate these attacks. The project's broader
significance and importance is hardening the security of modern computing
systems, especially cloud computing, where different users may share vulnerable
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies rowhammering the internal
RAM in modern peripherals, using only standard, unprivileged I/O operations at
the high bandwidths offered by these peripherals. The project studies practical
attacks on Solid State Drives (SSDs), traditional Network Interface Cards
(NICs), and emerging SmartNICs, launched by unprivileged users, such as a guest
virtual machine in a multi-tenant cloud system, and using only standard I/O
patterns. The work studies the impact on vulnerability to this attack of design
choices in both device firmware and operating system device drivers, using both
open and closed devices, and, in the case of SmartNICs, using both custom and
standard network offload functions. Because it is difficult to defend against
rowhammering entirely in hardware, the proposed work innovates in efficient,
software/hardware cooperative defenses, which can potentially improve future
peripheral hardware designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.