* 2154183
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Systematic Detection Of and Defenses Against Next-Generation Microarchitectural Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Christopher Fletcher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 103,652.00

It is difficult to compute on sensitive data without inadvertently leaking it to
the wrong party. Making matters worse, processor design significantly
exacerbates this problem. Specifically, processors are made up of performance
optimizations (called microarchitecture). Research has shown how a savvy
attacker can manipulate microarchitecture to leak sensitive data. This project’s
novelties are to design methodologies and tools for analyzing microarchitecture
through a security lens: capturing its potential to leak sensitive data and
providing actionable feedback to hardware designers and software writers to help
avoid sensitive data breaches at both hardware design time and software run
time. The project’s broader impact and importance is to develop a means for
building efficient, secure processors—i.e., those where performance and security
are not mutually exclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is broken into two
synergistic thrusts. Thrust 1, Analysis, develops techniques for understanding
and succinctly characterizing the information leakage potential of
microarchitectural components (at various stages in their development) when they
are integrated into a larger design. Thrust 2, Hardening, develops techniques
for using said characterizations (specifications), e.g., generated by thrust 1,
to derive software mitigations. In both thrusts, a major goal is to develop
techniques that can be automated. Correspondingly, by the end of the project,
the goal is to develop and disseminate a complete end-to-end prototype framework
that can be used alongside traditional hardware design flows to 1) enable
security-efficiency co-design by hardware engineers and 2) protect programs when
run on previously analyzed microarchitectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.