* 2154815
* CAS: Atom-Economical Decarbonylative Processes Using Low-Cost Heterogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Adelina Voutchkova-Kostal, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2025
* USD 440,301.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Adelina Voutchkova-Kostal of George Washington University is studying efficient
and minimally wasteful methods to prepare complex molecules from renewable
starting materials containing carbonyl (C=O) groups. The methods of interest
involve chemical reactions in which the carbonyl group controls the site of the
initial transformation before it is ultimately lost during the course of product
formation. Promoting the desired 'decarbonylative' reactions will rely on the
design of tunable clay-based catalysts which are anticipated to be directly
applicable to both small and large-scale synthetic processes. The methodology
developed is expected to find use in fine chemical synthesis, the conversion of
biomass to value-added materials, and in future manufacturing processes aimed at
facilitating a sustainable chemical economy. The broader impacts of the funded
project will extend to societal benefits accrued by the participation of Dr.
Voutchkova-Kostal and her coworkers in outreach and educational activities that
include the mentoring of middle and high school students from the local area and
the provision of summer research experiences for undergraduate students from
across the country. In addition to these programs, which will help to broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, all students engaging with the
Voutchkova-Kostal research group will gain transferrable skills and valuable
experiences in the evaluation of the environmental impacts of chemical
manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By their avoidance of traditional
organohalide starting materials, decarbonylation and decarbonylative coupling
reactions have the potential to minimize halogenated waste, allow for the use of
aldehydes from renewable biomass sources, and facilitate new selective C-C bond
forming reactions. Notwithstanding these advantages, such processes have yet to
find universal application in organic synthesis. To help to address this
deficiency, the funded research focuses on the development of a suite of atom-
economical and chemoselective decarbonylative transformations based on a low-
cost and tunable Pd-layered double hydroxide (Pd-LDH) heterogeneous catalyst
platform. Specifically, three types of reaction are being pursued: (i)
chemoselective methods for decarbonylation of carbonyl group-containing
substrates, (ii) decarbonylative aldol condensation processes, and (iii)
decarbonylative analogs of the Suzuki and Heck cross-coupling reactions. The
high-loading of precious metal complexes typically required for conventional
homogenous catalysis-based decarbonylation chemistry, makes such reactions
poorly chemoselective and both expensive and environmentally non-sustainable to
implement. By contrast, the approach being explored aims to overcome these
challenges by the use of easy-to-handle solid supported catalysts that offer
expanded use of decarbonylation as an atom-economical strategy for selective C-C
bond formation and defunctionalization. At a fundamental level, the studies will
help to enable the rational design of supported catalysts that can outperform
homogeneous analogues in function, while minimizing environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.