* 2154482
* New Coupled-cluster Methods for Linear and Non-linear Valence and Core-level Spectroscopy in Gas and Condensed Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Anna Krylov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Anna Krylov of the University of Southern California is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical approaches, computer
algorithms, and software to describe interaction of molecules and light in new
regimes (high energy, high intensities, etc). Using light to interrogate matter
is the basis of spectroscopy, which provides the most powerful set of tools for
unraveling mechanisms of chemical reactions, structures and intrinsic properties
of materials and biological objects. Using high-energy (X-rays) and high-
intensity radiation opens new exciting opportunities, which motivate the
worldwide development of multi-billion facilities for advanced light sources.
Recent advances in beam quality in these facilities greatly expanded possible
applications of X-rays, giving rise to a proliferation of techniques including
those operating in time-resolved and non-linear regimes. These novel techniques
promise to greatly expand our ability to interrogate molecular structure and
dynamics, but their full potential can only be realized when experiment is
augmented by accurate theoretical tools for modeling these phenomena. Despite
significant efforts, the theory is still lagging behind the experimental
capabilities, creating a bottleneck for maximizing the scientific impact of
multi-billion advanced light source facilities. Krylov will bridge this gap by
developing novel electronic structure methods for modeling linear and non-linear
core-level spectroscopies in the gas and condensed phases. The research plans
include training and mentoring of graduate students and postdocs for careers in
academia and industry as well as contributions to the research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capitalizing on her previous work, Krylov
will further extend highly reliable coupled-cluster (CC) and equation-of-motion
CC (EOM-CC) methods to the domain of core-level ionized and excited states by
exploiting core-valence separation (CVS) and damped response theory (or complex
polarization propagator, CPP) approaches. Specifically, she will further develop
theoretical framework and efficient computer codes for modeling E2PA (entangled
2PA), PECD (photoelectron circular dichroism), MCD (magnetic CD), and electronic
SFG (sum-frequency generation) spectra. She aims to develop a uniform
theoretical framework for both UV–vis (valence transitions) and X-ray (core-
level transitions) domains. Continuing close collaborations with
experimentalists guides and calibrate the developments, as well as helps to
design new experiments and interpret the experimental
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.