* 2154589
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Bubble Aid: Assistive AI to Improve the Robustness and Security of Reading Hand-Marked Ballots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Chengcui Zhang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 98,787.00

In the realm of election systems that scan and process hand-marked paper
ballots, the most sophisticated ones simply look at the average darkness of
marks across a bubble target. This allows traditional paper ballot scanners to
miss marks that are insufficiently filled in, or to miscategorize stray marks
and scanner noise as filled bubbles. In addition, an inherent security problem
is that these systems are not designed to identify potentially fraudulent voting
cases where a singular author has filled out ballots for multiple voters. The
project’s novelties, responding to these problems, is building Bubble Aid, an
Artificial Intelligence (AI) system, aided by data from millions of real ballots
that recognizes hand-marked bubble targets more effectively than existing
systems. The project's broader significance and importance lies in improving the
efficiency and security of election systems that use hand-marked ballots, with
wider implications to other applications of hand-marked forms, such as
standardized testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is building Bubble Aid as
an assistive tool which works as part of a post-election ballot auditing system,
which can be used during the "canvass" period before an election is finalized.
The goal is to identify the ballots where Bubble Aid disagrees with the official
ballot tabulator, and present these ballots to election workers for their
ultimate disambiguation. By applying state of the art techniques from the domain
of image processing and deep learning, trained on a large corpus of actual
ballot marks, Bubble-Aid’s goal is achieving significantly higher accuracy at
hand-marked paper ballot scanning than any existing system and also detecting
potential fraudulent cases of multiple ballots filled in the same hand. In
designing and testing the effectiveness of Bubble Aid, the research team is
conducting innovative human-participant experiments for a variety of tasks
related to this work. This includes requesting participants to mark test
ballots, deliberately injecting noise into them, or filling multiple ballots to
emulate the fraudulent scenario, in order to gain additional training
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.