* 2154830
* Controlling Magnetic Excitation Pathways via Molecular Design of Anisotropic Dipolar Spin Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeffrey Rinehart, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Jeffrey D. Rinehart of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of California, San Diego and his research team
will work toward the design of magnetic interactions at the single molecule
level. The team is targeting a specific set of materials that interact via
intuitive and controllable mechanisms akin to normal bar magnets, despite their
quantum mechanical nature. Access to these new materials has the potential to
offer new avenues to the design of quantum spin interactions from the bottom up.
The insight garnered from the groupâ€™s research will be used to hone fundamental
models of spin relaxation and offer new entanglement mechanisms in quantum
information science. This project combines subjects of inorganic, organic,
theoretical, and computational chemistry and will be conducted primarily by
graduate and undergraduate students at University of California, San Diego.
Outreach within the scope of this project will be a collaboration with the
Preuss School UC San Diego, a charter school for middle and high school low-
income scholars with goals to become first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the spin wavefunction of high moment, high
anisotropy lanthanide-based molecules requires broadly applicable and feasibly
implementable synthetic guidelines both to optimize desired magnetic properties
in distinct units and to extend into materials of higher dimensionality. Many
approaches have been pursued in this regard, including optimizing the crystal
field to maximize single-ion anisotropy and promoting strong orbital exchange
interactions between magnetic metal centers. Emphasizing control and
versatility, this work attempts to develop a general strategy to emergent
complexity through a building block approach based on the magnetic dipolar
interaction between highly anisotropic units. Preliminary work has established
that magnetic orientational anisotropy is consistently and predictably enforced
for an erbium ion (Er3+) when bound to a cyclooctatetraene dianion, leaving
other ligand sites available to establish connectivity. The predictable
magnitude and direction of the magnetic moment allow intuitive design of
through-space dipolar interaction pathways. The synthetic accessibility and
flexibility of the magnetic building unit should allow for tight control of
molecular structure to modify, test, and describe this interaction across
symmetry, angular, and dimensional parameter space, creating the potential for a
wavefunction-by-design approach to molecular spin
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.