* 2154781
* Minimally Empirical, First Principles-Derived Reactive Potential for Accelerated Simulations of Chemically Interacting Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Alexander Mironenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 380,340.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Alex Mironenko of the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is developing minimally empirical reactive
interatomic potentials from first principles for accelerating chemical reaction
simulations and materials discoveries. Quantum chemical methods being developed
over the last 100 years have led to new molecules, materials, and reactions
predicted on a computer, reducing the amount of costly trial-and-error
experimentation. The methods, however, remain too expensive to describe all
intricacies of chemical transformations. Data-driven approximate methods – so-
called interatomic potentials – are more affordable but often miss essential
physics and require large, expensive data sets for their accuracy. Mironenko
will develop interatomic potentials that will incorporate all required physics
at a low cost using an overlooked “chemical pseudo-potential” theory introduced
in the 1960s. His research group will implement the method using general-purpose
software and assess its performance on a chemical reaction of significance to
renewable energy. More broadly, the technique aims to quantify and unify
fundamental concepts of chemical reactivity and will be integrated into
educational modules for both undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generalize the minimally empirical
reactive potential, demonstrated for the simplest hydrogen clusters, to main-
group elements containing s and p valence orbitals. Several hypotheses and ideas
pertaining to the method will be tested, including, but not limited to (1)
electronegativity equilibration, (2) effective atomic pseudo-potentials, and (3)
analytical bond orders derived from the underlying quantum theory. The method
will be implemented using general-purpose, parallelizable open-access software,
designed to compute the reactive potential energy surface at a low computational
cost. The method will be used to study the mechanism of organocatalytic C-C
coupling of formaldehyde to form platform chemicals - C3 oxygenates. The choice
is motivated by its impact and relative simplicity, enabling direct comparison
of predictions with state-of-the-art ab initio methods. If successful, the
proposed method will pave the way to systematically derived, minimally
empirical, and transferable reactive potentials, thereby accelerating data
generation and further enabling predictive computational chemistry, catalysis,
and materials science. The research also has the potential to create new
knowledge about the fundamental origins of elementary, textbook electronic
structure theories (Huckel, molecular orbital theory), potentially opening up
new approaches to the description/teaching of theoretical physical chemistry, in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.