* 2154848
* LnIII Complexes Displaying ErIII-centered Upconversion Emission in Solution and the Solid State with YbIII, NdIII or a Porphyrin-based ligand as Activators
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ana de Bettencourt-Dias, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Anne E. V. Gorden of Texas Tech
University, Ana de Bettencourt-Dias of the University of Nevada, Reno, and Jorge
Monteiro of California Polytechnic State University-Humboldt will study
lanthanide complexes with erbium, ytterbium, and neodymium to develop new
compounds that have the potential to display efficient upconversion emission
both in the solid state and in solution. In two-photon upconversion, light of
lower energy non-destructive wavelengths, such as infrared light, is converted
to higher energy emission in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum
through a materials-excitation mechanism. The development of these new metal
complexes as water-soluble compounds is expected to enable their application as
new luminescent probes for bio-imaging of cells in real time without the need to
employ damaging, high-energy radiation. In the long term, such studies have the
potential to open up new vistas for biomedical science, by providing enabling
tools to study processes in cells and biological tissues without perturbing the
biology. Such complexes might, for example, provide a new means of analyzing
metabolic processes or the reactivity of metalloenzymes in living tissues,
thereby introducing new readouts for both healthy cell biology and dysfunctional
cell biology, as a possible diagnostic tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While selected
examples of Ln(III)-upconversion emission in the solid state exist, the
parameters for efficient upconversion emission in solution are not well
established. To probe these parameters, the Gordon research team will isolate
multi-metallic Ln(III)-ion complexes with water-soluble naphthylsalophen-based
ligands and pre-organized supramolecular structures and characterize their
photophysical properties. Ln(III)-ions have characteristic line-like spectra
with long-lived emission, which can be easily distinguished from background
fluorescence. Importantly, toxicity and low cell penetrability are not inherent
concerns with Ln(III)-complexes and the emission properties of these complexes
are not dependent on their crystalline phase. To realize upconversion emission,
a combination of Yb(III) and Er(III) or Nd(III) and Er(III) in the complexes is
needed, requiring careful balance of the necessary stoichiometry. Using
judiciously designed systems, Dr. Gordon and her team will tune the properties
of the Ln(III)-ion complexes for improved solubility, biocompatibility, and
photophysical properties. Optimally, such probes should be water-soluble,
display high emission efficiencies at emission wavelengths that are easily
discriminated from tissue and cell fluorescence, and should be excited at
wavelengths that are not absorbed by or damaging to biological tissues. This
work is expected to contribute to better understanding of the structure-
luminescence relationship that leads to increased upconversion emission in the
solid state and in solution. The insights gained from this work have the
potential to help guide the design and development of effective new luminescent
probes, ultimately for applications in biological
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.