* 2154228
* LTREB Renewal: Climate driven acidification in lowland Neotropical streams: building on a 30-year study of groundwater-surface water interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Luis Ramirez-Ulate, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 03/31/2027
* USD 597,444.00

Ongoing long-term studies in Costa Rica streams have found strong implications
of drought on the relationship between the water chemistry and the adjacent
forest soils. Prior long-term studies in environmental biology uncovered the
occurrence of acidification events in these lowland streams. Acidification
events are short periods, from hours to days, when the water becomes moderately
acid (low pH values). Their occurrence is the result of interactions between the
stream and the surrounding forest and result from changes in rainfall. During
the dry season organic materials accumulate on the forest floor, when the rains
start these materials breakdown, releasing carbon dioxide that moves with the
water into streams, creating acid conditions in streams (or lowering the water
pH). Acidification events become extreme during El Niño years, which in Costa
Rica has drier and wetter seasons than normal. Changes in acidification affect
how streams function and the associated stream biodiversity. Projected changes
in rainfall associated with global climate change could exacerbate the effects
of acidification events on stream ecosystems. Prior research in lowland streams
in Costa Rica indicate that stream invertebrates and algae can withstand
moderately acid conditions, but are affected when conditions are extreme or more
frequent. This Long-term Research in Environmental Biology (LTREB) award will
investigate acidification effects on stream ecosystems in lowland Costa Rica.
Research will take place at La Selva Biological Station, on the Caribbean slope
of Costa Rica, where streams have been under study for more than 30 years. The
main objective of this award is to understand the mechanisms and consequences of
changing rainfall patterns on the acidity and biotic response of tropical
streams. This study would provide training opportunities for graduate students
as well as outreach to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will explore
the consequences of the episodic acidification events and the hypothesis that an
influx of soil-derived CO2 via subsurface flow paths contributes to those pH
declines, signaling a tight coupling among rainfall, terrestrial, and aquatic
ecosystems. Climate-driven acidification events are stronger and more common in
solute-poor, poorly-buffered, streams than in solute-rich, well-buffered,
streams - another characteristic of the study landscape. The award will continue
evaluating this hypothesis by addressing three main objectives: (1) to assess
relations among daily, seasonal, annual, and decadal patterns in stream water
chemistry with major climate events (e.g., El Niño and La Niña - ENSO), focusing
on extreme events using high frequency sampling. (2) Assess biotic responses to
climate-driven acidification, focusing on event duration under laboratory
conditions. Finally, (3) to supplement the experimental buffering of a low-
solute stream with laboratory experiments of individual taxa. An analysis of the
long-term records of stream macroinvertebrates indicates an overall decline in
insects and strong differences in assemblage composition between solute-poor,
poorly-buffered, streams compared to solute-rich, well-buffered, streams.
Climate trends and global circulation models predict changes in the frequency
and intensity of weather extremes. For Central America, models predict greater
seasonality, similar to patterns observed during ENSO years. In the Caribbean
lowlands of Costa Rica, El Niño events result in abnormally low precipitation
during the dry season, while La Niña results is high precipitation. Thus, the
award will advance the understanding of the consequences of extreme climate
events on tropical lowland stream ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.