* 2154931
* Frame Theory and Phase Retrieval
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Daniel Freeman, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2025
* USD 332,696.00

Frames give a continuous, linear, and stable method for reconstructing a signal
from linear measurements. However, there are many situations where physical
limitations result in the loss of important aspects of those measurements. This
imposes constraints on which frames can be used for the analysis of a signal,
and different algorithms are required for reconstruction based only on partial
information. For example, phase retrieval is applied in X-ray crystallography
and coherent diffraction imaging where scientists are only able to identify the
magnitude (or intensity) of each linear measurement of a signal. A different
scenario occurs when using sensors with a fixed range, such as a pixel in a
digital camera. In this case, any measurement with an intensity above the range
saturates the sensor which then outputs the maximum value. In both situations,
we can formalize the physical limitations imposed by the measurement process as
applying a non-linear operator to a sequence of linear measurements. Although
these non-linear operators are very simple, the loss of linearity can cause
significant difficulty for signal reconstruction in high dimensions which
becomes further confounded in the presence of error. These kinds of
reconstruction scenarios arise naturally in many circumstances, and researchers
in a variety of disciplines have developed solutions for specific applications.
This makes the mathematical foundation for solving these types of inverse
questions particularly important, and has led to significant research being
devoted to the mathematics of phase retrieval in particular. The investigators
and their students are working on a unique approach to expanding the
mathematical theory of phase retrieval and saturation recovery by using a
combination of techniques from frame theory, probability, and the geometry of
Banach spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both phase retrieval and saturation
recovery require the redundancy of a frame, and are not possible with a basis.
One component of the project concerns identifying the exact amount of redundancy
which is necessary to do phase retrieval or saturation recovery using a frame or
fusion frame. The second component considers a generalization of the phase
retrieval scenario to the setting of subspaces of Banach lattices where the goal
is to identify a vector in a subspace from its absolute value. This connection
allows for established techniques in Banach lattices to prove new theorems about
phase retrieval, and also opens a new line of inquiry in the theory of Banach
lattices itself. It is not only important for phase retrieval to be possible,
but for phase retrieval to be stable under error. The best known methods for
constructing frames for high dimensional spaces which do stable phase retrieval
are random constructions which achieve a certain stability bound with high
probability. It is much easier to construct continuous frames which do stable
phase retrieval with a certain stability bound, but discrete frames are better
suited for computations. Because of this, important parts of the project involve
both (1) determining when a continuous frame may be sampled to construct a frame
with given frame bounds which does phase retrieval with a given stability bound
and (2) using probabilistic methods to determine when a continuous frame may be
randomly sampled to achieve such a frame with high probability. The final
component of the project introduces phase retrieval for vector bundles over
manifolds. That is, instead of recovering a single vector up to a phase factor
from the magnitude of its frame coefficients, the goal is to use a continuously
moving frame to recover a section of a vector bundle up to an equivalence
relation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.