* 2154523
* Quantifying Sources and Sinks of Rossby Wave Activity in the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2025
* USD 974,298.00

It is useful to think of the atmospheric circulation above the middle latitudes
as a progression of waves, with alternating northward and southward air flow,
superimposed on an eastward-flowing mean jet stream. The theory based on this
wave-mean flow framework has been successful in explaining many aspects of the
general circulation including the evolution of frontal weather systems and the
effect of mountains on the upper-tropospheric flow. The Prpincipal Investigator
(PI) has contributed to this theory by developing a measure of waviness which
captures a trade-off in which wave activity increases at the expense of mean jet
speed and vice versa, a consequence of the fluid analog of angular momentum
conservation known as Kelvin's circulation theorem. The measure is called Finite
Amplitude Wave Activity (FAWA), where finite amplitude refers to the fact that
the measure can be used even when the waves distort the flow enough to create
large circulation features which break off from the prevailing flow. FAWA
represents the bulk wave activity around a latitude circle, and the PI has
developed a related quantity called Local Wave Activity (LWA) to express
waviness at each longitude along a latitude circle. Previous work by the PI's
team has used the FAWA/LWA framework to explain the breakdown of the polar
vortex during Sudden Stratospheric Warmings (SSWs) and the formation of blocking
anticyclones (see AGS-1909522).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of FAWA and
LWA to problems like SSWs and blocking relies on their ability to capture
interactions between waves and the eastward mean flow, which can be understood
without knowing how the waves are generated or what eventually happens to them.
But the generation and dissipation of wave activity are also represented in the
evolution equations for FAWA and LWA, and the equations can be used to study
wave sources and sinks and their role in atmospheric circulation. For example
the dissipation of wave activity through diffusive mixing matters for the
strength of the low-latitude meridional overturning cells (the Hadley cells),
thus analysis of the sink term could offer insights into the expansion of the
cells and the associated aridification seen in climate change simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of sources and sinks is promising but also
challenging due to the need for intricate calculations involving small spatial
scales and quantities which are hard to observe. Work under this award takes up
the challenge, using a variety of techniques applied to idealized models,
archived climate model output, and observational datasets (the ERA5 reanalysis
in particular). Topics to be addressed through source/sink analysis include the
seasonal cycle of wave activity, the role of the atmospheric boundary layer in
generating and damping wave activity, and the generation of wave activity by
condensational heating in convective clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal value due to the connection between upper-tropospheric waviness and
surface weather, for instance blocking events are associated with extreme
precipitation and SSWs can lead to severe cold air outbreaks. The software used
to generate FAWA, LWA, and source/sink terms will be made openly available to
the public via github, along with documentation on their use. Education and
outreach are conducted through a biennial summer school and a local community
science center. In addition, the project supports two graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow, thereby fostering the next generation of scientists in this
research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.