* 2154724
* CAS: Nitrogen-Coupled Carbon Dioxide Conversion to Methylamine: Molecular Level Understanding and Tailoring of the Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hailiang Wang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 547,426.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Hailiang Wang of Yale University and Julien Panetier of Binghamton University
are studying chemical reactions that use renewable electricity to transform
carbon dioxide and nitrate, both of which are major environmental pollutants,
into methylamine, an organic compound that has widespread applications in
chemical synthesis, pharmaceuticals, agriculture, and the aerospace industry.
This transformation holds promise for recycling environmental wastes into
valuable chemical products under mild conditions. In this project, the team will
combine experimental and computational research to systematically study the
mechanism of the electrocatalytic reaction. With the guidance of fundamental
mechanistic understanding, the team will work to develop more selective and
active catalysts, as well as optimize the best catalysts to improve reaction
performance toward practical applications. This project will also provide
educational opportunities in chemistry, with a focus on catalysis and
sustainability, via outreach activities, classroom teaching, and research
training to a diverse body of students in STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Hailiang Wang of
Yale University and Julien Panetier of Binghamton University are studying the
electrochemical co-reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrate in aqueous media to
methylamine catalyzed by cobalt phthalocyanine molecules supported on carbon
nanotubes. The goal of this project is to understand the catalytic mechanism and
improve the reaction performance. The team will combine theoretical
calculations, kinetic studies, and in situ vibrational spectroscopy measurements
to analyze the reaction mechanism. Selectivity- and rate-limiting steps, as well
as their contributing factors, will be identified. Key reaction intermediates
and the C-N coupling step will be examined. With guidance from enhanced
mechanistic understanding, molecular structure tailoring, nanoscale
interactions, and microenvironment tuning will be combined to develop the best
catalytic systems for the most efficient and sustainable synthetic processes
achievable. This project will also provide educational opportunities in
chemistry, with a focus on catalysis and sustainability, via outreach
activities, classroom teaching, and research training to a diverse body of
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.