* 2154028
* Nonadiabatic Transition Probabilities:  Applications in Spectroscopy, Quantum Thermodynamics, and Quantum Computing
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Katharine Hunt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 450,100.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Katharine Hunt of Michigan State University is
developing new quantum mechanical theory and computational analyses to determine
the changes in molecular states caused by external electromagnetic fields. Hunt
and her research group will analyze the probability for a time-dependent
electromagnetic field to induce transitions from the initial quantum state of a
molecule to excited states. The results are expected to have important
applications in analyzing energy uptake and energy conversion devices. The work,
heat, power, and efficiency of quantum Otto engines will be analyzed within the
new theory developed by the Hunt research group. This analysis is expected to
show that quantum engines can exceed traditional Carnot limits on the conversion
of heat into useful work. The analysis may also suggest means of improving the
performance of quantum refrigerators, which are needed due to the push to reduce
the size of electronic components and the associated problems of heat
dissipation. Novel tests of the theory will be carried out in collaborations by
the Hunt research group with experimental research groups. The theory will be
applied in the context of quantum computing, to suggest new algorithms that may
minimize error and to probe effects of quantum entanglement. In addition to the
potential broader impacts in engineering and computer science mentioned above,
the project will have broader impact in integrating STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) research with education, through the inclusion of
undergraduates and high school students in the research team and the preparation
of pedagogical articles. The full participation of women, persons with
disabilities, and underrepresented minorities will be encouraged throughout the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hunt group has explored a theory that goes
beyond Diracâ€™s theory of transitions, to separate the actual excitations of
quantum systems from the adiabatic response to a perturbation. The group will
develop methods to take full account of decoherence and decay of excited states,
leading to predictions for the occupancy of excited states that are expected to
differ from Dirac theory, after a perturbation has ended. Vibrational
spectroscopy of polyaromatic compounds, ultrafast spectroscopy of small
molecules, and nonadiabatic electronic transitions in larger molecules will be
used as test cases. In addition, the production of molecules in selected excited
rovibrational states via Stark-induced adiabatic Raman passage will be
investigated, with the potential effects of non-zero phase damping added to the
existing theory. As applied to the operation of quantum Otto engines, the Hunt-
group theory is known to produce differences from previous theories in the
quantum-state occupancies at the end of the power stroke; it is expected to
predict differences in the overall engine efficiency, surpassing the Carnot
limits. A new algorithm for adiabatic quantum computing will be investigated,
based on step-wise separation of nonadiabatic and adiabatic response, to reduce
errors. The work is expected to have broader impact in engineering and computer
science, through applications to finite-time quantum operations, energy uptake
and conversion devices, quantum engines, quantum refrigerators, and quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.