* 2154791
* Uncovering Energy and Charge Transport Mechanisms in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Perovskite Quantum Wells with Nonlinear Action Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 455,000.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program of the Division
of Chemistry, Wei You and Andrew Moran of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are developing two-dimensional
organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite (2D-OIHPs) materials for their potential use
in solar cells. In these materials, layers of organic molecules confine
photoexcited electrons within inorganic metal-halide sheets termed “quantum
wells.” The goal of this research is to enable long-range electron transport in
such 2D-OIHP based solar cells by tuning the electronic structures of the
interstitial organic layers using derivatives of tetrazine molecules. Materials
developments will be guided by direct measurements of electron velocities with
newly developed laser spectroscopies. The project lies at the interface of
physical and materials chemistry. Graduate student education and outreach
activities involving K-12 students are integral parts of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites
(2D-OIHPs), in which organic cations and inorganic halide frameworks are
assembled in an alternating manner into a layered structure, have been
intensively studied due to their unique optoelectronic properties. The inorganic
phases of these systems (i.e., quantum wells) exhibit properties that depend on
the number of stacked metal-halide octahedra and interactions with the organic
layers. In the proposed work, derivatives of tetrazine will be incorporated into
2D-OIHPs to promote out-of-plane electron transfer processes by varying donor-
acceptor interactions and distances between neighboring quantum wells. The team
hypothesizes that out-of-plane electron transfer will be facilitated by aligning
the LUMO levels of tetrazine spacer molecules with the conduction band minima of
the quantum wells. In addition to conventional techniques, the team will apply
newly developed, multidimensional “action spectroscopies” to distinguish energy
and charge transport dynamics in these systems. This collaborative proposal
leverages the complementary expertise of research groups who specialize in (i)
materials synthesis and device fabrication as well as (ii) the development and
application of multidimensional laser spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.