* 2154999
* Multi-scale Modeling of Macromolecular Liquids, and  Macromolecules in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Marina Guenza, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Marina Guenza of the University of Oregon
will design multiscale modeling simulations for macromolecular systems that
combine advanced coarse-grained models with atomistic simulations. The Guenza
group will develop coarse-grained models of macromolecular liquids and
macromolecules in solution. Synthetic macromolecular liquids will play an
essential role in the transition from fossil carbon-based to renewable energy
sources. An emerging and impelling societal goal is to design eco-friendly
polymeric materials that maintain specific, desirable macroscopic properties.
Biological macromolecules, i.e. proteins and nucleic acids are the building
blocks of super-molecular machines that guide life processes. Modeling
biomacromolecular behavior is expected to provide invaluable information and
potential provide insight on biomacromolecular dysfunction and its relation to
disease. By adopting multiscale modeling procedures, Guenza and coworkers will
study how the global macromolecular properties depend on their local molecular
structure. These studies cannot be completed by atomistic simulations alone. In-
house computer codes will be shared with the scientific community through GitHub
and dedicated websites. As a part of her broader impact, Guenza will further
expand the student-led peer mediator program called DuckREFS that she has
initiated in the Chemistry Department at the University of Oregon. This program
trains graduate students to act as neutral, third-party resources for fellow
peers in alleviating stress and resolving conflict. The students learn active
listening, conflict negotiation, and dispute
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project will develop the
Integral Equation Theory of Coarse-Graining (IECG) by studying enthalpy,
entropy, free energy, and isothermal compressibility, predicted by IECG across
multiple resolutions. The implementation of temperature transferability of the
IECG potential, and the extension of IECG to fine resolution using machine
learning will enhance the applicability of the method. Atomistic and IECG
simulation will be combined in an Adaptive Resolution Simulation (AdResS). The
proposed work involves the scientific collaboration with Prof. Luigi delle Site
at the Freie Universit√§t in Berlin who spearheaded AdResS. The second part of
this research project aims to further extend the Langevin Equation for Protein
Dynamics (LE4PD). LE4PD is an efficient and accurate method to describe protein
dynamics because it accounts for local conformational barriers, as well as the
hydrophobic core, and hydrodynamic interactions. The proposed research will
extend LE4PD by including new terms that couple protein fluctuations with
rotation, translation, and viscous forces. The calculated coupling terms should
facilitate the application of these methods to protein binding and to the
formation of protein-DNA complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.