* 2154834
* From Protein Structure Predictions to Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Matthias Heyden, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 481,740.00

Professor Matthias Heyden at Arizona State University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division for the development of new methods to characterize and
predict collective dynamics in proteins. The goal is to include dynamics and its
effect on protein function in structure-based protein design processes and
eliminate current limitations in the design of efficient enzyme catalysts. This
promises to enable the design of tailored enzymes that catalyze novel reactions
and replace energy and cost intensive processes in the synthesis of valuable
compounds. The key development will be a series of new algorithms that capture
anharmonic low-frequency motions of proteins in all-atom computer simulations.
The computational nature of this project is further used to developed research
opportunities for online undergraduate students that can be carried out
remotely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein structure has long been regarded as the
key determinant of protein function, for example, the ability of enzymes to
catalyze a specific chemical reaction. However, an increasing body of evidence
shows that structure alone is insufficient to explain the catalytic efficiency
of many enzymes, whose activity instead relies on the co-existence of multiple
distinct conformations and the transitions between them. While the accuracy of
sequence-based protein structure predictions has seen dramatic recent
improvements and strategies exist to tackle the inverse problem of designing
amino acid sequences that fold into pre-selected structural motifs, our current
ability to predict the functional dynamics of protein is limited even once the
structure is known. All-atom molecular dynamics simulations provide a model with
sufficient microscopic detail, but the computational costs associated with the
sampling of conformational fluctuations limits their application to a small
number of systems. On the other hand, coarse-grained models and inelastic
network models are computationally efficient but lack microscopic detail. Here,
we propose a new set of methods to extract collective protein degrees of freedom
susceptible to large-scale motion from fluctuations in all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations on timescales that are accessible to high-throughput
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.