* 2154455
* The 38th Southeastern Analysis Meeting (SEAM)
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Michael Jury, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2024
* USD 33,400.00

The 38th annual Southeastern Analysis Meeting (SEAM 38) will be held on the
campus of the University of Florida, Gainesville Florida, March 5-7, 2022. SEAM
is a leading national venue for mathematical analysis and its applications. The
meeting promotes and encourages research and education in the field of analysis
and the dissemination and exchange of the latest ideas and developments in
operator theory and function theory and related subjects while encouraging the
participation and professional development of both junior members of the
analysis research community and members of groups underrepresented in
mathematics. Its mission includes promoting interaction and collaboration
between researchers at all career stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEAM brings
together senior researchers, early-career faculty, postdocs, and graduate
students to discuss recent work and advances in Function Theoretic Operator
Theory — the mathematics at the intersection of Operator Theory, Classical
Complex Analysis, Harmonic Analysis, and Several Complex Variables — and related
areas and fields of application, including Operator Algebras, Spaces, and
Systems; Systems and Scattering theory; Control Theory; and Partial Differential
Equations (PDE), to name a few. The scientific program consists of plenary
talks, by leaders both senior and junior, and twenty minute contributed talks
open to all participants. Professional development activities for early career
researchers is also part of the program. The plenary talks are on topics such as
as optimal polynomial approximation; multiplication operators on Hilbert spaces
of analytic functions; Foundational aspects of Operator Theory and Operator
Algebras; Operator systems and Quantum information; PDE and harmonic maps; and
applications of Harmonic Analysis to sampling and signal processing. The meeting
website is hosted at:
https://people.clas.ufl.edu/sam/seam-38/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.