* 2154032
* Interactions among Analysis, Optimization, and Network Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Pietro Poggi-Corradini, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 370,892.00

As our world becomes more and more interconnected, thanks to advances in
mobility, transportation, and information science, the role of networks becomes
increasingly salient at a global scale. This project will integrate advances in
the study of metric spaces and complex analysis with tools from convex analysis,
probability, and graph theory to address emerging questions in network science.
In particular, the project will bridge the gap between certain powerful tools
originating within the subject of mathematical analysis, and their counterparts
in discrete and applied mathematics. The project will also develop numerical and
algorithmic approaches that will connect abstract methods in analysis with
practical questions of network science, data science, and other areas in applied
mathematics. For example, tools developed in this project for the study of
network science may be useful for the modeling, prediction, and mitigation of
the spread of epidemics. The project will build upon and amplify the work of the
Network Optimization Design and Exploration (NODE) research group at Kansas
State University, an interdisciplinary team of researchers from mathematics,
electrical and computer engineering, computer science, and statistics. The
project will support the involvement of faculty, postdocs, graduate students,
and undergraduate students, working on a diverse range of topics in analysis,
applied mathematics, and network science within the framework of this
interdisciplinary research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aspect in the study
of spreading phenomena on a network is an understanding of interconnectedness,
i.e., the many ways in which individuals, represented by nodes within the
network, interact with and come into contact with other nodes. Classically, in
the quantitative study of spreading processes among subpopulations, researchers
have used mathematical concepts such as the length of a shortest path (to
measure how far one must travel) or the size of minimum cuts (to capture the
number of different pathways available). The notion of effective resistance,
which originated in the theory of electrical networks, provides a needed
compromise between these two extremes, balancing shortness of paths with variety
of pathways. In a sense, electricity is able to find many optimal routes and
thus yields insights into the intrinsic structure of networks. From a
mathematical point of view, electrical current has deep connections to random
walks and to classical diffusion processes. In previous work, the PIs and their
collaborators have developed the theory of p-modulus on networks, which unifies
in a single framework three classical measures: shortest paths, mincuts, and
effective resistance. The concept of p-modulus originated in complex analysis,
but when applied in the study of networks becomes an extremely flexible tool
that can measure the richness of many different families of objects in multiple
ways. The goal of the current project is to use the discrete theory of modulus
to obtain new results in analysis, and also to show that certain quantities in
the discrete context converge to their continuous counterparts under specific
approximation schemes or scaling limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Analysis Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.