* 2154019
* Geometry and Asymptotics of Schubert Polynomials, Graph Colorings, and Flows on Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Alejandro Morales, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 205,601.00

Three fundamental and challenging problems in mathematics inspired from real-
world activities are to count the number of ways of transporting goods through a
network, sorting a list of tasks, and scheduling jobs to time slots. Some
instances of these counting problems are difficult to count exactly and one can
instead study bounds, asymptotics, and large-scale behaviors of these numbers as
well as using geometric structures encoding the objects that are counted.
Abstractly these problems can be studied with the following mathematical
objects: "integer flows on a graph", "Schubert polynomials of permutations", and
"graph vertex colorings", respectively that have connections to other fields of
mathematics and other areas like computer science, and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, this project studies problems in
enumerative, algebraic, and asymptotic combinatorics with connections to
representation theory and geometry. The project has three parts. The first part
is about finding a ¨q-analogue¨ of a constant term identity of Zeilberger to
compute volumes of flow polytopes and establishing a connection between this
identity and the famous Selberg integral. The second part is about studying the
large-scale behavior of Schubert and Grothendieck polynomials using existing
combinatorial models like rc-graphs, bumpless pipe dreams, and excited diagrams.
The last part is about studying chromatic symmetric functions of Dyck paths,
which are the object of the famous Stanley--Stembridge--Shareshian--Wachs
conjecture. The PI will study the Newton polytope, Lorentzian property, and
connections to q-rook theory of these symmetric functions. Students will be
trained during the course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.