* 2154416
* CAS: Bridging Surface Chemistry and Photophysics to Understand Photo-Electrochemical CO2 Reduction on Solar Photocathodes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Aravind Asthagiri, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 306,381.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) programs in the Division of Chemistry, L.
Robert Baker and Aravind Asthagiri of Ohio State University (OSU) are studying
the conversion of CO2 to useful products using earth-abundant metal oxides as
photocatalysts. The ability to reduce CO2 has the potential to close the carbon
cycle and to stabilize the environmental impacts of CO2 emissions. Consequently,
this project will help to address one of the pressing challenges for science and
technology related to environmentally friendly energy production and chemical
synthesis. Although much work has been performed to understand electrocatalysis
on metal surfaces, semiconductor photocatalysts are more complex. In this
project we will establish a combined experimental and theoretical framework to
explore the knowledge gap between electrocatalysis on metal surfaces and photo-
electrocatalysis on semiconductor surfaces. The research activities of this
proposal will also be integrated with an outreach plan designed to improve
student recruitment and retention in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) education. To accomplish this, the PIs will participate in the TEK8
undergraduate fellowship program at OSU. Through this program, undergraduate
researchers gain hands-on research experience, which they then translate to
middle school students through interactive, age-appropriate learning modules
designed to expose students to real-world research challenges and inspire them
to pursue STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project,
partnering L. Robert Baker and Aravind Asthagiri of Ohio State University,
endeavors to increase understanding of the mechanistic details of the
photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to useful products using earth-abundant metal
oxides as catalysts. The study is built around a synergistic collaboration
between theorist Asthagiri (density functional theory - DFT) and experimentalist
Baker [vibrational sum frequency generation (VSFG) and element-specific, extreme
ultraviolet (XUV) spectroscopy]. These studies will focus on photo-
electrocatalysis experiments using CuFeO2 as a model p-type semiconductor
showing high selectivity for CO2-reduction. In Aim 1, DFT calculations will
investigate the free energy of elementary steps during CO2-reduction on CuFeO2
and generate predictions of stable surface intermediates. Direct observation of
surface species by operando SFG spectroscopy will test these predictions in
order to refine theoretical models of the surface reaction mechanism. Aim 2 will
extend these studies to ultrafast time-resolved SFG in order to detect transient
surface intermediates and reveal the branching pathways during the first
proton/electron transfer to CO2. Spectroscopic results will be compared to DFT
barrier height calculations showing the kinetics of various proton/electron
transfer pathways. The goal of this aim will be to resolve between concerted
proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) and sequential electron/proton transfer
(ET/PT) and to illustrate how this branching point ultimately guides CO2R
selectivity. Aim 3 will build on Aims 1 and 2 by investigating electron dynamics
as a function of cation substitution in a series of p-type delafossite cathodes
having the formula AFeO2 (A = Cu, Ag, and Au).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.