* 2154157
* Visualizing Ultrafast Chemical Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Penner-Hahn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Roseanne Sension and James
Penner-Hahn of the University of Michigan are combining advanced visible and
x-ray laser methods to watch the movement of atoms and electrons during the
making and breaking of chemical bonds. Chemical reactions are controlled by the
coupled motions of atoms and electrons on time scales measured in trillionths of
a second or shorter. No ordinary camera can capture this movement. Professors
Sension and Penner-Hahn and their students will use very short x-ray pulses to
image the coupled motions of atoms and electrons in photochemical reactions,
focusing on one element at a time. Their discoveries could lead to the design of
more efficient chemicals used in applications ranging from photo-selective drug
delivery to industrially important photocatalysts. This project will also
contribute to education and human resource development by training a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate students to work at the interface of x-ray
physics, optics, chemical dynamics, and inorganic chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical reactions involve changes in atomic arrangement,
electron distribution, and bonding. Professors Sension and Penner-Hahn combine
strengths in ultrafast spectroscopy and x-ray spectroscopy to visualize,
describe, and control these dynamics. By using light to initiate reactions, the
molecular behavior can be synchronized, allowing studies on time scales ranging
from attoseconds, for electronic rearrangements, to femtoseconds and picoseconds
for atomic motion. Polarization and time-resolved x-ray spectroscopies will
provide an element specific view of chemical reaction dynamics, complementing
and extending the view provided by optical and vibrational spectroscopies. The
results could challenge conventional thinking, identify new phenomena, and
overturn previous models. In this project Professors Sension and Penner-Hahn and
their students will focus on the ultrafast coherent dynamics of transition metal
containing systems, including organocobalt complexes, that drive both
biologically relevant transformations and technologically important molecular
conversions, as well as the light-driven conformational changes in polyenes that
underlie processes ranging from vision to molecular motors. Ultrafast x-ray
spectroscopies are applicable to a broad range of systems active in transport,
energy harvesting, energy storage and biological systems. The broader impacts of
this work include the development of methods that enable a wider use of time-
resolved x-ray spectroscopies in the chemical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.