* 2154637
* Classification of von Neumann Algebras: Connections and Applications to C*-algebras, Geometric Group Theory and Continuous Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ionut Chifan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 246,264.00

Von Neumann algebras were introduced as a mathematical framework to study
particle physics. The pioneering works of F. Murray and J. von Neumann from
1930-1940 already revealed that von Neumann algebras are complex objects that
display extraordinary rich mathematical structures. Gradually, their study
morphed into a stand-alone discipline which, over time, triggered the
development of powerful mathematical theories and brought valuable insight to
other sciences, including physics (statistical mechanics), biology (DNA molecule
structure), engineering (cell phone network design) and computer science (error-
correcting codes, theory of quantum information and quantum computing). Von
Neumann algebras are highly interdisciplinary, arising naturally from simpler
mathematical structures, such as symmetries and actions, often present in many
areas of mathematics. Over time, their study maintained close connections with
various topics in dynamical systems, measured group theory, and more recently to
continuous model theory and geometric group theory. This project investigates
new research avenues at the rich interaction between von Neumann algebras and
the aforementioned areas. The main goal is to identify new ways of classifying
von Neumann algebras through the lens of rigidity - a condition where it is
shown that an entire structure of a mathematical object can be unraveled only
from very limited a priori known information on that object. The project
provides ample opportunities for the training and professional development of
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing prior efforts of the
Principal Investigator (PI), this project is aimed at expanding the boundary of
knowledge in the classification of group/measure space von Neumann algebras and
their applications to related fields. Specifically, the PI pursues new ideas at
the interaction between deformation/rigidity theory and geometric group theory
to advance several fundamental problems: (i) identify new groups and algebraic
group features that are completely recognizable from the von Neumann algebraic
and C*-algebraic structure; in particular, find additional examples of property
(T) groups satisfying Connes' rigidity conjecture; (ii) compute invariants like
the endomorphisms and the fundamental group of property (T) group factors and
reduced group C*-algebras; (iii) find new natural examples of W*-superrigid
actions, a problem of continued interest as it unifies two extreme forms of
rigidity both in orbit equivalence and von Neumann algebras; and (iv) unveil new
invariants distinguishing ultrapowers of factors and explore in depth their
applications to continuous model theory. Many of these projects are highly
interdisciplinary in nature and results arising from these projects are expected
to reveal new bridges between geometric group theory, ergodic theory,
C*-algebras, model theory, and von Neumann algebras. To enhance the career
development of the PI’s graduate students, the award supports a student visiting
program to peer institutions aimed at exposing students to different expertise
and research environments. To promote the visibility of and to attract new
talent to this field, the PI will continue to teach advanced graduate courses
and organize learning seminars in the field. The PI will also continue to
disseminate his research findings through publications, lecture series, seminar
and colloquium talks at other research institutions, as well as through invited
talks at national and international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.