* 2154620
* CAS: Synthetic Entries to ETM with M-Ligand Multiple Bonds and Their Role in Stoichiometric and Catalytic Carbon-Hydrogen Activation and Functionalization of Volatile Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Mindiola, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Daniel J. Mindiola of the University of Pennsylvania will
study the fundamental reactivity of the most abundant and volatile hydrocarbons
such as methane, ethane, and propane under mild conditions and with zero
emission of carbon dioxide. The project will establish new strategies to convert
natural resources such as methane and ethane, the main components of natural and
shale gases, into more value-added materials using earth-abundant base metals
such as titanium, vanadium, and niobium, among others. One main target is to
convert these alkanes into olefins; molecules that are industrial building
blocks due to their use in the design of polymers, adhesives, detergents, and
many other value-added chemicals that are routinely used commercially and in the
household. Because of their volatility and limited storage capacity available,
these natural resources are routinely being flared at staggering rates, so their
combustion as well as their direct release into our atmosphere play a tremendous
role in our fragile environment. Our main objective will be to selectively and
controllably activate these alkanes using compounds that contain highly polar
metal-carbon or metal-nitrogen multiple bonds, especially under mild conditions
(room temperature), which is in contrast to industrial processes that tend to
crack these alkanes under energy-intensive conditions. The research will also
explore methods to construct well-defined metal-oxide, -sulfide or heavier
chalcogenide (Se and Te) analogues, and to use these as supports for other
metals ions to mimic how metal-oxide supports are used in conjunction with metal
catalysts. Dr. Mindiola has been active with the ACS (American Chemical Society)
and the ACS Scholars Program for nearly 20 years in order to promote diversity
in the physical sciences. He is actively involved in promoting the science of
methane and other “mysterious” hydrocarbons at the university level as well as
in elementary and middle schools nationwide. His research group will also
develop podcasts explaining their research projects but aimed to a broader
audience. These short clips organized by students and postdoctoral associates
will be available to the public through the YouTube group channel “MindiScience”
with the aim to educate the community about flaring, catalysis, natural and
shale gases, and their rich chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mindiola
research team will study the chemistry of early-transition metals ions composed
of Ti, V, and Nb, and how these can promote the dehydrogenation of volatile
hydrocarbons, selectively and under mild conditions, into olefins containing
these unsaturation at the terminal positions. The PI’s research team will
investigate these reactions via the development of metal-carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and chalcogen multiple bonds, and their reactivity with the alkanes.
Using a combination of synthesis, reactivity, and mechanistic studies, the Penn
team will explore optimized conditions for higher catalytic turnover using these
base metal complexes. One specific reaction being targeted is the room
temperature conversion of methane into an olefin using a well-defined metal
complexes that can dehydrogenate the parent hydrocarbon into a parent Schrock-
like carbene. Mindeola and co-workers also plan to synthesize archetypes of
group 4 transition metal bischalcogenides and heterobimetallics. If successful,
such chemistry is expected to have both real practical impact in making
available valuable olefin building blocks and in providing an important
contribution to sustainable chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.