* 2155213
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Improving Decentralized Kernel Patch Ecosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Zhiyun Qian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the security of open-source
operating system (OS) kernels from the supply chain's perspective. As it is
extremely costly to develop a brand new OS, a large number of downstream OS
kernels are derived from an upstream OS kernel (e.g., Linux) to save development
costs. However, this also means that the security of the downstream kernels are
dependent on timely patch propagation from the upstream to downstream. The
diversity and decentralized nature of downstreams causes delays or even missed
upstream patches altogether. Even worse, due to customizations in the
downstreams, it is time-consuming to infer which bugs are applicable to
downstream and worth patching. Finally, even if they know an upstream
vulnerability exists in a downstream and a patch is available, it may require
additional efforts to port and test upstream patches --- a significant hurdle
for many downstream vendors who are wary of breaking
things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a series of automated
and novel analyses to reason about patches, bug behaviors, and their impacts.
More specifically, the project will include an analysis of upstream patches and
infer which ones fix critical bugs; it will automatically infer which
downstreams are affected by an upstream bug and what security impact it bears;
it will understand whether the corresponding upstream patch can be applied
safely and correctly. The results of the project will alleviate the human burden
in analyzing, reviewing, and adopting patches. Ultimately, they will improve the
security of the entire open-source OS ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.