* 2155037
* CAS: Quantifying the Systematic Catalytic Surface Chemistry of Non-Noble Metal Intermetallic Compounds to Achieve Diol and Olefin Production in Polyol Deoxygenation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Siris Laursen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 353,295.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Siris Laursen of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville is developing
inexpensive, earth-abundant catalysts for the valorization of waste from biomass
pyrolysis and bio-diesel production. The future of a fully integrated
biorefinery is contingent upon the efficient and selective conversion of all
parts of biomass to value-added compounds. Dr. Laursen and his team are studying
non-noble metal intermetallic compounds as catalysts to selectively form diols
and olefins (building block chemicals) from water waste streams generated during
biomass processing. These catalysts will be tuned in an effort to provide
greater activity for the removal of oxygen atoms from the waste products, lower
activity for carbon-carbon bond fragmentation, and lower activity for olefin
hydrogenation. Simultaneously, a general understanding of the composition-
activity relationships of the catalysts is being developed to improve predictive
performance, accelerate catalyst discovery, and advance catalyst sustainability.
This research project is expected to impact K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
education by integrating students directly into the research group through
summer experiences to build an educated workforce to support new renewable
chemicals industries. Institutional programs are being used to support the
inclusivity of these experiences and to identify students who may benefit the
most from these activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-noble intermetallic
compounds are compositionally ordered solids composed of transition metals and
post-transition metals or semimetals that have exhibited promising properties
for the partial or complete deoxygenation of glycerol to 1,2-propanediol and
propene. Siris Laursen and his research group are utilizing a combination of
quantum chemical surface reaction modeling and experimental investigations to
determine the composition-activity relationships of these compositionally
complex catalysts and accelerate the discovery of materials that can produce
valuable chemicals from polyols. Specific ranges of surface chemistry that
promote the partial and complete removal of oxygens from polyols to produce
valuable diols and olefins are being determined. Likewise, catalyst compositions
that exhibit more aggressive surface chemistry to drive the complete breakdown
of polyols to produce hydrogen (H2) and CO are also being noted. By
understanding the origin of the special surface chemistry of intermetallic
compounds at the atomic and electronic levels, Dr. Laursen and his students are
working to develop simple fundamental design rules for non-noble metal catalysts
that may be used in a wide range of chemical transformations that still lack
efficient catalytic materials. Moreover, by integrating research and education,
this project is promoting the education of a diverse group of future scientists
and building an educated workforce for the biorefinery
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.