* 2155144
* Synergy in a Solvent-Restrained Environment: Mechanochemical Control of Synthesis and Applications to Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Timothy Hanusa, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2025
* USD 524,592.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Timothy Hanusa of Vanderbilt University will explore reactions that
occur through grinding or ball milling. Chemical reactions are often performed
in solvents that are toxic and/or environmentally unfriendly. Thus, there are a
number of reasons why reducing solvent use could be of advantage. This project
addresses the problem by developing a mechanical approach (mechanochemistry) to
run chemical reactions with little or no solvent. Mechanochemistry involves
grinding solid reactants together so that they are in intimate contact and the
milling process provides the energy required to initiate and maintain the
reaction between reactants. Mechanochemistry is a relatively undeveloped area
and this research will work to find optimal conditions for such reactions.
Targeted products include biodegradable polymers, a class of compounds of broad
academic and industrial interests. Students involved in this project will gain
insight and experience in mechanochemical methodology, a significant departure
from the solvent-based orientation of most synthetic chemistry approaches. In
addition, Professor Hanusa works closely with the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-
Ph.D. Bridge Program, which is designed to broaden the participation of women
and underrepresented minorities in science through partnerships between
Vanderbilt and Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study how the introduction of small
amounts of liquid—too little to dissolve the reagents—influences mechanochemical
reaction outcomes. A modification of this “liquid-assisted grinding” (LAG)
technique will employ solid solvated reagents (“solvate-assisted grinding”, such
as using the solid pyridine adduct [Ni(py)₄Cl₂] instead of NiCl₂ and liquid
pyridine). Both main-group and transition metal coordination complexes and
organometallic compounds will be studied. The research will also examine the
effect of the lattice structures of solid reagents on mechanochemical
reactivity. In addition to training of students, the project will provide
educational and outreach efforts for women, members of underserved groups, and
middle and high school students. An example is Professor Hanusa’s leadership
role in the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-Ph.D. Bridge Program, which facilitates
the entry and success of Master’s degree students into the Ph.D. program at
Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.