* 2155157
* CAS-Climate: Electroadsorption Kinetics on Transition Metals: Measurement and Mechanism
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Hector Abruna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 542,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Jin Suntivich and Héctor Abruña of
Cornell University are investigating the mechanism of surface hydrogen formation
on transition metals with well-defined structure and orientation.
Electrochemical and non-linear spectroscopic measurements facilitate the
formation of a conceptual framework for proton and electron transfers across the
metal-water interface. Drs. Suntivich and Abruña and their students examine the
electrode potential-dependent formation of surface hydrogen on metal single
crystals because this reaction represents the first step in the
evolution/production of hydrogen and involves only one electron and one proton.
The team also investigates the influence of local variables such as interfacial
electric field and surface chemistry on proton and electron-transfer kinetics.
Non-linear spectroscopy is used to provide local electric field information at
the metal-water interface. By advancing the mechanistic knowledge of
electrochemical reactions, future catalysts that efficiently generate or evolve
hydrogen from water could be designed. The team also translates concepts in
electrochemical and optical sciences to outreach activities through the New York
Stat 4-H Youth Development program. The team is developing new curricular
materials on chemical circularity for first year students at Cornell
University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the proton-coupled
electron transfer (PCET) mechanism on well-defined single-crystal metal surfaces
such as platinum and palladium. These heterogeneous electrochemical reactions
are common in electrocatalysis; however, they are complex because most PCET
reactions involve the transfer of multiple protons and electrons. The research
team applies a time-dependent electro-analytical method and non-linear
spectroscopy to probe surface hydrogen formation, which involves only one proton
and one electron. These studies examine the surface hydrogen formation kinetics
on single-crystal metal surfaces as a function of proton donor and metal
chemistries as well as local electric field and surface oxide. Phase-sensitive
second harmonic generation measurements are employed to characterize the local
electric field during the electrochemical reaction. These investigations foster
a deep understanding of the molecular picture during the heterogeneous PCET
electrocatalysis mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.