* 2155232
* State-to-State Photodissociation of Polyatomic Free Radicals: Nonadiabatic Dynamics and Quantum Coherence
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jingsong Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 463,720.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) program of the
Chemistry Division funds Professor Jingsong Zhang of the University of
California at Riverside to investigate the photodissociation dynamics of
polyatomic free radicals. Free radicals are important reactive intermediates in
many chemical environments (such as combustion and atmospheric chemistry). This
research aims to understand the photochemistry of polyatomic radicals and the
roles of interacting electronic states with quantum accuracy. The knowledge
(free radical electronic structures, energetics, reaction mechanisms, etc.) from
this project is valuable to the combustion, atmospheric chemistry, theoretical
chemistry, and physics communities. The project trains graduate students and
prepares them for careers in academia or industry and promotes research
experience of women and underrepresented minority undergraduate students. The
project reaches out to the diverse student population in the Riverside and San
Bernardino community colleges. This program also mentors economically
disadvantaged high school students for summer research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the hydroxymethyl,
hydroperoxy, and methylene radicals. Experimentally, the free radicals are
produced by photolysis of suitable precursors and subsequent reactions and are
cooled in a molecular beam with a well-defined initial energy. The free radicals
are photodissociated under a single collision condition by tunable laser
radiation, producing hydrogen atom photoproducts. The high-n Rydberg atom time-
of-flight technique is utilized to measure state-resolved product kinetic energy
and angular distributions. These distributions are closely related to
theoretical calculations and are central to understanding photodissociation
dynamics and mechanisms. The research generates high-quality data and benchmarks
to test quantum mechanical theories of the excited open-shell
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.