* 2155227
* CAS: Electrochemical Processes of Chelated Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Michael Marshak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2025
* USD 474,704.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Marshak of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Colorado Boulder is developing new materials
for grid-scale long duration energy storage. Grid-scale energy storage is a
longstanding and unmet need to support the sustainable production of electricity
from intermittent sources such as wind and solar. Flow batteries offer a
compelling engineering framework for providing inexpensive energy storage
because they permit independent scaling of their power conversion and energy
storage components. This project supports investigation of the fundamental
electrochemical behavior of metal chelate materials as sustainable and scalable
energy storage materials in flow batteries. This project also supports the
development of new education and outreach programs in battery chemistry, with
the goal of creating a competitive and equitable US workforce in clean energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project aims to provide a
fundamental molecular understanding of a broad class of metal chelate
coordination complexes, coupled with the evaluation of these chemical phenomena
to improve system level flow battery performance. This understanding will be
accomplished through the evaluation of the ability of organic chelates to
inhibit water splitting reactions and test its performance limits. This approach
will then be expanded to develop metal chelate complexes that can undergo multi-
electron redox reactions, which can further increase the energy density and
performance of the flow battery systems. This project represents a new approach
to address longstanding challenges in the field of energy storage with low-cost
materials that are economically feasible for wide scale deployment. Moreover,
this project not only could prove transformative for enabling high-voltage
aqueous batteries, but the molecular inhibition of water splitting using
chelates could also carry wider implications for controlling hydrogen evolution
reactions in other electrochemical and electrocatalytic applications such as
electrochemical fuel production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.