* 2155183
* Studies of the Mean Field and Allen-Cahn Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Changfeng Gui, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2025
* USD 380,575.00

Partial differential equations (PDE) are fundamental tools in modeling many
scientific and social phenomena. The mean field equation and the Allen-Cahn
equation are two important types of nonlinear PDE that have arisen in the study
of physical phenomena such as electroweak interaction and Chern-Simons-Higgs
quantum field theories, statistical mechanics of two-dimensional turbulence,
phase separation, and phase transitions. The mean field equation is also related
to the study of general relativity as well as to cosmology. An important aspect
of the Allen-Cahn equation is the formation of interfaces separating different
physical regions of interest, which often have area minimizing properties, seen
in minimal surfaces such as soap bubbles. This research project aims to advance
understanding of these important equations through use of a mathematical tool
recently developed by the investigator and collaborators. The project involves
students at both undergraduate and graduate levels in interdisciplinary
research. Postdoctoral fellows and junior researchers will also participate in
and be trained as part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator plans to investigate the newly discovered sphere covering
inequality (SCI) in high dimensions and various other generalizations.
Applications to the mean field equation and its high-dimensional counterpart
will be explored. The SCI connects geometry to analysis and has become a
powerful tool in the study of two-dimensional nonlinear PDE. High-dimensional
SCIs have potential for study of conformal geometry, such as improved Beckner's
inequalities and uniqueness of solutions to higher order equations involving
Paneitz operators. For the Allen-Cahn equation, the PI will focus on the level
set structure of solutions of finite Morse index, such as, for example, the
relation between the level sets of solutions and minimal surfaces. In
particular, a classification of stable solutions in three dimensions will be
pursued. The PI intends to use various identities and energy estimates as well
as Morse index information to develop a new approach for these non-monotone,
non-minimizing solutions. The final goal of the project is to understand
completely entire solutions for both scalar and vector-valued Allen-Cahn
equations and the stability and dynamics of triple or quadruple
junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.