* 2155187
* Improving Biopharmaceutical Technician Education with Cell and Gene Therapy Credentials
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* James Sniezek, Montgomery College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 349,999.00

Over the past four years more than 30 cell and gene therapy companies have
started or become located in Montgomery County, Maryland, making it an emerging
center for biopharmaceutical industries. Montgomery College will address the
critical workforce needs of this growing industry by increasing the number of
work-ready biotechnicians with a focus on cell and gene therapy. The
biotechnology program at Montgomery College will add a new Certificate in Cell
and Gene therapy with an expected annual enrollment of 20 students by 2025. They
will combine this new certificate program with two new micro-credentials in
Micropipetting and Aseptic Techniques for Mammalian Cell Culture. Skills from
these courses and credentials will be vetted by industry professionals to ensure
alignment with their expectations for entry-level biotechnology positions.
Finally, the college plans to increase awareness and enrollment in the
biotechnology program through increased outreach combined with a comprehensive
marketing strategy, and focus group analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Montgomery
College plans to improve educational outcomes for students in the biotechnology
program by creating a new Principles of Cell and Gene Therapy Technology course
that will be part of the new Cell and Gene Therapy certificate. The certificate
will include three existing courses that feature a strong regulatory component
that addresses the essential elements of FDA compliance for therapeutics. The
college will consult with an industry advisory group to develop new micro
credentials in Micropipetting and Aseptic Techniques for Mammalian Cell Culture.
While these are considered standard techniques, Montgomery College plans to
achieve industrial buy-in for these credentials which can augment degrees and
certificates and improve employment opportunities for students. To improve
enrollment in the program, the college will conduct focus groups to determine
baseline data regarding student interest and knowledge of biotechnology careers.
They will also develop a 10-hour biotechnology camp for Montgomery County
students and educators to improve the program’s outreach. A program evaluator
will monitor the progress of the project and will use formative and summative
assessments to guide it. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.