* 2155042
* Hexadehydro-Diels-Alder (HDDA) Reaction-Enabled Synthesis  of Structurally Elaborate, Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Hoye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Thomas Hoye of the University of Minnesota is studying the
use of a versatile new method for chemical synthesis known as the hexadehydro-
Diels-Alder (HDDA) reaction. The HDDA reaction requires merely the simple
heating of an appropriately designed precursor (a reactant known as a triyne) to
produce a highly reactive species known as a benzyne. In turn, this intermediate
can engage myriad types of “trapping agents,” often resulting in unprecedented
types of chemical transformation. The funded research focuses on using the HDDA
reaction as a tool to discover new ways to build molecules known as polycyclic
aromatics. Compounds of this class often exhibit photochemical and photophysical
properties critical for the operation of modern optoelectronic devices that are
of great value to society; for example, organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs),
which are used in energy efficient displays and lighting units, and photovoltaic
cells, which are used for the conversion of solar energy into electricity. In
addition to facilitating the preparation of polycyclic aromatics, pursuit of the
project aims is anticipated to advance both fundamental understanding of various
new types of chemical transformations as well as providing the means and
inspiration to access previously elusive types of chemical structures. A number
of significant broader impacts of benefit to a wider group of stakeholders –
including students, instructors, and the broader scientific community – are
planned. Of particular note are (1) an activity dubbed “Vignettes in Physical
Organic Chemistry” in which Professor Hoye and his coworkers will prepare (and
make available on a curated website) pedagogically valuable documents of
historically important developments in the field of mechanistic organic
chemistry, and (2) the development and dissemination of tutorial tips and tricks
of practical value to the users of NMR spectroscopy, the single most valuable
and powerful tool for analyzing organic reactions and
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is enabling the Hoye research group
to continue to capitalize on the capacity of the HDDA reaction to facilitate
concise and efficient elaborations of highly conjugated polycyclic aromatics.
The new methods and strategies for the syntheses of such compounds are the most
important outcomes that are anticipated to result from this project but
fundamentally important mechanistic knowledge will likely also emerge. Specific
topics to be explored include naphthalene- and anthracene-templated HDDA
reactions, intra-annular HDDA reactions, “propagating HDDA reactions” for the
synthesis of conjugated polymers, and the use of an iterative exponential growth
strategy to produce discreet polyyne substrates designed to undergo long
sequences of “domino HDDA reactions” leading to oligomeric linear polyacenes.
Professor Hoye holds major teaching awards that recognize his career-long
commitment to the education of students at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Broader activities supported by this project will benefit chemistry
research students at multiple levels. The scientific advances have the
possibility of opening new avenues for pursuit by materials scientists who use
organic electronic and photonic compounds in the settings of light-emitting
diodes, photovoltaics, and solar cells, applications that have a large potential
for societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.