* 2155222
* PIPP Phase I: Center for Emerging Pathogen Prediction and Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,610.00

The Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) Phase I: Development
Grants Center for Emerging Pathogen Prediction and Integration (CEPPI) will lead
strategic surveillance of wildlife pathogens across changing environments.
Understanding and preventing the emergence of new infectious diseases requires
interpreting many types of data (e.g., information on the disease-causing
pathogens, interactions between the human and wildlife populations, and changes
in their associated environments). The team will use the vast historical data
and sampling available in biorepositories, such as museums, to systematically
investigate pathogen emergence to enable reliable predictions of zoonotic
disease to help prevent or mitigate future pandemics. Many aspects of pathogen
biology in wildlife remain poorly documented worldwide, particularly in low-
income, biodiverse regions. Pandemics pose a challenge that requires
international, collaborative, proactive solutions, so the Center will focus on
developing best methods in training the next generation of pathogen biologists,
improving basic biodiversity infrastructure, databases, and workflows, and then
sharing these new approaches globally. Working especially with partner museums
in the Americas, the Center will expand wildlife sampling strategies to develop
a more comprehensive, decentralized network of specimen repositories and
researchers to improve pathogen identification and
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve pathogen detection, surveillance,
and mitigation, the Center will promote state-of-the-art biorepositories,
genomic screening, and bioinformatic workflows, which are empowered by
intuitively interactive visualization web tools, computational and mathematical
modeling, and machine learning. Rapid visual and intelligent integration of
pathobiology into the vast global, digital infrastructure for wild mammals is
the cornerstone of this Center, which will act as an early warning system for
pandemic prediction and prevention. In Phase I, the cross-disciplinary team aims
to develop internationally scalable multidisciplinary workflows to build: 1)
informatics baselines for pathogens and hosts derived from existing archival
biorepositories representing decadal sampling of mammalian communities that will
be linked directly to targeted strategies for improved monitoring and
surveillance; 2) pipelines that streamline sequencing and bioinformatic methods
for rapid, affordable, large-scale screening of mammalian host and parasite
samples to provide scalable views of diversity and change over space and time;
3) pathogen risk assessments linking novel methods that integrate social and
environmental parameters and pathogen diversity to predict the outcomes of
accelerating anthropogenic change; 4) collaborations across local
biorepositories to develop strategic sampling and digitization protocols for
expanded geographic, temporal and taxonomic coverage; and 5) problem-solving
networks through educational modules, direct engagement, and collaborative
learning. CEPPI helps standardize exploration of pathogens and biodiversity by
building new connections with local communities, sequencing and bioinformatic
facilities, and public health and natural resource agencies. New capacities for
visualization, informatics interpretation, and translation emanate from the
development of fast, affordable, and scalable sequencing and bioinformatic
technologies. These capacities will stimulate new methods of pathogen detection,
discovery, and monitoring that will foster global pathogen surveillance and
mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG),
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.