* 2155082
* CDS&amp;E: Two-electron Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Chemistry and Physics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Mazziotti, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

With this award, the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor David A. Mazziotti
of the University of Chicago to develop new methods for treating many-electron
quantum systems to study problems in chemistry and materials. Many new molecules
and materials that are critically important to improving society are so complex
that they are difficult to study with conventional methods. Mazziotti and his
research group will pursue novel quantum chemistry algorithms that exploit the
pairwise nature of the electronic interactions in combination with recent
advances in quantum computing, machine learning, and optimization to predict the
energies and other properties of molecules and materials with increased
efficiency. The work has the potential to be transformative in that it aims to
enable applications to more complex chemical systems, opening new vistas for
computational research in chemistry and materials. Mazziotti and his group will
also drive educational and outreach activities including a quantum computing and
machine learning curricula for chemistry, an interactive videoconference-based
lecture series on quantum chemistry, and an online science journal for high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and yet efficient computation of
molecules and materials with correlated electrons remains one of the outstanding
problems in science and engineering. Catalyzed by recent discoveries in quantum
computation, machine learning, and optimization theory, Mazziotti and his
research group aim to improve predictive capabilities for correlated molecules
and materials by exploring the combination of these recent advances with reduced
density matrix (RDM) theory. They will develop RDM algorithms for general
quantum systems with correlated electrons via new, emergent paradigms in quantum
computing, machine learning, and/or optimization, going beyond recent classical
algorithms based on approximate functionals or N-representability conditions.
These novel formulations will use quantum computing, machine learning, and/or
optimization to avoid the explicit classical construction and storage of the
many-electron wave function, and therefore, they will raise new possibilities
for treating strongly correlated systems that are beyond the reach of current
approaches. The proposed work is timely: recently, quantum computers have been
developed with significant improvements in their qubit-numbers and fidelity, and
machine learning has been applied successfully to applications in image and
speech recognition, natural language processing, autonomous driving, and
chemistry. Mazziotti and his group will apply existing and proposed two-electron
RDM methods to predict and optimize strongly correlated molecular systems and
processes of importance in chemistry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.