* 2155135
* Dynamics of Molecules in Extreme Rotational States Made with an Optical Centrifuge
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Amy Mullin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 610,093.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Amy Mullin and her team at the
University of Maryland-College Park will investigate how molecules behave when
they possess significant rotational energy. Many chemical reactions proceed
faster when energy is added, usually in the form of increased temperature.
Adding heat allows molecules to adopt high-energy configurations from which they
can convert into other molecules. In the macroscopic world, energy is a smoothly
varying property. However, molecules are small in an absolute sense, and their
energy levels are determined by quantum mechanics. A CO2 molecule is 50
billionths of a centimeter in length, and it has discrete energy levels when it
rotates and when its atoms vibrate internally. These quantized energy states
control the types of molecular motion that help, or hinder, chemical change
under high-energy conditions. The importance of the project is to determine how
molecular geometry is distorted by large amounts of rotational energy and how
this distortion leads to new types of chemical processes. The results of this
project will have implications for understanding chemical reactions and are
expected to inform research in other fields where high energy molecules are
present. Graduate students will have the opportunity to gain experience in
sophisticated laser-based approaches. Training workshops will be organized to
prepare undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry students for applying to
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the Mullin group at U.
Maryland will use an ultrafast, tunable optical centrifuge to prepare molecules
in extreme rotational energy states with oriented angular momentum. The
structure and dynamics of the high energy molecules will be interrogated using
high-resolution transient infrared spectroscopy. The optical centrifuge is a
strong-field, non-resonant technique that can induce large angular momentum
increases in molecules, thereby giving access to a previously unexplored realm.
The project will prepare nascent rotational distributions with controllable
amounts of energy, and investigate how the molecules undergo collisional
relaxation, orientational anisotropy decay, and coupling to vibrational modes.
The project will investigate how energy gaps, angular frequencies, and
rotational quantum numbers impact the dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.