* 2155208
* SaTC: TTP: Medium: Hardware Intellectual Property Protection through Hybrid ASIC/TRAP Integrated Circuit Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Carl Sechen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

As the semiconductor industry transitioned from an in-house fabrication model to
a third-party foundry model, it provided widespread access to cutting edge
technology at affordable cost and accelerated development of advanced electronic
circuits. At the same time, it introduced new concerns regarding protection of
the intellectual property of these electronic circuits, whose blueprints must
now be shared with globally distributed and potentially untrusted entities
involved in the contemporary electronics supply chain. To address these
concerns, this project is developing a methodology which enables redaction of
proprietary or sensitive portions of an electronic circuit prior to fabrication
and reinstatement upon receipt of the final product, thereby protecting the
critical intellectual property from theft and/or malicious modification. By
focusing on transitioning this technology to practice in collaboration with
other academic institutions, industrial partners and federal laboratories, this
project addresses the need for high technology-readiness level solutions as well
as workforce development. Considering the pervasive development of electronics
in every facet of modern life, including critical infrastructure, the objective
of this project aligns with NSF's mission "to secure the national defense" and
"to advance prosperity".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, this project
builds upon a novel Transistor-Level Programmable (TRAP) fabric which challenges
conventional practices in reconfigurable computing by pushing granularity of
post-fabrication programmability down to the transistor-level. Thereby, TRAP
achieves significant reduction in area, performance and power consumption
overhead over conventional Look-Up Table (LUT) based solutions, while at the
same time presenting harder obstacles for brute-force or intelligent search-
based reverse engineering attacks to overcome. To transition this technology to
practice, this project is developing an ecosystem of design tools, training
material and proof-of-concept silicon fabrication opportunities, to enable the
use of untrusted facilities for manufacturing trusted electronic components
while preventing unauthorized entities from being able to understand, use or
copy sensitive hardware Intellectual Property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.