* 2155060
* CAS: Reaction Mechanisms in 3d Transition Metal Complexes for Artificial Photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Yulia Pushkar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Yulia Pushkar of the
Department of Physics and Astronomy at Purdue University will develop new
molecular solutions for artificial photosynthesis. In artificial photosynthesis,
solar energy is converted into chemical energy through generation of clean fuels
such as hydrogen. Water serves as a source of electrons and protons for fuel
forming reaction but its splitting into hydrogen and oxygen requires
rearrangement of chemical bonds at high potential. Molecular catalysts which
contain earth-abundant iron, cobalt and manganese can facilitate water splitting
by lowering the potential and, thus, boosting energy conversion efficiencies.
The development of artificial photosynthesis and its large-scale implementation
is expected to address the energy needs of modern society and facilitate
transition to a CO2 neutral economy. This research lies at the interface of
physics, chemistry and materials science, with results expected to impact
diverse fields and contribute to fundamental science, education, environment and
national energy security. Planned research and educational activities are
designed to increase participation of under-represented students from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, improve experiences of female students
in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), enhance training of
students via integration of research results into curriculum and to deliver
teaching modules to schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in this project
focuses on the complex multielectron chemical process of artificial
photosynthesis. Among the goals is the development of new and detailed studies
of known Fe-based molecular water oxidation catalysts. In situ spectroscopic
characterization of intermediates in catalytic water oxidation using Fe systems
will inform future design of more active and stable catalysts. Advanced
spectroscopic techniques such as synchrotron-based X-ray absorption near edge
structure (XANES), extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), X-ray
emission, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and multi-wavelength kinetic
resonance Raman will be used to uncover mechanism of O-O bond formation in these
catalysts. The relationship between molecular structure and catalytic activity
will be uncovered experimentally and further analyzed computationally using
density functional theory (DFT). Experimental techniques will deliver
information on the structure of the intermediates and their electronic
configuration and evolution of samples during the catalytic processes in
situ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.