* 2155127
* RUI: Development of Bench-stable N-quaternized ketene N,O-acetals as Multifunctional Reagents for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Max Majireck, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 05/31/2025
* USD 246,927.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Max Majireck of Hamilton College is studying a new class of compounds that is
useful for the manufacture of value-added materials such as pharmaceutical
agents, agrochemicals, and other substances of use to society. Central to this
research is a recent discovery made by the Majireck research group that reactive
compounds known as N-quaternized ketene N,O-acetals, typically too delicate to
be handled, can be prepared in a manner that stabilizes them. This important
finding opens the door for such materials to be employed for the first time in
the synthesis of a broad range of valuable compounds. For example, a goal of the
funded project is to use the newly available class of N,O-acetals for the
preparation of biologically active nitrogen-containing cyclic compounds commonly
found as components in active pharmaceuticals. Furthermore, the research team
will investigate a variety of processes involving the new reagents to uncover
efficient methods for chemical manufacture that are straightforward and devoid
of expensive additives, such as precious metal catalysts. The broader impacts of
the project will extend to supporting research-based academic courses and summer
research experiences for undergraduate students in synthetic organic chemistry
at Hamilton College, with an emphasis on recruiting, training, and retaining
students from underrepresented groups for careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-Quaternized ketene
N,O-acetals have been overlooked as reagents in organic synthesis due to their
typical instability and/or specialized means of generation in situ. However, it
was recently discovered that certain compounds within this class, and
particularly pyridinium ketene N,O-acetals, have long-term bench-stability that
allows for their preparation and purification in a straightforward manner. This
opens up the possibility of leveraging N-quaternized ketene N,O-acetals as
versatile reagents in organic synthesis. For example, such compounds can act as
a source of thermally-generated O-alkyl ketenium ions, which can be used in acid
catalyst-free Friedel-Crafts acylations, or in various cycloaddition reactions.
Beyond the continued explorations of these kinds of processes, Dr. Majireck and
his team of undergraduate students will also study the use of
2-halo-N-(1-alkoxyvinyl)pyridinium salts as electrophiles for the production of
2-aminopyridine derivatives via mild nucleophilic aromatic substitution
reactions. The research will provide valuable opportunities for undergraduate
students, particularly those from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM,
to partake in immersive research experiences which are anticipated to contribute
toward a strengthening and diversification of the U.S. scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.