* 2155068
* Connecting Kinetics and Mechanisms to Surface Structures on Highly-Oxidized Metal Surfaces in Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Killelea, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division, Dan
Killelea of Loyola University of Chicago (LUC) will explore the reactive species
present during heterogeneously catalyzed oxidation reactions and will probe
their energetics to advance understanding of the oxidative surface chemistry of
catalytically active metals. Heterogeneously catalyzed oxidation reactions on
metal surfaces seem superficially straightforward, yet subtle details may
dominate because of the heterogeneity of the surfaces. These key details are
often obscured, rendering accurate atomic-level descriptions elusive for even a
‘simple’ reaction like CO oxidation to CO2. Illuminating these atomic-level
details about heterogeneously catalyzed reactions is expected to contribute to
advances in the utilization of scarce resources and to a reduction in the
generation of environmentally harmful byproducts. In conjunction with the
surface chemistry aspect, this project will offer scientific research
opportunities to under-represented socioeconomic groups in the Chicago Public
Schools (CPS) through various outreach efforts: the high school lab, tours of
LUC facilities, and a summer internship program. Additional engagement and
outreach efforts will include hosting CPS student meetings with admissions
counselors from local universities and trips to Argonne National Laboratory.
Through these efforts, high school students from economically disadvantaged
neighborhoods will gain exposure to science and learn about new educational
opportunities and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Dan Killelea
of Loyola University, Chicago and his team are working to uncover the connection
between observed surface structures and reaction kinetics and mechanism for
heterogeneous catalysis systems. Rhodium metal surfaces, which are
representative of the late-transition metals, are reproducibly prepared with
specific, well-characterized oxygenaceous phases. The effects of defect density
and geometry on surface oxidation and chemistry will be systematically explored
using a curved Rh(111) crystal. Structural data from scanning tunneling
microscopy(STM)-imaging will be interpreted using input from density functional
theory (DFT), which will also calculate the energetics of Osub. The data
obtained will be complemented with ancillary surface science measurements. The
reactivity and structural measurements collected at Loyola will identify the
surface states and conditions for further study of CO oxidation. These
experiments will be conducted in Leiden (Netherlands) and Göttingen (Germany)
with the reactive molecular-beam scattering with velocity resolved detection.
The results of this project are expected to advance catalytic surface chemistry
by providing much-needed fundamental information about the kinetics and
mechanisms of heterogeneously catalyzed oxidation reactions and reveal the
importance of subsurface oxygen in these industrially relevant
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.