* 2155029
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Targeted Microarchitectural Attacks and Defenses in Cloud Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Houman Homayoun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Cloud computing paradigms have emerged as a major facility to store and process
the massive amount of data produced by various business units, public
organizations, Internet-of-Things, and cyber-physical systems. The cloud
scheduler is the component responsible for deciding on which computer a cloud
application should run. The current design of cloud schedulers only focuses on
meeting the performance requirements of submitted applications without security
considerations. The project’s novelties are: (1) understanding the security
threats introduced to the cloud due to the current design of cloud schedulers
and (2) designing next generation of cloud schedulers and cloud infrastructure
that are both secure and meet applications’ performance requirements. The
project's broader significance and importance are: (1) identifying serious
security vulnerabilities in clouds that threaten the security, privacy, and
availability properties of the cloud, (2) developing both software and hardware
solutions to mitigate the security threats in the cloud, (3) sharing all
software work products from the project with the public, (4) developing new
educational material on cloud security and integrating it into classes, (5)
providing research opportunities for underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is performing a comprehensive threat analysis
of cloud schedulers, while also investigating defenses to harden clouds against
micro-architectural attacks, i.e., attacks that exploit shared resources.
Specifically, the project is exploring how cloud schedulers can be exploited by
attackers to facilitate targeted micro-architectural attacks in cloud
environments. Moreover, the project is exploring two novel approaches to defend
against targeted micro-architectural attacks in the cloud, which are: (1)
software-based defense-in-depth approach by combining entropy-reduction
techniques with attacks detection techniques, and (2) developing fine-grain
schedulers that are capable of provisioning cloud infrastructure not only at the
architectural level but also at the micro-architectural level in a principled
way to eliminate the root cause of micro-architectural
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.