* 2155131
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Enabling Mobile Users to Solve Privacy Issues with Their Own Hands Unobtrusively based on Gripping Hand Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Chen Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2025
* USD 471,429.00

Smartphones have become our most intimate devices. To protect against
unauthorized access, many authentication methods (e.g., PINs, fingerprints, and
face IDs) have been deployed. However, by requiring active user efforts to input
biometric data, they are unable to cope with many scenarios when user
participation is not available at once, such as when the smartphone is shared
with others or when notification content is displayed on the screen
spontaneously. Furthermore, while biometric data have become more popular for
authentication, it can be eavesdropped and reused. This research addresses the
two long-standing issues of biometric authentication, obtrusiveness and replay
threat, based on gripping-hand sensing. The key insight is that for a handheld
device, the user needs to hold the device to use it. The project’s novelties are
enabling smartphone users to solve access issues with their own hands
unobtrusively, extracting nonreusable biometric features for authentication, and
using media sounds to sense the user’s gripping hand. The project's broader
significance and importance are that it benefits the huge population of
smartphone users by providing enhanced mobile security, disseminates the
research outcomes to the public to benefit both industry and academia, and
contributes to educational programs, including curriculum development,
graduate/undergraduate training, K-12 involvement, and underrepresented student
engagement in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the
knowledge of mobile device security and privacy. It explores a novel gripping-
hand biometric for user identification, which is readily available to acquire
visually or acoustically from mobile device users. Deep learning-based
algorithms are developed to derive unique biometric features and distinguish
people’s hands. The project further devises a technique based on modulated
stimulus signals to encode biometric features into each non-repeated biometric
code for challenge-response user authentication. Moreover, cross-domain user
authentication methods are developed, which leverage commonly used smartphone
audio signals (e.g., ringtones) to sense and recognize a user’s gripping hand
rather than using dedicated signals. The hard-to-forge physical relationships
between the resulting acoustic and vibration responses of such audio signals are
explored for achieving replay resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.