* 2155047
* Lanthanide Ion Complexes with Viscosity- or Temperature-dependent Emission
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ana de Bettencourt-Dias, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 485,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Programs of the Chemistry Division of
the National Science Foundation, Professor Ana de Bettencourt-Dias and her
research group at the University of Nevada, Reno, will isolate lanthanide ion
complexes capable of metal-centered light emission. They plan to demonstrate
that this light emission can be modulated by viscosity and temperature and they
will study the compound design features that best enable this modulation. With
the ability to correlate the intensity of the emitted light with the temperature
and the viscosity, the group will be able to measure the temperature and
viscosity inside of the cells. These properties vary with the type of cell and
are important properties to help in the diagnosis of disease and in the
unraveling of cell metabolism. The research is also of interest in the
management of industrial processes, such as monitoring completion of
polymerization and hydrogelation processes. During the project, undergraduate
and graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars will be trained in the
synthesis and spectroscopic techniques needed to successfully complete the
proposed work. As part of the commitment to support the advancement and
inclusivity of underrepresented minority faculty, Professor Ana de Bettencourt-
Dias will continue mentoring junior colleagues and promoting their science
through a variety of avenues, including, but not limited to, the Periodic
TableTalks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lanthanide ions display sharp emission
profile. This emission, which arises from transitions within the 4f orbitals, is
most efficiently sensitized through coordinated ligand chromophores. These
chromophores can be designed to display an energy transfer to the emissive
lanthanide ion, which is modulated by viscosity and temperature. In this
project, Professor Ana de Bettencourt-Dias and her research group propose to
isolate several new ligands, based on N-heterocycles and cyanovinyl molecular
rotors, and to assess their ability to promote metal-ion centered emission as a
function of the temperature and viscosity of the medium. In addition, they will
study, by using heteroleptic complexes, which ligand functionalities enable the
viscosity- and temperature-dependent emission through a two-photon excitation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.