* 2155017
* Controlling Energy Distribution Pathways in Designer Photocatalysts for Efficient Polymer Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zachariah Page, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 411,629.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Zachariah A. Page and Sean T. Roberts of The University of Texas at Austin are
studying how the chemical structure of visible and near-infrared light absorbing
dye molecules influences their ability to catalyze the additive manufacturing of
plastics in an energy-efficient manner. Traditional light-based manufacturing
relies on the use of dyes that operate only with high-energy ultraviolet (UV)
light. This reliance on UV light is both energy-intensive and limits the
functionality of materials that can be produced due to the low penetration depth
of UV light and its potential to induce photodamage. The funded research teams
aim to overcome this limitation by synthesizing new dye molecules comprised of
earth-abundant elements and examining the ability of these so-called
'photocatalysts' to efficiently harvest the energy contained in visible/near-
infrared (IR) light to power chemical reactions. These fundamental efforts are
anticipated to increase the accessibility of light-based manufacturing at an
affordable price, which has direct implications in technologies such as
coatings, microelectronics, and 3D printing. The broader impacts of the project
will extend to providing new training opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary chemistry with activities ranging from
chemical synthesis to laser-based spectroscopic characterization. Moreover, Page
and Roberts will bridge educational programs at UT Austin and Austin Community
College to create a channel for students to share knowledge and interact via
hands-on research opportunities in an effort to improve diversity in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this award, the UT-Austin collaborative team of Page and Roberts has as its
overarching goal the development of eco-conscious photocatalysts that can
harvest low-energy, visible-to-near infrared light with efficiency and
selectivity that extend beyond our current capabilities with UV light, the
industrial gold standard. To this end, three aims will be addressed. The first
involves the establishment of a quantitative correlation between the structure
of heavy-atom free photocatalysts (e.g., those without toxic halogens or
expensive metals) and their ability to induce polymerization via long-lived
spin-triplet states. The second aim is to identify individual dyes capable of
absorbing multiple different colors of light and using that distinct, dual-band
absorptive property to drive orthogonal chemical transformations (i.e.,
wavelength-selective catalysis). The third aim seeks to drive rapid
photopolymerizations in UV-opaque materials by converting more transparent low
energy visible/near-infrared photons into high-energy ones via triplet fusion-
based photon upconversion. Each aim combines the synthesis of novel dye
molecules with ultrafast spectroscopic characterization to create a closed-loop
of knowledge with the aim of accelerating photocatalyst optimization. If
successful, this work could have significant scientific broader impacts as there
is great interest in establishing more efficient methods of harvesting energy
from near IR to visible light to drive chemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.