* 2155228
* Attached-Ring Cross-Coupling to Explore Chemical Space and Receptor Selectivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ryan Shenvi, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Ryan Shenvi of The Scripps Research Institute is studying a series of
unusual processes that will facilitate the chemical synthesis of bioactive
substances of possible utility in chemical biology and medicinal chemistry.
Specifically, the work will focus on the preparation of derivatives of
psychoactive agents that were originally discovered in the bark of rainforest
trees belonging to the genus Galbulimima. The methods being developed for this
purpose are based on the use of non-precious metal-containing reagents and they
are anticipated to enable not only concise syntheses of Galbulimima alkaloid
derivatives, but also other complex target molecules that likewise contain so-
called 'attached-ring' motifs. The prepared compounds will be evaluated for
biological activity, specifically opioid receptor antagonism. The broader
impacts of the funded project will extend to the benefits accrued to society as
the PI and other members of the Shenvi research group engage in a broad range of
educational and outreach activities involving students from elementary school
through college level, both within the US and beyond its borders. A significant
portion of these efforts focus on individuals belonging to groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modular syntheses of sp2–sp2 attached-rings, such
as those found in biaryl systems, can be readily accomplished via transition
metal-mediated cross-coupling. By contrast, the attachment of cyclic
substructures by sp2–sp3 and sp3–sp3 bond linkages remains a challenge. The
synthesis of tetrahedral equivalents of biaryls is complicated by increased
steric encumbrance about the bond linking the two rings, the need to navigate
point-chiral stereoselectivity issues and, occasionally, chemical instability.
As a consequence, attached rings embedded within natural product scaffolds are
typically synthesized indirectly: by initial generation of the adjoining bond
and then a cyclization event to form the desired new ring. The Shenvi group
recently identified an attached-ring Galbulimima alkaloid that potently, yet
non-selectively, antagonizes two receptors involved in psychotropic activity in
humans. A ligand-controlled cross-electrophile coupling process co-mediated by
Ni and Mn was discovered that offers a means to install the attached ring with
the necessary contrasteric (endo face) diastereoselectivity. This curious
process may offer a general approach for the installation of attached rings, but
it is currently poorly understood, and especially with regard to the origin of
stereoselectivity. The objectives of the funded project are two-fold. First, the
unusual ligand-controlled stereo-invertive attached-ring cross-coupling that
positions one fragment onto the hindered, endo-face of its partner, will be
optimized and its scope explored. It is anticipated that the Galbulimima
alkaloid analogues generated during the course of these studies will show
different selectivity profiles between two target opioid receptors and across
their larger protein superfamily. Second, the findings made will be extended to
a generalized model of ligand-controlled cross-coupling that will fill a
significant gap in methods to synthesize natural product-like attached-ring
systems. Molecules containing such motifs have been hitherto little investigated
and useful new fundamental knowledge is anticipated to emerge from this
endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.