* 2155024
* Mechanism-based Development of New Nickel-catalyzed Stereospecific Cross-electrophile Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Jarvo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Elizabeth Jarvo of the University of California at Irvine is studying
the development of new nickel-catalyzed processes for the formation of carbon-
carbon bonds. Nickel is more earth-abundant than the metals typically used to
catalyze CC bond formation and so synthetic methods that use it are advantageous
from the standpoint of environmental sustainability; however, the chemistry of
nickel is complex and not well understood. To overcome the challenges of
realizing effective and reliable forms of nickel catalysis, process development
is being coupled with detailed mechanistic experiments designed to elucidate the
fundamental attributes responsible for the control of reaction selectivity. The
methods under investigation offer the promise of new approaches for the
conversion of simple precursors into value added products with potential
applications as pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other advanced
materials. The broader impacts of the funded project extend to the benefits
accrued to society as Professor Jarvo and her coworkers engage in a variety of
educational and outreach activities. Among them, the unique LEAPS (Laboratory
Experiments and Activities in Physical Sciences) program is directed at
increasing participation in, and awareness of, chemical research by middle
school students from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) fields. In other supported activities
that likewise promote broadening participation in the scientific enterprise,
mentoring and career-development workshops that target female and other minority
faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate students are also being diligently
pursued by the lead investigator and her team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded
research focuses on study of new nickel-catalyzed intramolecular cross-
electrophile coupling reactions of esters, sulfonamides, and imides. It is
anticipated that these efforts will provide useful methods for late-stage
functionalization as well as strategies for the synthesis of 1,1-diarylalkanes
and heterocycles, important moieties for medicinal chemistry. Mechanistic
experiments being performed will inform on the rational design of new nickel-
catalyzed reactions and the identification of key catalytic intermediates will
be attempted to address existing knowledge gaps concerning reaction pathways. A
central aim of the research being pursued is to obtain experimental evidence
establishing the ligand features necessary to support one- and/or two-electron
elementary redox steps as nickel complexes navigate the cross-electrophile
coupling catalytic cycle. The odd or even nature of oxidation state changes at
nickel during the reaction cycle is a critical determinant for the
stereochemical outcome of reactions of alkyl electrophiles in cross-coupling and
cross-electrophile coupling reactions. Ultimately, by refining basic
understanding of the mechanism of nickel-catalyzed reactions, the research seeks
to remove a significant obstacle that has hindered the wider adoption of base
metal catalytic manifolds for organic synthesis, namely, mechanistic
ambiguity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.