* 2155026
* Mechanistic and Exploratory Photochemistry with Plane-Polarized Light
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Evgueni Nesterov, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 440,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Evgueni Nesterov of Northern
Illinois University will investigate a novel method to control selectivity of
photochemical reactions through the use of aligning media and plane-polarized
light. Photochemistry is intrinsically “green chemistry” as it uses light
(potentially solar light) as both source of energy and reactant. The proposed
research program in photochemistry aims to establish a new paradigm for
controlling and enhancing selectivity of photochemical reactions, and can
potentially lead to new environmentally benign chemical processes. It will also
lead to better understanding of the mechanisms of photochemical reactions, thus
helping to develop them as practically useful synthetic tools. Students
participating in this program will benefit from multidisciplinary and
collaborative training. The Nesterov group will also contribute to society
through participation in special hands-on outreach activities to local K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to establish and
develop a novel paradigm relating to the tuning of photochemistry with plane-
polarized light. This has the potential to control the course and selectivity of
photochemical reactions through the uniform molecular alignment of photoreactive
compounds and through the use of spatially selective excitation of a particular
electronic transition with plane-polarized light. In contrast to previous ways
of controlling photochemical reactivity through imposing certain geometric
constraints on the photoreactive molecule, the proposed approach will not rely
on a topochemical “reaction cavity.” Rather the approach taken here is to
selectively excite a particular electronic transition leading to a desired
photochemical transformation. If successful, these studies would also deliver a
simple method to experimentally correlate the outcome of a photochemical
reaction with specific electronic transitions, a potentially valuable tool for
the study of photochemical reaction mechanisms. The project involves the
following specific aims: (1) design and synthesis of a series of photochemically
reactive compounds with enhanced ability to align in liquid crystalline media,
allowing these systems to display excitation-selective photochemical reactivity;
(2) detailed investigation of the photochemistry of these systems using plane-
polarized light; (3) investigation of the potential to carry out similar
reactions on photochemical substrates without specially added aligning groups
and (4) development of alternative methods for the uniform alignment of
photoreactive molecules without using a liquid crystalline solvent. This will
include examining Langmuir films on air-water interfaces or using molecular
“alignment enhancers” and studying plane-polarized light controlled
photochemistry in such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.