* 2155215
* GOALI: A General Strategy for Piperidine Synthesis Using Zincke Imine Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrew McNally, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Andrew McNally of Colorado State University and Matthew Maddess of the Process
Research and Development Group at Merck (Rahway, NJ) are engaged in an academic-
industrial collaboration to study a process to prepare saturated nitrogen
heterocyclic of the piperidine family from simpler aromatic (unsaturated)
nitrogen-containing compounds of the pyridine family. This endeavor is
important, and has societal benefits, because piperidines are among the most
widespread class of compounds used as pharmaceutical agents and large
collections of pyridines are available as potential starting materials. The
overall process involves the chosen planar pyridine being first unraveled into
an acyclic molecule (a so-called 'Zincke imine') which is then recyclized into a
reactive positively charged intermediate (a pyridinium salt) that is
subsequently converted into the desired three-dimensional piperidine of
interest. This academic-industrial collaboration involves fundamental reaction
development accelerated by Merck's unique technological capabilities, including
high-throughput experimentation (HTE) and artificial intelligence (AI) tools,
and it is anticipated to lead to a suite of chemical reactions capable of
generating previously inaccessible piperidines that may impact the development
of new therapeutics. The broader impacts of the funded project extend to
providing unique training opportunities for graduate students who will receive
mentorship from both academic and industrial settings and gain direct experience
of Merck's technologies during the project
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Piperidine is the most common nitrogenous
heterocycle found in FDA approved pharmaceuticals; accordingly, synthetic
methods that can access piperidine derivatives in an efficient and selective
manner are potentially useful tools for drug development. The aim of this GOALI
(Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) project is to develop
and explore a new route to substituted piperidines that exploits a recently
discovered Zincke-type pyridine ring-opening chemistry that offers significantly
greater scope than previously known variants. Specifically, upon activation of
pyridines as their N-triflyl salts, subsequent engagement with a suitable amine
(e.g., dibenzylamine) results in efficient conversion to acyclic Zincke imines.
These species will be ring-closed with (heteroaryl)anilines or aliphatic amines
and the resulting N-substituted pyridinium salts converted into a diverse range
of otherwise difficult to access substituted piperidines by hydrogenation
processes or via stagewise reactions with nucleophiles and electrophiles.
Throughout the investigation, Merck's notable technological capabilities,
including high-throughput reaction screening, AI tools to assist with the
optimization of enantioselective hydrogenation reactions, and computational
expertise to probe the mechanistic details of the processes of interest, will be
deployed to facilitate achievement of the project goals. New transformations of
pyridinium salts, including those allowing access to three-dimensional scaffolds
and atropisomeric piperidine derivatives, are also a focus of attention and, if
successful, would provide an entirely new route into such axially chiral
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.