* 2155153
* Highly Luminescent Multinuclear Coinage Metal Arrays with a Twist: A New Approach to Design Light-Emitting Molecular Strings and Coils
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Stollenz, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 348,917.00

With support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Michael Stollenz of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Kennesaw
State University will explore novel molecules containing individual metal atoms
of the elements copper, silver, and gold that are arranged in a linear fashion
and are in close proximity to each other. These complexes are highly luminescent
and the luminescence properties can be controlled by the structures of these
complexes. Such molecular strings also have the potential to serve as conducting
molecular wires and coils for applications in miniaturized electronic devices on
the submicroscopic scale. Luminescent complexes with multiple copper, silver,
and gold ions are of particular interest in this regard, since they can be
applied in molecular/organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). For the construction
of molecular strings of this nature, tailored synthetic methodologies are
required to target and control linear arrangements of the individual metal ions.
Stollenz and his group will work to develop a new methodology for producing not
only strictly linear arrays of copper, silver, and gold ions, but also
arrangements that are substantially bent and therefore represent molecular
coils. The major goal is to investigate how the structural changes affect the
emission properties of these compounds. A long-term prospect for such molecular
coils, if embedded in electronic circuits, is to utilize them as tiny
electromagnets that can be integrated in nanomachines and other nanoscaled
electronic devices. Such devices can in turn be applied in nanorobots that
deliver drugs inside a human body. If these devices are luminescent, their path
can be followed by fluorescence imaging. The broader impacts of this work will
include the mentoring and training of undergraduate and masters students from
the significant population of underserved groups at Kennesaw State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program focuses on the development and
implementation of new strategies to multinuclear coinage metal arrays as
molecular strings and coils that serve as key components in molecular/organic
light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The underlying synthetic methods aim to provide a
fundamental approach to control aggregation of linear cluster assemblies and to
provide a insight into the coordination chemistry of multinuclear complex arrays
in general. Specifically, a library of new bis(amidine) ligands that are capable
of accommodating at least four copper centers, arranged in a linear fashion, are
being targeted. The incorporation of Cu(I) ions will be accomplished by
employing a clean organometallic Cu(I) source, mesitylcopper. Bis(amidine)
ligands with additional terminal N-donor groups will be selectively protected by
MR (M = Cu, Ag, Au; R = Cl, Mes) complex fragments. These hitherto unknown
dinuclear metalloligands will be utilized as building blocks for new linear or
bundled homonuclear Cu(I) or heterobimetallic Cu(I)/Ag(I) or Cu(I)/Au(I) cluster
assemblies with promise as luminescent materials. Finally, this program will
provide in-depth training of undergraduate/graduate research students and
postdocs in synthesis, characterization techniques (crystallography and
spectroscopy), oral presentation skills, scientific writing, laboratory safety,
and data management. These activities will prepare research students and
postdoctoral researchers to achieve their ambitious career goals in science or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.