* 2155055
* Transition Metal Catalysis of Electrocyclic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Joseph O'Connor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 04/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Joseph O’Connor of the University of California, San Diego will study
new ways to convert readily available acyclic organic compounds that contain
multiple carbon-carbon double bonds into high-value cyclic compounds. This will
be achieved by the design of new organometallic catalysts that provide a high
degree of control over the three-dimensional structure of the product molecules.
Organometallic catalysts are carbon- and metal-containing substances that, when
added in trace amounts to a reaction mixture, speed up the conversion of
starting materials to products. Catalysts permit lower reaction temperatures,
thereby minimizing energy input and the associated production of green-house
gases. In addition, catalysts prevent the formation of undesired byproducts and
their associated negative environmental impacts. Novel approaches for the
controlled generation of proposed intermediates will advance our understanding
of a relatively unexplored but important area of hydrocarbon chemistry. The
proposed research will contribute to future advances in the eco-friendly
preparation of organic molecules with useful properties. Students, including
women, persons with disabilities, and persons from underrepresented minority
groups, will receive will receive multidisciplinary training that spans
mechanistic, synthetic, organometallic, and computational chemistry, thereby
positioning them for future independent scientific contributions in both
industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under with award, the O’Connor
research group will study new ways to catalyze the electrocyclization of
conjugated trienes. It is anticipated that these studies will lay a foundation
for the development of new catalysts that facilitate challenging reactions that
involve highly delocalized, nonpolar transition-state structures. The catalyst
design innovations include metal catalysts with a facial array of three
accessible metal coordination sites for the simultaneous interaction of the
metal with three pi-bonds. Low temperature spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography,
and computational studies will be utilized to reveal how hexadentate
coordination perturbs polyene structures and induces disrotatory triene ring
closure. By employing a chiral ancillary ligand, enantioselective
electrocyclization will be targeted. Studies into metal-catalyzed
electrocyclization will unlock new retro-synthetic approaches for the synthesis
of complex biologically active compounds, designer ligands, and new materials.
The scope and limitations of these new electrocyclization reactions will be
studied in detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.