* 2155190
* RUI:CAS:Reaction Dynamics of Anderson-Type Polyoxometalate Ions in Aqueous Solution: Relating Solid-State Structures with Solution-State Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric Villa, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 205,772.00

WIth support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Eric Villa of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Creighton University is focused on determining how the
structural features of simple polyoxometalate ions (predominately-anionic metal-
oxide clusters) affect their reactivity in aqueous solution. The range of
applications for these polyoxometalate (POM) ions is wide, with properties
including antiviral/antitumor activity, acid catalysis, water oxidation
catalysis, MRI contrast agents, luminescent and magnetic materials, and
potentially radioactive waste treatment. The goal of this research is to
understand how POMs react in aqueous solution and what controls their reactivity
in solution. The resulting data from this project will allow for POMs to be
better tuned for these important applications. This project engages
undergraduate students in fundamental research and gains them training in
inorganic chemistry, which includes several analytical techniques and
instrumental methods. Undergraduate students will also be involved in the set-up
and delivery of a middle school chemistry summer camp focusing on inorganic
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on understanding the
stability and reactivity of Anderson-type POM ions (XMo6O24z-) in aqueous
solution. Here, the primary goal is to pinpoint how changes in the identity of
atom X alters the ionâ€™s properties in aqueous solution to be able to correlate
structure-property relationships. The Anderson-type POM has only three types of
structural oxygen, making it an ideal structure for undergraduate researchers to
appreciate the complexities of aqueous solution reactivity. Importantly, the
general reactivity trends of POMs in aqueous media have not been clearly
identified and still have many unanswered questions: 1) What types of oxygen
sites exchange the fastest? 2) What affects only a single site versus what
affects the entire unit? 3) What structural properties (bond lengths, charge
state or protonation) correlate with reactivity? 4) How general are the trends
observed? 5) Critically, can the reactivity of POMs in water be easily
predicted? 6) Finally, how do single, targeted metal substitutions affect the
ability of the POM to make stable complexes with surrogates of radioactive
cations for remediation purposes? The small Anderson-type POMs will allow
undergraduate researchers to confidently probe the above questions and the data
collected will allow for the ability to better tune these ions to their
impressive set of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.