* 2155003
* CAS: Catalytic Synthesis via Small Molecule Evolution
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Jon Tunge, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2023
* USD 221,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jon Tunge of the University of Kansas is studying the development of
strategies that harness the inherent energy in molecules to enable efficient and
environmentally sustainable processes for chemical manufacturing. Specifically,
the release of small stable molecules (carbon dioxide and/or hydrogen) from
simple feedstocks, sometimes in combination with harvesting light energy, will
provide the energy to drive chemical reactions without the need for traditional,
more wasteful, methods of energy input. To further lessen the environmental
impact of the chemistry while also allowing for the exploitation of new types of
reaction pathways, catalysts based on cobalt, an earth abundant metal, rather
than traditional more expensive and rare precious metals, will be employed as
critical promoters. It is anticipated that the methods developed will be
applicable to the synthesis of a wide variety of materials with potential
applications as pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other substances of
value to science, engineering, and commerce. The broader impacts of the funded
project extend to the benefits accrued to society as Professor Tunge and his
coworkers engage in outreach and educational activities designed to integrate
the goals of this research with training and recruitment programs that
incorporate the promotion of 'green chemistry' principles. A significant goal of
these activities will be to attract students from diverse backgrounds, including
individuals belonging to groups underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, to address contemporary challenges
in sustainable chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project is focused on
the development of chemical transformations based on the catalytic generation of
reactive intermediates via the cleavage of C–C and C–H bonds. The catalytic
pathways being developed utilize decarboxylation to provide an efficient
strategy for the in situ formation of synthetically useful reactive
intermediates directly from inexpensive carboxylic acids. Other processes under
investigation utilize the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) for atom-economical
functionalization. Cobalt catalysts replace traditional, expensive, palladium
catalysts in decarboxylative coupling reactions and are anticipated to allow for
new transformation types that are inaccessible using current technologies.
Additionally, photoredox-catalyzed hydrogen evolution will allow for the site-
specific functionalization of amino acids and peptides, while also enabling
regiocontrolled decarboxylative Heck-like acylations. These studies will advance
a general paradigm for synthetic chemists to use for accessing reactive species
under mild conditions, while generating minimal waste using: (1) visible light
photoredox catalysts for redox shuffling of transition metal catalysts, and (2)
hydrogen evolution to allow oxidative couplings through liberation of the
smallest molecule, hydrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.