* 2155192
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Drivers and Air-quality Implications of Marine Gas-phase Emissions in Urban Coastal Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kelley Barsanti, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2025
* USD 432,543.00

This project includes a combination of field work, laboratory analysis, and
modeling to improve the understanding of the complex interactions between human
and natural systems at the interface of urban cities and coastal oceans. This
research focuses on quantifying and characterizing factors controlling the
marine emissions of trace gases in an urban coastal southern California location
known to be impacted by run-off and anthropogenic emissions. The data collected
in this study will be used to estimate the current and future influences of
these trace gas fluxes on global climate and local air
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has three primary aims: (1) Characterize
the environmental drivers and anthropogenic influences controlling coastal
secondary marine aerosol (SMA) precursors through controlled mesocosm
experiments and in-situ measurement campaigns; (2) Integrate the gas-phase
emissions characterized above into updated online coastal emissions inventories;
and (3) Model impacts of the modified ocean emissions under current and future
climate scenarios. The potential impacts of chemical speciation, timing, and
temperature dependence identified through the field campaign and laboratory
measurements will be explored using both global and regional atmospheric
simulations. This effort will provide new datasets for a largely under-
constrained anthropogenic-biogenic system, and lead to a subsequent improvement
of emission inventories and regional and global modeling to increase the
understanding of the formation of coastal secondary marine aerosols (SMA) in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes support for a
postdoctoral scholar, several graduate students, and opportunities for the
involvement of citizen science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.