* 2155072
* Using Computational Modeling to Transform Assessments of Creativity in Engineering Design
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Fuge, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2025
* USD 211,171.00

This collaborative project from research teams at Pennsylvania State University,
University of Maryland, and Washington and Lee University focuses on measuring
creativity in undergraduate engineering education. The ability to think
creatively is essential for success in STEM fields, particularly engineering,
which requires designing solutions to complex problems that often have no single
or "correct" solution. The Next Generation Science Standards identify creative
thinking skills, such as problem solving and flexibility, as core competencies
for modern STEM education. Yet educators are not currently equipped with
adequate tools to assess creativity in their classrooms. To effectively prepare
the STEM workforce, there is a critical need for assessment tools that educators
and researchers can use to identify what works in STEM education to foster
creativity. Current creativity tests present significant challenges for STEM
educators, including (in-person) paper administration and, perhaps most
problematically, manual scoring that requires teachers to count and code
thousands of responses—a labor-intensive and often costly process, particularly
for under-resourced schools. In light of the increasingly diverse student
population, the availability of creativity tests that measure student ability
fairly and consistently, regardless of race or ethnicity, is even more critical
for equity of opportunity in STEM education. This project seeks to create an
online platform for measuring creativity in engineering design that educators
can use to cater to the needs of all their students. The tool will allow
educators to administer a range of engineering creativity tasks and
automatically calculate creativity scores. This project fits the intent of the
ECR program to facilitate "the development, refinement, and testing of new
education research, measurement, and evaluation methodologies." It addresses the
ECR research track, "Research on STEM Learning and Learning Environments," and
has additional impacts for "Research on Broadening Participation in STEM Fields"
by designing inclusive and culturally and linguistically diverse assessment
tools targeted to students who remain underrepresented in the pursuit of STEM
courses of study and English as second language
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two aims guide this project. First is to build an
online platform for large-scale engineering design assessment — validating all
platform tasks with undergraduate engineering students — to allow teachers and
researchers to easily assess creativity, automatically compute creativity
metrics, and generate customizable student reports. Second is to apply the
platform in an undergraduate design course at Penn State that includes a 3-week
Creativity Module (with lessons and exercises on creativity in engineering
design) to obtain valuable platform usability data from both instructors and
students, while evaluating a promising undergraduate course intended to promote
creativity in engineering design. The team will apply recent advances in
computational modeling and machine learning — including active learning of
design sketches and distributional semantic modeling of text-based responses to
creative problem solving tasks. It is expected that this approach will
streamline educational assessment of creativity, resulting in a user-friendly
technology to assist STEM educators in the classroom. The novel computational
tools developed in this project will advance knowledge and understanding for
creativity psychometric assessment and across different fields (not only
engineering). The PI team will also design assessment tools that are culturally
responsive and minimally biased — especially for the growing number of students
who speak English as a second language — and collaborate with STEM educators to
maximize the usability of the platform in their classrooms. The online platform
and course materials will be publicly available, facilitating the national
transition to remote education and research (accelerated by the current
pandemic) by providing online resources for STEM teachers and researchers across
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.