* 2155201
* Housing Reconstruction Demand Surge: Measurement, Modeling, And Vulnerability Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Mohsen Shahandashti, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 265,930.00

Significant post-disaster cost escalations often slow down repair process,
magnify inequality, and amplify underinsurance problem. This research will
reveal vulnerable characteristics in regional housing construction markets and
identify effective disaster-related policies to alleviate these vulnerabilities.
It will help identify the construction capacity gaps that cause the construction
cost escalation following natural disasters. The discovery is critical for
raising awareness, developing a greater construction capacity, setting effective
reconstruction goals, initiating risk mitigation and resourcing strategies, and
enforcing effective regulations and policies. Cutting the housing recovery time
and cost through effective pre-planning could be realized. This project also
aims to address the critical shortage of talents capable of leading post-
disaster reconstruction in the civil engineering discipline. Hispanics and women
graduate and undergraduate students at the Hispanic-serving University of Texas
at Arlington (UTA) will participate in every step of this project. This project
will enable students to work with city planners to lead stakeholder involvement
in disadvantaged communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
fundamental limitations of existing demand surge models by 1) creating non-
hazard econometric baselines for housing construction cost variations, 2)
creating an econometric measurement method for quantifying post-disaster
construction cost escalations, 3) creating spatiotemporal econometric models to
represent the housing reconstruction demand surge, and assessing the housing
reconstruction vulnerability of communities, and 4) quantifying the impacts of
disaster-related policies on housing reconstruction. This project will generate
new knowledge at the nexus of three critical disciplines: Housing Construction,
Economics, and Built Environment Resilience. The research will transform
existing construction demand surge models by establishing links between pre-
disaster construction market conditions and post-disaster construction cost
escalations. To that end, spatiotemporal econometric models, such as spatial
panel data models, will use data from more than 600 U.S. counties affected by
large-scale natural disasters over the past ten years, as well as data from
their neighboring counties. These models will consider different circumstances
based on a range of non-hazard to extreme hazard conditions. Difference-in-
difference panel data models will estimate the effect of disaster-related
policies (ranging from local to federal). The research team will engage federal,
state, and local governments to identify and evaluate various disaster-related
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.