* 2155160
* CAS: Organometallic Chemistry of High- and Low-Valent Nickel Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Liviu Mirica, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 170,516.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Liviu M. Mirica of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) will study the electronic properties and
reactivity profiles of uncommon but reactive complexes of nickel that help in
the production of useful organic compounds. The proposed studies will include a
combination of synthetic chemistry to make the compounds and advanced
spectroscopy for the characterization of these compounds, and thus will provide
students in the research laboratory an interdisciplinary training and the
opportunity to develop a broad range of scientific skills. In addition,
Professor Mirica has developed a collaboration with Michael Webb from the
neighboring Illinois State University (ISU) that will allow students from ISU to
visit Professor Mirica’s laboratory for research and advanced spectroscopy
studies. The PI will continue to be active in recruiting and training graduate
and undergraduate students from different backgrounds, and will participate in
the Chemistry Community program at UIUC aimed at increasing graduation rates for
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) majors from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that palladium
(Pd)-based complexes feature prominently as catalysts for cross-coupling
reactions to generate C-C and C-X bonds. Nickel (Ni)-based systems have been
recently developed given their generally broader substrate scope. This project
by Professor Mirica deals with detailing the role of paramagnetic organometallic
Ni complexes in important chemical transformations such as C-C and C-heteroatom
bond formation and coupling. The project builds on Professor Mirica’s recent
work in this area of chemistry of Ni chemistry, and will pursue the synthesis,
isolation, detailed characterization, and reactivity studies of a series of
organometallic Ni(III) complexes supported by flexible multidentate ligands.
Novel organometallic Ni complexes in varied oxidation states will be isolated,
characterized, and employed in new photocatalytic cross-coupling
transformations. Professor Mirica and his group will investigate the
photochemical and thermal reactivity of these Ni systems in detail, using the
appreciable number of isolated organometallic Ni(III) and Ni(I) complexes
expected to be synthesized in this project. The interdisciplinary training of
students will span inorganic, organic, organometallic, and physical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.