* 2155095
* Data-informed Modeling for DNA and RNA Aptamer Design
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Petr Sulc, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2025
* USD 338,355.00

Petr Sulc of Arizona State University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop new data-driven methods to design new RNA and DNA binders to molecular
targets. Molecular interactions are at the basis of function of all living
organisms, and their understanding is crucial for for diagnostic and
therapeutics. Dr Sulc will develop machine learning models to analyze sequences
of molecules that bind to a certain target molecule of interest (such as surface
of a virus). The models extract particular structural or sequence motif in the
molecule that is crucial for its function, which allows to computationally
design even stronger binders. Dr Sulcâ€™s group will train and validate the
methods on both naturally occurring molecules as well as results from selection
experiments against different targets (including viral surface proteins) with
possible applications in diagnostics, therapeutics, as well as basic
understanding of molecular interactions. Dr Sulc will further develop outreach
programs that include public lectures and online activities aimed at high school
students and general public to broaden participation in science and develop
interdisciplinary skills that combine computer modeling, simulations and
biochemistry experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new
machine-learning methods for processing of sequence ensembles from selection
experiments. The experimental selection protocols (such as SELEX) serve to
obtain DNA or RNA sequences that bind to a target of interest (e.g. protein,
small molecule, or cells from a particular tissue ), where in each round a
subset of the random sequence library that binds strongly to the target is
amplified and kept for the next round of selection. Such methods produce large
numbers of sequences, most of them only weakly binding to the target of
interest, with few strongly binding candidates emerging at the end of the
procedure. This project will develop novel models derived from Restricted
Boltzmann Machine architectures and uses them both use as classifiers as well as
generators of novel binders. Additionally, the models can be used to infer
sequence and structural motifs in aptamers that are the key elements for strong
affinity with the molecular target, making the models also interpretable. The
models will be trained on naturally occurring non-coding RNAs, as well as
multiple experimentally generated ensembles and the novel generated sequences
will then be verified in experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.