* 2155133
* Development of and Mechanistic Studies on the Palladium and Iron-Cocatalyzed Nucleoboration of Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kami Hull, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Kami L. Hull of the University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin) is studying a
palladium- and iron-catalyzed process that converts simple chemical feedstocks
(olefins) into value-added products. This so-called "nucleoboration" method
results in the addition of an atom of boron and one of another element,
typically nitrogen, to the olefin in a finely controlled manner. Selective
transformations exist to subsequently convert the boron atom into a wide variety
of other substituents and the overall process promises to be a versatile
approach for the manufacture of complex compounds and advanced materials of
value to society. In combination with method development, the funded research
encompasses detailed mechanistic studies designed to elucidate how the catalyst
pair functions with the goals of advancing fundamental knowledge of transition
metal-based catalysis and improving the efficiency and sustainability of
chemical synthesis. The broader impacts of the funded project extend to the
benefits accrued to society as Dr. Hull and her coworkers engage in an extensive
range of educational and outreach activities, including: the ChemBridge program
to improve the college readiness of young Texans who belong to groups
underserved in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields,
and ongoing efforts to propagate shared values of diversity, equity, and
inclusivity among the faculty and students of UT-
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research focuses on investigations of a
recently discovered Pd/Fe-cocatalyzed aminoboration of alkenes and it features
further development of the process (e.g., to expand both the substrate and
nucleophile scope) and associated mechanistic studies to gain insights for the
underlying role of the iron(II) triflate cocatalyst. Specifically, during the
course of methodological development (Aim 1), reaction conditions for the
successful aminoboration of norbornene [key reagents: PhthNH, B2Pin2, cat.
Pd(MeCN)2Cl2, cat. Fe(OTf)2, and O2] will be further explored and extended to
more challenging olefin substrates for which beta-hydride elimination following
the Markovnikov addition stage of the process could be encountered. Nucleophiles
other than N-based systems, such as O-based (e.g., phenols), S-based (e.g.,
thiols), and C-based (e.g., indoles), will also be investigated as will
alternative transmetalation reagents (e.g., Si- and Sn-based) to potentially
arrive upon a highly generalized nucleometallation process. In further efforts
to broaden the versatility of the platform yet further, a remote nucleoboration
transformation that incorporates a 'Pd-walking' stage (i.e., regioisomerization)
prior to transmetalation is also being pursued. In mechanistic studies (Aim 2),
the origin of the critical role for iron species in the transmetalation step of
aminoboration is being explored as is its equally curious beneficial effect on
the aza-Wacker process. Finally, in an effort to develop a more sustainable
variant of the nucleoboration process (Aim 3), a heterogenous and recyclable
Pd/Fe catalyst system is under development. All told, the studies being pursued
are anticipated to extend the versatility of olefin difunctionalization
chemistry and in so doing, facilitate the synthesis of important classes of
nitrogen (and other heteroatom) containing compounds that are prominent among
active pharmaceutical ingredients and other kinds of complex molecules of
utility in science, engineering, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.