* 2155239
* Redox-Active Carboranyl-Based Lewis Acids for Targeted N-H Bond Weakening
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gabriel Menard, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Gabriel Menard of the Department of Chemistry at University of California –
Santa Barbara will investigate the ability of a class of compounds, called
carboranes, to activate N-H bonds in ammonia. This project is motivated by the
need to develop energy storage technologies to facilitate the sustained growth
of renewable energy (RE) production and distribution. For the practical use of
RE, efficient energy storage is vital. This is because excess energy is
obtained, for example, during periods when the sun is shining and must be stored
in order to provide energy when the sun is not shining. An emerging storage
technique involves use of ammonia. Ammonia, the second most produced chemical in
the world, is a low-cost, energy-dense molecule with a high hydrogen content and
an established global distribution infrastructure. However, its use in RE
storage relies on its efficient conversion to hydrogen – a clean fuel – and
nitrogen. This project will develop a set of molecules, called carboranes, that
are capable of utilizing electrical energy to transform ammonia into hydrogen
and nitrogen. The work focuses on the maximizing the ability of the carboranes
to weaken the chemical bonds in ammonia, which prompts the fundamental steps
involved in the conversion to hydrogen and nitrogen. The project will lead to
the training of highly skilled chemists, including women and underrepresented
minority scientists. In addition, Dr. Menard hosts monthly “Science Pub Night”
event, where scientists from campus present their research to the public in an
open and accessible way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop
carborane reactivity for initiating the activation of the strong N–H bonds in
ammonia for hydrogen release (or its equivalents). The underlying challenge in
converting NH3 (ammonia) lies in activating the strong N–H bonds sufficiently to
prompt subsequent N–N bond formation. A general strategy is being developed to
systematically control N–H bond dissociation free energy by synthesizing
proximal, redox-active, carborane (Cb)-appended Lewis acidic centers that allow
for the decoupling and control of the thermochemical parameters by tuning the Cb
cage electronics and Lewis acidic properties of these compounds. This will allow
the systematic control and weakening of the N–H bonds of coordinated NH3 and
target its partial splitting to hydrazine and hydrogen equivalents. The Specific
Aims include: 1) the synthesis of Cb-appended, proximal Lewis acidic systems; 2)
targeting the spontaneous release of H2 through thermochemical and structural
control, and; 3) closing the cycle using an electrochemical reactor. The project
involves a significant effort to recruit and retain a diverse group of students
and an outreach component target non-traditional audiences for science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.