* 2155027
* Fluorescence-Encoded Infrared Spectroscopy for Single-Molecule Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrei Tokmakoff, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 640,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrei Tokmakoff and his
research group at the University of Chicago are developing new techniques to
study the time-dependent behavior of individual molecules in solution. These
methods reveal the motions and interactions of molecules during the course of
chemical reactions in a manner that has been previously inaccessible. Single
molecule (SM) methods have had enormous impact describing molecular processes
that occur on surfaces and in biological processes, but their application to
problems in solution-phase chemistry remains a persistent challenge. This
project attempts to overcome earlier limitations by using a new high-sensitivity
detection strategy, fluorescence-encoded infrared spectroscopy (FEIR), with the
goal of using vibrational spectroscopy to track how chemical bonds and molecular
contacts evolve in time for single molecules in solution. Students working on
this project receive training in a cross-disciplinary setting that provides
experience on an array of topics including instrument development, optics and
spectroscopy, and chemical dynamics. This training in the Tokmakoff group
prepares students for leadership roles in scientific research at academic and
national labs, or in high-tech companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this grant builds on recent work by Prof. Tokmakoff and his team
demonstrating the single-molecule sensitivity of the FEIR approach using photon
correlation spectroscopy (CS). The team is now expanding the capabilities of the
FEIR technique using new types of chromophores to target a variety of chemical
applications. For example, the research team is developing IR vibrational
contrast mechanisms for FEIR-CS that use vibrational frequency shifts as
reporters of the chemical dynamics for applications such as site-specific
bimolecular binding, protonation and deprotonation reactions, and ion transport
through electrolytes. Additionally, the team is working to extend FEIR
measurements to measure the dynamic information content of single-molecule
photon streams that describe bond-specific histories of individual diffusing and
reacting molecules. These research efforts are guided by the overarching goal of
building a broadly applicable tool to study chemical dynamics and molecular
transport processes in liquids, solutions, and other soft materials. The broader
impacts of the project also include the development and dissemination of open-
access educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.