* 2155211
* Spectral Transitions and Critical Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Svetlana Jitomirskaya, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2027
* USD 242,502.00

The research will focus on the anomalous spectral properties of quasiperiodic
(almost but not quite periodic) structures. Quasiperiodic operators provide
central or important models for integer quantum Hall effect, experimental
quasicrystals, and the quantum chaos theory. Quasiperiodic systems are also used
in modeling many other micro and macro effects: from quantum localization to
earthquakes. Other deterministic aperiodic (irregular) structures will be of
interest as well. The planned development of the rigorous theory is expected to
contribute to the understanding of all the above phenomena and may lead to
finding new materials with desired physical properties. The topics will include
studying properties of quantum mechanical systems with both strong and weak
disorder (many and few impurities, respectively), which demonstrate certain
anomalous behavior. An integral part of the project will consist of educating
graduate students and other young researchers. Related outreach activities will
take place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of several parts,
including the connection of dual Lyapunov exponents to characterization of
spectra and spectral components, proof of the ubiquity of arithmetic spectral
transitions and universal hierarchical structures of eigenfunctions for analytic
quasiperiodic operators, proof of extended states for multidimensional
quasiperiodic operators, studies of the critical phenomena and of the ‘two
interlacing particles’ effect. Other important objectives will be the study of
issues related to certain models of quantum chaos. The project will involve the
continuing development of non-perturbative methods for the proofs of
localization-type effects, as well as for the study of absolutely continuous
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.