* 2155163
* Development of New Catalytic Reactions for the Synthesis of Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sarah Reisman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Sarah E. Reisman of the California Institute of Technology
(Caltech) is developing new catalytic reactions for the chemical synthesis of
natural products. Key to advancing the science of chemical synthesis is the
design and application of new reactions for carbon–carbon (C–C) bond formation.
The invention of new catalytic C–C bond forming reactions allows chemists to
synthesize important molecules with increased efficiency – reducing the cost and
resources required. Reisman and team will focus on the synthesis of natural
products and, in particular, the complex structures of the selected target
molecules pose challenges to the current state-of-the-art in catalysis, and
provide a platform to invent, test, and refine new C–C bond forming reactions
that can ultimately find applications in the synthesis of a broad range of
molecules that can benefit society. The rigorous training of scientists in the
theory, methods, and strategies of constructing organic molecules will be an
essential part of the funded research studies. Undergraduate, graduate student
and post-doctoral researchers trained through this research experience will be
poised to pursue careers in the chemical, biotechnology, and materials science
sectors. With support from the Caltech Center for Teaching, Learning and
Outreach (CTLO), the Reisman team will visit Los Angeles Unified School District
(LAUSD) and Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD) classrooms to give
presentations to high school science students about the role of chemistry in
drug discovery and related chemistry career opportunities. In partnership with
Progress Brewing, a local brewery, the Reisman team will host Science Café
programs featuring Caltech scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structurally
complex, polycyclic natural products – which often possess multiple reactive
functional groups and stereogenic centers – challenge the limits of current
synthetic methodology. This award will support two natural product synthesis
projects that feature new reaction development. The first project will
investigate a Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling as the key step in a concise and
modular synthesis of an ent-kauranoid natural product. The second project will
develop a radical-polar crossover annulation using photoredox catalysis to
prepare a polyketide natural product. It is expected that these studies will
advance the state of the art in catalytic C–C bond formation, provide new tools
for strategic bond formation in complex settings, and demonstrate how modern
synthetic methods can improve synthetic strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.