* 2155181
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Exploiting Stimulus-response Correlation for Wireless Hidden Device Localization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Song Fang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 516,000.00

Smart Internet-of-things (IoT) devices, such as wireless cameras and voice-
controlled devices, commonly employ motion or voice activity detection for
increased security and convenience, so that upon detecting physical stimuli
(e.g., motion or sound), they start to work and upload the sensing data to the
cloud. The ubiquity of such devices also brings privacy concerns associated with
unauthorized monitoring, as they can be kept hidden easily in various locations
like hotel rooms. Traditional ways to detect a wireless hidden device mainly
include Radio Frequency (RF) scanning, lens detection, and physical search. The
latter two methods are cumbersome as they require inspecting every corner of the
target area. RF scanning may work when the device is actively transmitting, but
existing work can only detect a sensor's existence, not its exact location.
However, detection is often insufficient, as the device owner may claim it is
somewhere outside of the room or installed by others. By finding the physical
device, a victim whose privacy is violated can obtain direct and solid
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on investigating causality
between stimuli to hidden wireless devices and resultant patterns in observable
wireless traffic. This research aims at (i) designing practical approaches to
pinpoint wireless hidden devices leveraging the correlation between artificial
stimuli and resultant wireless traffic, and (ii) developing countermeasures
against stimulus-response-based device localization schemes. The project will
create techniques that substantially safeguard user privacy against unauthorized
monitoring via wireless hidden devices. The results from this research will be
openly shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.