* 2155170
* 1,2-Dioxetanes for Quantitative Chemiluminescence Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alexander Lippert, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B (CSDM-B)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Alexander R. Lippert of Southern
Methodist University is studying the fundamental structures and mechanisms of
chemiluminescent molecules for use in quantitative chemiluminescence imaging
techniques. Chemiluminescence is the light observed in fireflies and glowsticks
and is sometimes referred to as cold light generated during a chemical reaction.
Imaging in cells and mammals using chemiluminescence offers significant
advantages including low-cost, high sensitivity, low phototoxicity, and the
ability to image in deeper tissue. This emerging technique for molecular imaging
is limited, however, by a lack of methods for precise quantitative imaging of
analytes and optimal microscopy instrumentation. The proposed study will advance
the field of chemiluminescence sensing by progressing from rough relative
measurements to precise quantitative imaging of a diverse set of analytes. This
project will also serve to enhance participation of under-represented students
in STEM. In collaboration with a local HBCU Prairie View A&amp;M University, the
PI will recruit and co-mentor under-represented students to participate in this
research and receive long-term mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
specific aims of the project are: (1) develop near-infrared (NIR) and short-wave
infrared (SWIR) ratiometric chemiluminescent probes for quantitative Imaging;
(2) develop kinetics-based chemiluminescence probes for quantitative imaging;
(3) develop chemiluminescence microscopy for quantitative imaging. The proposed
work aims to gain mechanistic understanding to develop innovative molecules,
instrumentation, and methods for quantitative chemiluminescence imaging of O2,
pH, metals, reactive species, and enzymes in cells and animals, thereby
advancing fundamental understanding of chemiluminescence and broadly enabling
biological studies. Chemiluminescent molecules with NIR and SWIR ratiometric
emission will provide better quantification and the ability to image in deeper
tissue. The kinetics of the chemiluminescent reactions and reactions of probes
with analytes will be solved in detail and methods will be developed to advance
this understanding in the context of chemiluminescence microscopy. New types of
chemiluminescence microscopes will be developed with optical components that
maximize light gathering ability and minimize photon loss. Finally, the
translation of novel molecules and mechanistic understanding into methods for
cellular and whole animal imaging will unlock a new field of high sensitivity,
low phototoxicity, and deep tissue quantitative chemiluminescence
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.