* 2155175
* CAS: Understanding Structural Metamorphosis of Transition Metal Chalcogenide Electrocatalyst Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Manashi Nath, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 379,583.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Chemistry
Division (CHE) and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR), Manashi Nath and Xinhua Liang from
Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology are studying the surface
chemistry of transition metal chalcogenide-based electrocatalysts. The materials
catalyze water electrolysis under reactive electrochemical conditions and
understanding their fundamental activity is important to further improve them.
Water electrolysis, also known as water splitting, is a promising way to produce
hydrogen and oxygen. Electrochemically-produced hydrogen has significant
potential for renewable energy. However, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is
the most challenging aspect to overcome in electrocatalytic water splitting.
Although several highly active OER electrocatalysts have been discovered over
the last few years, there remains a lack of understanding of the actual catalyst
surface species responsible for their reactivity. In this project, the PIs will
investigate an interesting and well-defined family of chalcogenide (selenide and
telluride) electrocatalysts with high OER catalytic activity to diagnose their
interfacial behavior. Apart from offering new insight about the active surface
composition, the PIs will also (i) provide science education opportunities for
high school students and educators by organizing workshops and distribution of
demonstration toolkits; (ii) provide opportunities for members of
underrepresented groups and women in the PI research laboratories and increase
diversity in the workplace; (iii) involve researchers at academic levels from
undergraduate to postdoc and mentor these coworkers to sharpen their research
and scientific communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
collaborative research project, the teams of Manashi Nath and Xinhua Liang from
Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology will together studying the
surface chemistry of transition metal chalcogenide-based electrocatalysts.
Although transition metal chalcogenides have shown tremendous promise for
catalytic water oxidation owing to their unprecedented high efficiency, there
remains a lack of proper understanding of the active surface composition for
these catalysts under operational conditions. In this project, the PIs will
focus on bridging this knowledge gap by trying to understand the cause of high
catalytic activity of transition metal selenide and telluride based
electrocatalysts by following speciation and evolution of the active
electrochemical interface through detailed in situ and ex situ characterizations
of experimentally created surface model analogues, along with density functional
theory (DFT) studies. The PIs hypothesize that the catalytic chalcogenide
surface in alkaline medium can potentially be described by two different
structural models: one resulting from complete chemical conversion of
chalcogenide to oxide surface leading to oxide-coated chalcogenide surface, and
the other comprising partially hydroxylated mixed anionic (hydroxy)chalcogenide
surface which retains compositional integrity of the chalcogenide. The PIs
further propose the mixed anionic (hydroxyl)chalcogenide model to be more
accurate description of the active surface. These hypotheses will be evaluated
by synthesizing catalyst surfaces analogous to the oxide-coated chalcogenide and
(hydroxy)chalcogenide models through electrodeposition and atomic layer
deposition and collecting experimental evidence from a combination of extensive
bulk and surface characterization techniques. Simulation studies will be
performed to decipher local coordination environment around the catalytically
active site under reactive conditions. This project has the potential to provide
structural and functional insight on the nature of the active electrochemical
interface, information needed to guide future efforts at surface engineering of
such important transition metal chalcogenide-based functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.