* 2155096
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Exploiting Performance Correlations for Accurate and Low-cost Performance Testing for Serverless Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Wei Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 329,334.00

As organizations increasingly port their applications to cloud services instead
of using local resources, they face the challenge of determining how to use
cloud resources and maintain good interactive experiences for their application
users while reducing their cloud usage costs. Serverless computing greatly
simplifies the deployment of large-scale cloud applications by automatically
provisioning and managing the servers and removing this burden from cloud
developers. However, cloud developers still need to determine the most cost-
effective cloud-resource allocations for their deployments and debug performance
issues in their serverless applications. This research focuses on providing
cloud-application developers with accurate performance knowledge by addressing
the lack of performance testing tools to accurately determine the performance of
serverless cloud applications. The success of this research can reduce the
deployment costs and improve the performance satisfaction for organizations,
such as education, research, and health institutions, that utilize serverless
clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research specifically addresses the
scalability and workflow challenges that serverless computing sets forth to
accurate performance testing through the design of novel performance-testing
frameworks that will utilize correlation-aware, non-parametric statistical
tools, including clustered-block bootstrap and regression-based bootstrap. It
will provide three accurate, low-cost, and automated serverless performance-
testing frameworks, specifically for: 1) unit testing for a single serverless
application's performance by exploiting the correlation within the application's
performance testing data from simultaneous invocations (i.e., intra-application
correlation); 2) integration testing for the performance correlation between two
serverless applications (i.e., inter-application correlation); and 3)
integration testing for the overall performance of a workflow of serverless
applications by exploiting both intra- and inter-application correlations. The
insights and techniques developed in this project will also deepen the research
community's understanding of the performance characteristics of serverless
computing and on how to effectively analyze serverless performance using modern
statistical tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.