* 1700747
* PFI:AIR - TT: High Efficiency Hydraulic Pump-Motors Employing Partial Stroke Piston Pressurization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Perry Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a discovery
on how to vary the power of hydraulic pumps and motors in a simple and effective
manner to fill the need for high efficiency hydraulics in a variety of
applications. The new technology is called "partial stroke piston pressurization
(PSPP)". Hydraulic pumps and motors are often run at a small fraction of their
maximum power, and they are typically very inefficient when run at that
operating point. PSPP is important because it saves energy at low power
operation, which occurs frequently, thereby reducing global energy consumption.
Power will be saved in a large variety of applications where hydraulics are
employed including: off-road vehicles (e.g., construction equipment), stationary
equipment (e.g., hydraulic elevators and industrial presses), and aircraft
(e.g., landing gear and wing articulation). Furthermore, reduced power
consumption by pumps and motors enables dramatic systems-level savings; for
example, engines and cooling systems can also be down-sized. The project will
also have economic impact by expanding the domain of products where hydraulics
provide optimal solutions; for example, PSPP pumps and motors may make hydraulic
hybrid on-road vehicles competitive with electric hybrids, and they may
facilitate the capture and storage of renewable energies, such as wind and wave
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a working prototype of
a PSPP pump to be demonstrated on a skid-steer loader. The pumps and motors
developed in this project are unique in utilizing hydro-mechanical rotary valves
to implement PSPP. They are also unique in utilizing hydraulic power exclusively
in internal control circuits; e.g., no electric controls nor mechanical cams are
needed. These features provide higher durability, increased up-time, lower total
and life-cycle costs, and increased ease of maintenance when compared to the
leading competing technology in this market space, which instead utilizes
electro-hydraulic valving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application: First, analytically projected efficiency gains will be
experimentally demonstrated on an existing first prototype by developing
improved manufacturing methods for the valving systems. Second, efficiency will
be further increased by applying a rigorous analysis-driven design methodology
to optimize the valving systems. Third, the cost of PSPP pumps and motors will
be reduced through the application of advanced manufacturing strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, graduate and undergraduate students involved
with the project will receive technology translation experiences by working with
industrial manufacturers to demonstrate the advantages of PSPP pumps on skid-
steer loaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages KoMotion Technologies,
LTD, to guide commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort
from research discovery toward commercial reality. KoMotion has extensive
practical experience in leading new hydraulic pump and motor technology from
concept development, through production launch, and into large scale global
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships and the Division of
Engineering Education; reflecting the alignment of this project with the
respective goals of the two divisions and their programs.