* 1700881
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Integrating microtome sectioning with isotopic tracing to study biotransformation in synthetic Escherichia coli biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Yinjie Tang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 32,501.00

1700881/1700935&lt;br/&gt;Tang/Ren&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are created by
colonies of bacteria with polymeric substances produced by the cells. With a
high-level of tolerance to a variety of stresses, biofilms cause serious
problems in both industrial (biofouling and corrosion) and healthcare
(persistent infections) settings. On the other hand, biofilms of environmentally
friendly bacteria have promising applications in bioremediation and biofuel
production. This project will develop a new method for investigating nutrient
transport and enzyme activity of using Escherichia coli as a model
organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have extensive research experience in E.
coli metabolic analysis and biofilm physiology. This team will develop and test
a new biofilm study method by integrating several interdisciplinary approaches:
1) culture synthetic biofilms with controlled morphology to reduce spatial
variation in gene expression and enzymatic functions; 2) use microtome
sectioning to obtain thin slides of biofilm samples with cells in similar
metabolic/nutrient transport status; and, 3) apply a stable isotopic labeling
method (i.e., 13C-pulse) to trace nutrient mass transfer within biofilm layers
as well as intracellular free metabolite conversions along functional pathways.
The transient labeling in cascade metabolites can reveal the speed of substrate
diffusion through biofilm layers as well as the rate of biotransformation into
downstream intracellular metabolites. It can also determine these active
biotransformation pathways important for biofilm survival and growth.
Ultimately, the outcome of this exploratory project will be a new method for
studying biofilm physiology (i.e., intracellular biotransformation) of diverse
environmental microbes. This biofilm study technology will reveal regulatory
mechanisms of biofilm growth and persistence under environmental stresses (e.g.,
antibiotic conditions); and it will improve our understandings of diverse
biofilm systems from environmental microbes to pathogens. Specifically,
Escherichia coli will be used as a model bacterium in this project with
complementary studies outlined in the following Tasks: 1. Create synthetic
biofilms with rigorously controlled morphology to reduce structural
heterogeneity. 2. Optimize microtome technology to quench and sample free
metabolites from different layers of biofilm cells, which can be analyzed via
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. 3. Validate this new method by
conducting 13C-pulse experiments with microtome sectioning and liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of cascade metabolites to determine
glucose transfer and biotransformation rates across different layers of E. coli
biofilm cells. This project will result in a new approach to section biofilms to
detect metabolite biotransformation and probe the pathway function with desired
spatial resolutions. The interdisciplinary nature of this work and the
development of new tools outlined herein will build the foundation for advanced
research and innovation to address many grand challenges associated with
microbial biofilms at molecular level. It will provide new insights into
nutrient transport and intracellular enzyme conversions within the biofilm
matrix; and help reveal regulatory mechanisms and essential pathways for biofilm
survival under diverse environmental conditions. Such insights can help
researchers design more effective way to control biofilm physiologies.