* 1700795
* Conference on Derived Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Paul Goerss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Ivey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of early-career US mathematicians in the
Conference on Invertibility and Duality in Derived Algebraic Geometry and
Homotopy Theory, which will be held April 3-7, 2017 at the University of
Regensburg, Germany. Derived algebraic geometry is an increasingly active
mathematical area that combines approaches from a number of established fields
(including algebraic geometry, topology, and mathematical physics), and the
conference location is a major center for work in this subject. Funds will
support the travel and local expenses of junior researchers; accordingly, the
direct impact will be the training and career development of 10 or more early-
career US mathematicians, who will gain the opportunity to participate in a
workshop in this subject, communicate their research results, and further
develop collaborations with emerging research groups in Europe. Conference
speakers and participants from outside of the United States will be supported by
the German national research foundation (DFG) through the grants SFB-1085 and
SPP-1786.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past fifteen years, we have seen the rapid
development of the field of derived algebraic geometry. Because it draws threads
and inspiration from algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, algebraic K-theory,
and even mathematical physics, this field has attracted a large number of early-
career researchers. This conference will bring together international experts
from algebraic topology, homotopy theory, derived algebraic geometry, and
related areas, and the focus of the conference will be current work and emerging
ideas in the field, using the existence and applications of dualities as a
theme. Throughout algebraic topology and algebraic geometry, the existence of a
theory of duality reveals deep structure about the objects under study. Basic
examples include Poincare duality for manifolds or Serre duality for varieties,
but these are expressions of much more general phenomena best studied in the
derived setting. There has been significant recent progress in derived algebraic
geometry, in both theory and computations. It is the aim of this conference both
to consolidate these advances and to promote new research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference webpage:&lt;br/&gt;http://www-
cgi.uni-regensburg.de/Fakultaeten/MAT/sfb-higher-
invariants/index.php/SpringSchool2017