* 1700559
* Water INTENsE: INteractive TEchNology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ellen Bluth, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 941,495.00

The Water INTENsE project will increase STEM-based learning and improve
workforce training by developing virtual reality (VR) simulated technician
curricula in the areas of water technologies and agriculture for students in
two-year college associate degree programs around the country. The Advanced
Technology Environmental and Energy Center (ATEEC), working with partners in
industry and education, will develop and field test VR training modules that are
focused on simulating learning situations in the fields of water/wastewater and
agriculture/water conservation. The simulations will allow technology students
to receive hands-on, applied training in a contextual environment, providing
students with practice on virtual real-world equipment when actual field
equipment is often cost-prohibitive for most educational institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage ATEEC's work in occupational
analysis, curriculum development, and instructional material projects in water
technology. Due to ATEEC's national environmental technology network with
industry and education, the project is well positioned to supplement and enhance
existing water and agriculture technology curricula, utilize a wide variety of
content experts in the field, and determine and fulfill workforce needs. Through
its online resource center, ATEEC interacts with two-year colleges across the
nation and will disseminate all VR modules through its own well-established
online resource center and through additional NSF and ATE channels in an effort
to reach as many educators, students, and technicians as possible. Broader use
of the simulated modules will result in 1) the ability to reach students that
are underrepresented in the STEM fields and 2) an increased number of
technicians in water/wastewater and conservation/ag jobs that meet the growing
need for a skilled, diverse workforce. Project evaluation will focus on the
progress of the development of the VR learning modules, measurement of student
performance and their success in the workplace, and dissemination of the
learning materials.