* 1700464
* 2017 Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Margaret Bayer, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2018
* USD 17,000.00

The Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference (GSCC) will be held April 7-9,
2017 at the University of Kansas in Lawrence. This will be the 13th annual
edition of the GSCC, which is traditionally organized by graduate students and
has benefited greatly from NSF support in the past. The GSCC focuses on graduate
student research presentations and will include keynote addresses by Sara Billey
(University of Washington) and Jacques Verstraete (University of California, San
Diego). The GSCC provides a unique and invaluable opportunity for graduate
students in combinatorics to experience the benefits of taking part in a
research conference. Giving their own presentations allows graduate students to
develop their teaching and presentation skills, helping them further succeed as
junior researchers.

Combinatorics is a field of mathematics with applications to many disciplines.
It is a vibrant area for new, innovative research that can involve problems and
techniques within algebra, geometry, topology, probability, computer science,
and analysis. This conference will keep junior investigators aware of the
advances that have been made in this lively and exciting field. The GSCC
provides a great opportunity for graduate students to network by meeting other
young mathematicians with similar research topics that can lead to potential
joint research projects and opportunities for future collaboration. Website:
http://www.math.ku.edu/conferences/2017/GSCC/