* 1700748
* Local Cohomology in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Wenliang Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 03/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation in an international conference entitled Local
Cohomology in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry, at the University of
Minnesota on August 7 - 11, 2017. The topic of this meeting will be recent
advances in Commutative Algebra related to local cohomology, rings of prime
characteristic, D-modules, and the homological conjectures. The purpose of this
conference is twofold. First, it will set up a platform where new collaborative
research projects can be started, current ones can be furthered, and completed
ones can be reported on. Second, the meeting will take advantage of the
Midwest's outstanding tradition in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry
and contribute to this tradition by giving young mathematicians an opportunity
to meet the leaders in the field and absorb the latest trends and techniques.
Through a poster session, this meeting will help, in particular, with the
transition from graduate student to academic employee. We will also disseminate
new results discussed at the conference though a bundled publication. The
journal "Communications in Algebra" will publish a special volume dedicated to
this meeting. The award will be used primarily to fund young mathematicians,
graduate students and recent postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
conference is to contribute to the training of scientists and to advance
research in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry by bringing together
students, postdoctoral fellows, and more senior international experts.
Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry are vibrant fields with rich and ever
evolving interconnections. Local cohomology possesses intriguing ties with other
areas of mathematics such as D-modules, interactions with the Frobenius
morphism, hypergeometric differential equations and their solution sheaves,
singularity invariants based on the de Rham functor, and big Cohen--Macaulay
algebras. Recent discoveries have occurred that touch finiteness properties, the
cohomology of Milnor fibers, the homological conjectures, and birational
geometry. This meeting will take advantage of these new developments and infuse
them into the current generation of graduate students. Further information can
be found at the conference website: http://www-
users.math.umn.edu/~cberkesc/localCohomConf2017