* 1700454
* Data Analytics Technician Advancement (DATA) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Gloria Rogiers, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2022
* USD 689,189.00

The State of Ohio's workforce-development agency, JobsOhio, has identified
Information Technology (IT) as a continuing high-growth industry. Career
prospects across the eleven-county central Ohio region are expected to be bright
for well-educated data analysts and related IT specialists. By 2024, central
Ohio employers in manufacturing, healthcare, logistics, insurance, banking,
retail, and government will need 1,794 additional data analysts (a 20% growth
rate). Despite the high demand for data analysts, higher education has been slow
to integrate data analysis into the curriculum. The Data Analytics Technician
Advancement (DATA) project serves the national interest by addressing this
workforce issue. The project will use a region-wide approach to develop a data
analytics career pathway to meet the needs of regional employers. The
comprehensive DATA Pathway will have entry points for high school graduates and
incumbent workers and multiple exit points. The new innovative curriculum with
an embedded internship and articulation with area high schools and universities
will include significant outreach efforts to serve military
veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to establish a DATA
Pathway in the central Ohio region to increase the supply of qualified data
analytics technicians. Multiple entry and exit points will offer maximum
flexibility to address the shifting needs of industry employers and accommodate
the diverse interests and experiences of students of different ages and life
stages. Project deliverables will be based upon input from an Industry
Leadership Team that identified query languages, database fundamentals,
visualization and presentation, business intelligence, data structures, and
fundamental programming languages as the six key skills and abilities needed for
data analytics technicians. The deliverables, which will be evaluated and
disseminated nationally, include: (1) a new industry-led curriculum in data
analytics that will include three new courses resulting in a new DATA
certificate that is stackable toward an Associate's Degree in Information
Systems &amp; Analytics; (2) 2+2+2 Data Analytics Technician Advancement (DATA)
Pathway to coordinate and facilitate the education pipeline from high school to
the community college to a university; (3) an internship guide for data
analytics technicians working with the EDC; (4) learning modules that educate
students on the foundational aspects of data analytics, adaptable for
contextualized courses within other non-computer science programs; and (5) an
outreach plan for veteran populations to attract active and former military into
the DATA program.