* 1700312
* Weak Solutions and Turbulence in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Philip Isett, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

In the field of fluid dynamics, a major goal is to obtain a detailed and
quantitative understanding of turbulence, which is a type of fluid motion
commonly observed in everyday experience with fluids that is characterized by
rapid and irregular fluctuations in velocity. Turbulence plays a pivotal role in
countless engineering and industrial applications such as the design of land and
aircraft, where the production of turbulence must be understood deeply to
achieve energy efficient and effective technology. It has long been believed
that the inner workings of turbulence may be understood in terms of the
differential equations that are being used to model fluid motion, including the
Euler equations. However, the analysis of these equations has proved so
difficult that much of the relationship between turbulence and solutions to the
equations of fluid dynamics remains conjectural and unresolved. Recently through
the work of the investigator and other mathematicians, a new approach has
emerged to analyze solutions to fluid equations that have rapid fluctuations
comparable to what is seen in turbulence. This approach is intimately tied to
questions in the mathematical discipline of geometry. This research project aims
to push this new approach towards its fullest potential to improve the
understanding of turbulence and to expand the frontiers of what can be
accomplished through mathematical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical
level, the PI will prove rigorous results on the structure of "weak solutions"
to the equations of fluid dynamics, including the incompressible Euler
equations. The results will address the extent to which such weak solutions can
be shown to exhibit the properties observed or predicted of turbulent flows. One
direction of research will relate to the phenomenon of anomalous dissipation of
energy and the extent to which this phenomenon may exist and be generic or
stable under perturbation. The PI will consider analogues and extensions of
Onsager's conjecture on anomalous dissipation, and will also investigate fine
properties of the dynamical structure of general weak solutions to the Euler and
related equations. The research will implement and expand upon the method of
convex integration, as well as introduce new tools of geometric or harmonic
analysis as needed.